the history of tPendennis chapter I show how first love may interrupt one fine morning in the full season , major come over from he lodging , accord to he custom , to breakfast at a certain club in , of which he be a chief ornament . as he be one of the finest judge of wine in , and a man of active , dominate , and inquire spirit , he have be very properly choose to be a member of the committee of this club , and indeed be almost the manager of the institution ; and the steward and waiter bow before he as reverentially as to a or a - . at a quarter past ten the major invariably make he appearance in the best blacked boot in all , with a check morning cravat that never be rumple until dinner time , a buff waistcoat which bear the crown of he sovereign on the button , and linen so spotless that himself ask the name of he laundress , and would probably have employ she have not misfortune compelle that great man to fly the country . 's coat , he white glove , he whisker , he very cane , be perfect of they kind as specimen of the costume of a military man en retraite . at a distance , or see he back merely , you would have take he to be not more than thirty year old : it be only by a nearer inspection that you see the factitious nature of he rich brown hair , and that there be a few crow 's - foot round about the somewhat fad eye of he handsome mottled face . he nose be of the pattern . he hand and wristband be beautifully long and white . on the latter he wear handsome gold buttons give to he by he the of , and on the other more than one elegant ring , the chief and largest of they be emblazon with the famious arm of . he always take possession of the same table in the same corner of the room , from which nobody ever now think of ous he . one or two mad wag and wild fellow have in former day , and in freak or bravado , endeavoure twice or thrice to deprive he of this place ; but there be a quiet dignity in the major 's manner as he take he seat at the next table , and survey the interloper , which render it impossible for any man to sit and breakfast under he eye ; and that table -- by the fire , and yet near the window -- become he own . he letter be lay out there in expectation of he arrival , and many be the young fellow about town who look with wonder at the number of those note , and at the seal and frank which they bear . if there be any question about etiquette , society , who be marry to whom , of what age such and such a duke be , be the man to whom every one appeal . Marchioness use to drive up to the club , and leave note for he , or fetch he out . he be perfectly affable . the young man like to walk with he in the or down ; for he touch he hat to everybody , and every other man he meet be a lord . the major sate down at he accustom table then , and while the waiter go to bring he he toast and he hot newspaper , he survey he letter through he gold double eye - glass . he carry it so gaily , you would hardly have know it be spectacle in disguise , and examine one pretty note after another , and lay they by in order . there be large solemn dinner card , suggestive of three course and heavy conversation ; there be neat little confidential note , convey female entreaty ; there be a note on thick official paper from the of , tell he to come to to a little party at the and , and speak , which language the major possess very perfectly ; and another from the Bishop of and , request the honour of major Pendennis 's company at , all of which letter read gracefully , and with the more satisfaction , because , the surgeon , breakfast opposite to he , be look on , and hat he for have so many invitation , which nobody ever send to . these peruse , the major take out he pocket - book to see on what day he be disengage , and which of these many hospitable call he could afford to accept or decline . he throw over , the Director , in , in order to dine with and the little french party at the and -- the Bishop he accept , because , though the dinner be slow , he like to dine with bishop -- and so go through he list and dispose of they accord to he fancy or interest . then he take he breakfast and look over the paper , the gazette , the birt and death , and the fashionable intelligence , to see that he name be down among the guest at my so - and - so 's fete , and in the interval of these occupations carry on cheerful conversation with he acquaintance about the room . among the letter which form major Pendennis 's budget for that morning there be only one unread , and which lay solitary and apart from all the fashionable letter , with a country postmark and a homely seal . the superscription be in a pretty delicate female hand , and though mark ' immediate ' by the fair writer ,
, with a strong dash of anxiety under the word , yet the major have , for reason of he own , neglect up to the present moment he humble rural petitioner , who to be sure could hardly hope to get a hearing among so many grand folk who attend he levee . the fact be , this be a letter from a female relative of Pendennis , and while the grandee of she brother 's acquaintance be receive and get they interview , and drive off , as it be , the patient country letter remain for a long time wait for a audience in the ant -chamber under the slop - bason . at last it come to be this letter 's turn , and the major break a seal with ' ' engrave upon it , and ' Claver 's ' for a postmark . it be a double letter , and the major commence peruse the envelope before he attack the inner epistle . " be it a letter from another , " grow , inwardly , " Pendennis would not be leave that to the last , I be think . " " my dear major , " the letter run , " I beg and implore you to come to I immediately " -- very likely , think , and 's dinner to - day --" I be in the very greatest grief and perplexity . my dearest boy , who have be hitherto everything the fondest mother could wish , be grieve I dreadfully . he have form -- I can hardly write it -- a passion , a infatuation , " -- the major grin -- " for a actress who have be perform here . she be at least twelve year older than -- who will not be eighteen till next -- and the wretch boy insist upon marry she . " " ! what be make swear now ? " -- ask of himself , for rage and wonder be concentrate in the major 's open mouth , as he read this astounding announcement . " do , my dear friend , " the grief - stricken lady go on , " come to I instantly on the receipt of this ; and , as be guardian , entreat , command , the wretch child to give up this most deplorable resolution . " and , after more entreaty to the above effect , the writer conclude by sign herself the major 's ' unhappy affectionate sister , . ' " Fairoaks , " -- the major conclude , read the last word of the letter -- " a --- pretty business at , ; now let we see what the boy have to say ; " and he take the other letter , which be write in a great floundering boy 's hand , and seal with the large signet of the Pendennise , even larger than the major 's own , and with supplementary wax sputter all round the seal , in token of the writer 's tremulousness and agitation . the epistle run thus : " Fairoaks , , . " my dear uncle ,-- in inform you of my engagement with , daughter of , , of , but , perhaps , better know to you under she professional name of , of the and , and of the and , I be aware that I make a announcement which cannot , accord to the present prejudice of society at least , be welcome to my family . my dearest mother , on whom , know , I would wish to inflict no needless pain , be deeply move and grieve , I be sorry to say , by the intelligence which I have this night convey to she . I beseech you , my dear Sir , to come down and reason with she and conseal she . although oblige by poverty to earn a honourable maintenance by the exercise of she splendid talents , 's family be as ancient and noble as we own . when we ancestor , , land with . in , my 's forefather be king of that country . I have the information from , who , like yourself , be a military man . " it be in vain I have attempt to argue with my dear mother , and prove to she that a young lady of irreproachable character and lineage , endow with the most splendid gift of beauty and genius , who devote herself to the exercise of one of the noblest profession , for the sacred purpose of maintain she family , be a being whom we should all love and reverence , rather than avoid ; --my poor mother have prejudice which it be impossible for my logic to overcome , and refuse to welcome to she arm one who be dispose to be she most affectionate daughter through life . " although be some year older than myself , that circumstance do not operate as a barrier to my affection , and I be sure will not influence its duration . a love like mine , , I feel , be contract once and for ever . as I never have dream of love until I see she -- I feel now that I shall die without ever know another passion . it be the fate of my life . it be C.'s own delicacy which suggest that the difference of age , which I never feel , might operate as a bar to we union . but have love once , I should despise myself , and be unworthy of my name as a gentleman , if I hesitate to abide by my passion : if I do not give all where I feel all , and endow the woman who love I fondly with my whole heart and my whole
whole fortune . " I press for a speedy marriage with my -- for why , in truth , should it be delay ? a delay imply a doubt , which I cast from I as unworthy . it be impossible that my sentiment can change towards -- that at any age she can be anything but the sole object of my love . why , then , wait ? I entreat you , my dear uncle , to come down and reconcile my dear mother to we union , and I address you as a man of the world , qui more hominum multorum vidit et urbe , who will not feel any of the weak scruple and fear which agitate a lady who have scarcely ever leave she village . " pray , come down to we immediately . I be quite confident that -- apart from consideration of fortune -- you will admire and approve of my Emily .-- you affectionate nephew , , " when the major have conclude the perusal of this letter , he countenance assume a expression of such rage and horror that , the surgeon-official , feel in he pocket for he lancet , which he always carry in he card - case , and think he respected friend be go into a fit . the intelligence be indeed sufficient to agitate . the head of the Pendennise go to marry a actress ten year he senior ,-- a headstrong boy go to plunge into matrimony . " the mother have spoilead the young rascal , " groan the major inwardly , " with she curse sentimentality and romantic rubbish . my nephew marry a tragedy queen ! gracious mercy , people will laugh at I so that I shall not dare show my head ! " and he think with a inexpressible pang that he must give up 's dinner at , and must lose he rest and pass the night in a abominable tight mail - coach , instead of take pleasure , as he have promise himself , in some of the most agreeable and select society in . and he must not only give up this but all other engagement for some time to come . who know how long the business might detain he . he quit he breakfast table for the adjoining writing - room , and there ruefully write off refusal to the , the , the Bishop , and all he entertainer ; and he order he servant to take place in the mail - coach for that evening , of course charge the sum which he disburse for the seat to the account of the widow and the young scapegrace of whom he be guardian . chapter II and other family matter Early in the Regency of the , there live in a small town in the west of , call , a gentleman whose name be . there be those alive who remember have see he name pain on a board , which be surmount by a gilt pestle and mortar over the door of a very humble little shop in the city of , where exercise the profession of apothecary and surgeon ; and where he not only attend gentleman in they sick - room , and lady at the most interesting period of they life , but would condescmend to sell a brown - paper plaster to a farmer 's wife across the counter , -- or to vend tooth - brush , hair - powder , and perfumery . for these fact be a few folk at could vouch , where people 's memory be more tenacious , perhaps , than they be in a great bustling metropolis . and yet that little apothecary who sell a stray customer a pennyworth of salts , or a more fragrant cake of soap , be a gentleman of good education , and of as old a family as any in the whole county of . he have a Cornish pedigree which carry the Pendennise up to the time of the Druid , and who know how much farther back ? they have intermarry with the at a very late period of they family existence , and they be related to all the great family of Wales and . Pendennis have have a piece of education too , and might have pursue that career with great honour , but that in he second year at he father die insolvent , and poor be oblige to betake himself to the pestle and apron . he always detest the trade , and it be only necessity , and the offer of he mother 's brother , a apothecary of low family , into which 's father have demean himself by marrying , that force into so odious a calling . he quickly after he apprenticeship parte from the coarse - minded practitioner he relative , and set up for himself at with he modest medical ensign . he have for some time a hard struggle with poverty ; and it be all he could do to keep the shop and it be gild ornament in decent repair , and he bed - ridden mother in comfort : but happen to be pass to the room with a intoxicated irish chairman who bump she ladyship up against very door - post , and drive he chair - pole through the handsomest pink bottle in the surgeon 's window , alight scream from she vehicle , and be accommodate with a chair in 's shop , where she be bring round with cinnamon and sal - volatile . 's manners be so uncommonly gentlemanlike and soothe , that she ladyship , the wife of , of , in the county of , . , appoint she preserver , as she call he , apothecary to she person and family , which be very large . master come
come home for the holiday from , over -ate himself and have a fever , in which treat he with the greatest skill and tenderness . in a word , he get the good graces of the family , and from that day begin to prosper . the good company of patronise he , and amongst the ladie especially he be belove and admire . first he humble little shop become a smart one : then he discard the selling of tooth - brush and perfumery , as unworthy of a gentleman of a ancient lineage : then he shut up the shop altogether , and only have a little surgery attend by a genteel young man : then he have a gig with a man to drive he ; and , before she exit from this world , he poor old mother have the happiness of see from she bedroom window to which she chair be roll , she belov step into a close carriage of he own , a one - horse carriage it be true , but with the arm of the family of handsomely emblazon on the panel . " what would yoArthu say now ? " she ask , speak of a younger son of hers -- " who never so much as once come to see my dearest through all the time of he poverty and struggle ! " " be with he regiment in , mother , " remark , " and , if you please , I wish you would not call I before the young man -- before . " presently the day come when she cease to call she son by the name of , or by any other title of endearment or affection ; and he house be very lonely without that kind though querulous voice . he have he night - bell altered and place in the room in which the good old lady have grumble for many a long year , and he sleep in the great large bed there . he be upward of forty year old when these event befell ; before the war be over ; before the come to the throne ; before this history indeed : but what be a gentleman without he pedigree ? , by this time , have he handsomely fram and glaze , and hang up in he drawing - room between the picture of in , and 's , , where he have pass the brief and happy day of he early manhood . as for the pedigree he have take it out of a trunk , as 's officer call for he sword , now that he be a gentleman and could show it . about the time of 's demise , another of she son 's patient likewise die at ; that virtuous woman , old , daughter of twelfth of , and by consequence great - grand - aunt to the present , and widow of second , and likewise of the , of the , . for the last five year of she life she ladyship have be attend by , a very distant relative of the noble house of , before mention , and daughter of , , kill at the battle of . under 's roof find a comfortable shelter , as far as boarding and lodging go , but suffer under such a infernal tyranny as only woman can inflict on , or bear from , one another : the Doctor , who pay he visit to my at least twice a day , could not but remark the angelical sweetness and kindness with which the young lady bear she elderly relative 's insult ; and it be , as they be go in the fourth mourning coach to attend she ladyship 's venerate remains to , where they now repose , that he look at she sweet pale face and resolve upon put a certain question to she , the very nature of which make he pulse beat ninety , at least . he be older than she by more than twenty year , and at no time the most ardent of man . perhaps he have have a love affair in early life which he have to strangle -- perhaps all early love affair ought to be strangle or drown , like so many blind kitten : well , at three - and - forty he be a collect quiet little gentleman in black stocking with a bald head , and a few day after the ceremony he call to see she , and , as he feel she pulse , he keep hold of she hand in he , and ask she where she be go to live now that the family have come down upon the property , which be be nail into boxe , and pack into hamper , and swaddle up with hayband , and bury in straw , and lock under three key in green baize plate - chest , and car away under the eyes of poor , -- he ask she where she be go to live finally . she eye fill with tear , and she say she do not know . she have a little money . the old lady have leave she a thousand pound , indeed ; and she would go into a boarding - house or into a school : in fine , she do not know where . then , look into she pale face , and keep hold of she cold little hand , ask she if she would come and live with he ? he be old compare to -- to so bloom a young lady as ( be of the grave old complimentary school of gentleman and apothecary ) , but he be of good birth , and , he flatter himself , of good principle and temper . he prospect be good
good , and daily mende . he be alone in the world , and have need of a kind and constant companion , whom it would be the study of he life to make happy ; in a word , he recit to she a little speech , which he have compose that morning in bed , and rehearse and perfect in he carriage , as he be come to wait upon the young lady . perhaps if he have have a early love - passage , she too have one day hope for a different lot than to be wed to a little gentleman who rap he tooth and smile artificially , who be laboriously polite to the butler as he slid upstairs into the drawing - room , and profusely civil to the lady 's - maid , who wait at the bed - room door ; for whom she old patroness use to ring as for a servant , and who come with even more eagerness ; who get up story , as he send in draught , for he patient 's amusement and he own profit : perhaps she would have choose a different man -- but she know , on the other hand , how worthy be , how prudent , how honourable ; how good he have be to he mother , and constant in he care of she ; and the upshot of this interview be , that she , blush very much , make a extremely low curtsey , and ask leave to -- to consider he very kind proposal . they be marry in the dull bath season , which be the height of the season in . and have previously , through a professional friend , , secure lodging in , , take he wife thither in a chaise and pair ; conduct she to the theatre , the park , and the ; show she the folk go to a draw - room , and , in a word , give she all the pleasure of the town . he likewise leave card upon , upon the the of , and upon and , he earliest and kindest patron . Bareacres take no notice of the card . call , admire , and say would come and see she , which she ladyship do , per proxy of she footman , who bring she card , and a invitation to a concert five week off . be back in he little one - horse carriage , dispense draught and pill at that time : but the ask he and to a entertainment , of which brag to the last day of he life . the secret ambition of have always be to be a gentleman . it take much time and careful save for a provincial doctor , whose gain be not very large , to lay by enough money wherewith to purchase a house and land : but besides we friend 's own frugality and prudence , fortune aid he considerably in he endeavour , and bring he to the point which he so pante to attain . he lay out some money very advantageously in the purchase of a house and small estate close upon the village of before mention . word can not describe , nor do he himself ever care to confess to any one , he pride when he find himself a real landed proprietor , and could walk over acre of which he be the master . a lucky purchase which he have make of share in a copper - mine add very considerably to he wealth , and he realise with great prudence while this mine be still at it be full vogue . finally , he sell he business at , to , for a handsome sum of ready money , and for a annuity to be pay to he during a certain number of year after he have for ever retire from the handling of the mortar and pestle . , he son , be eight year old at the time of this event , so that it be no wonder that the latter , who leave and the surgery so young , should forget the existence of such a place almost entirely , and that he father 's hand have ever be dirty by the compounding of odious pill , or the preparation of filthy plaster . the old man never speak about the shop himself , never allude to it ; call in the medical practitioner of Clavering to attend he family when occasion arrive ; sink the black breech and stocking altogether ; attend market and session , and wear a bottle - green coat and brass button with drab gaiter , just as if he have be a english gentleman all he life . he use to stand at he lodge - gate , and see the coach come in , and bow gravely to the guard and coachman as they touch they hat and drive by . it be he who founde the : and set up the and . it be he who bring the mail , which use to run through before , away from that village and through Clavering . at church he be equally active as a vestryman and a worshipper . at market every , he go from pen to stall , look at sample of oat , and munch corn , feel beasts , punch geese in the breast , and weigh they with a know air , and do business with the farmer at the Clavering Arm , as well as the oldest frequenter of that house of call . it be now he shame , as it formerly be he pride , to be call , and those who wish to please he always give he the title of . know where they come from , but a
a whole range of portrait presently hang round the Doctor 's oak dining - room ; Lelys and Vandykes he vow all the portrait to be , and when question as to the history of the original , would vaguly say they be 's ancestor of he . ' you could see by he wife 's look that she disbelieve in these genealogical legend , for she generally endeavoure to turn the conversation when he commence they . but he little boy believe they to they fullest extent , and of , of , of and , be as real and actual being for this young gentleman as -- whom shall we say ?-- as , or , or the of , whose histories be in he library . 's , which , at the best , be not above eight hundred pound a year , do not , with the best economy and management , permit of he live with the great folk of the county ; but he have a decent comfortable society of the second - best sort . if they be not the ros , they live near the rose , as it be , and have a good deal of the odour of genteel life . they have out they plate , and dine each other round in the moonlight night twice a year , come a dozen mile to these festival ; and besides the county , the Pendennise have the society of the town of , as much as , nay , more than they like : for be always pok about 's conservatory , and intercept the operation of she soup - ticket and coal -club ( , ) be for ever swagger about the 's stable and garden , and endeavour to enlist he in he quarrel with the Vicar , with the postmaster , with the of Clavering , for overflogge he son , , -- with all the village in fine . and and he wife often bless themselves , that they house of Fairoaks be nearly a mile out of , or they premise would never have be free from the prying eye and prattle of one or other of the male and female inhabitant there . Fairoak lawn come down to the little river , and on the other side be the plantation and wood ( as much as be leave of they ) of , , . the park be let out in pasture and feed down by sheep and cattle , when the Pendennise come first to live at Fairoaks . Shutter be up in the house ; a splendid freestone palace , with great stair , statue , and portico , whereor you may see a picture in the ' Beauty of and . ' , 's - grandfather , have commence the ruin of the family by the building of this palace : he successor have achieve the ruin by live in it . the present be abroad somewhere ; nor could anybody be find rich enough to rent that enormous mansion , through the deserted room , mouldy clanking hall , and dismal gallery of which , many a time walk trembl when he be a boy . at sunset , from the lawn of Fairoaks , there be a pretty sight : it and the opposite park of Clavering be in the habit of put on a rich golden tinge , which become they both wonderfully . the upper window of the great house flam so as to make you eye wink ; the little river run off noisily westward , and be lose in a sombre wood , behind which the towers of the old abbey church of ( whereby that town be call 's to the present day ) rise up in purple splendour . 's figure and he mother 's , cast long blue shadow over the grass ; and he would repeat in a low voice ( for a scene of great natural beauty always move the boy , who inherit this sensibility from he mother ) certain line begin , " these be thy glorious work , parent of ; ! thine this universal frame , " greatly to 's delight . such walk and conversation generally end in a profusion of filial and maternal embrace ; for to love and to pray be the main occupations of this dear woman 's life ; and I have often hear Pendennis say in he wild way , that he feel that he be sure of go to heaven , for he mother never could be happy there without he . as for , as the father of the family , and that sort of thing , everybody have the greatest respect for he : and he order be obey like those of the and . he hat be as well brush , perhaps , as that of any man in this empire . he meal be serve at the same minute every day , and woe to those who come late , as little , a disorderly little rascal , sometimes do . prayer be recit , he letter be read , he business dispatch , he stable and garden inspect , he hen - house and kennel , he barn and pigstye visit , always at regular hour . after dinner he always have a nap with the newspaper on he knee , and he yellow bandan to handkerchief on he face ( major Pendennis send the yellow handkerchief from , and he brother have help in the purchase of he majority , so that they be good friend now ) . and so , as he dinner take place at six o'clock to a minute , and the sunset business allude to may be suppose to have occur at about half - past seven , it be probable that he do not much care for the
the view in front of he lawn window or take any share in the poetry and caress which be take place there . they seldom occur in he presence . however frisky they be before , mother and child be hush and quiet when walk into the drawing - room , he newspaper under he arm . and here , while little , bury in a great chair , read all the book of which he could lay hold , the peruse he own article in the ' 's , ' or take a solemn hand at picquet with , or a occasional friend from the village . usually take care that at least one of he grand dinner should take place when he brother , the major , who , on the return of he regiment from and , have sell out and go upon half - pay , come to pay he biennial visit to Fairoak . " my brother , , " be a constant theme of the retire 's conversation . all the family delighte in my brother the major . he be the link which bound they to the great world of , and the fashion . he always bring down the last news of the nobility , and be in the constant habit of dining with lord and great folk . he spoke of such with soldierlike respect and decorum . he would say , " my have be good enough to invite I to Bareacres for the pheasant shoot , " or , " my be so kind as to wish for my presence at for the holiday ; " and you may be sure the whereabouts of my brother the major be carefully make know by worthy to he friend at the room , at - meeting , or at the - town . they carriage would come from ten mile round to call upon major Pendennis in he visit to Fairoaks ; the fame of he fashion as a man about town be establish throughout the county . there be a talk of he marry , of , old the 's daughter , with at least fifteen hundr a -year to she fortune : but my brother the refuse this negotiation , advantageous as it might seem to mose person . " as a bachelor , " he say , " nobody care how poor I be . I have the happiness to live with people who be so highly place in the world , that a few hundred or thousand a year more or less can make no difference in the estimation in which they be pleased to hold I . , though a most respectable lady , be not in possession of either the birth or the manners , which would entitle she to be receive into the sphere in which I have the honour to move . I shall live and die a old bachelor , : and you worthy friend , , I have no doubt , will find some more worthy object of she affection , than a worn - out old soldier on half - pay . " show the correctness of the surmise of the old man of the world ; marry a young french nobleman , and be now at this moment live at , under the title of , have be separate from she wild young scapegrace of a very shortly after they union . the major be a great favourite with almost all the little establishment of Fairoaks . he be as good - nature as he be well breed , and have a sincere liking and regard for he sister - in - law , whom he pronounce , and with perfect truth , to be as fine a lady as any in , and a honour to the family . indeed , 's tranquil beauty , she natural sweetness and kindness , and that simplicity and dignity which a perfect purity and innocence be sure to bestow upon a handsome woman , render she quite worthy of she brother 's praise . I think it be not national prejudice which make I believe that a high - breed English lady be the most complete of all 's subject in this world . in whom else do you see so much grace , and so much virtue ; so much faith , and so much tenderness ; with such a perfect refinement and chastity ? and by high - breed ladie I do not mean duchess and countess . be they ever so high in station , they can be but lady , and no more . but almost every man who live in the world have the happiness , let we hope , of count a few such person amongst he circle of acquaintance -- women , in whose angelical nature , there be something awful , as well as beautiful , to contemplate ; at whose foot the wildest and fiercest of we must fall down and humble ourselves ; -- in admiration of that adorable purity which never seem to do or to think wrong . have the good fortune to have a mother endow with these happy quality . during he childhood and youth , the boy think of she as little less than a angel , -- as a supernatural being , all wisdom , love , and beauty . when she husband drive she into the county town , or to the assize ball or concert there , he would step into the assembly with he wife on he arm , and look the great folk in the face , as much as to say , " look at that , my lord ; can any of you show I a woman like that ? " she enrage some country lady with three time she money , by a sort of desperate perfection which they
they find in she . say she be cold and haughty ; , that she be too proud for she station ; , as a doctor of divinity 's lady , would have the pa of she , who be only the wife of a medical practitioner . in the meanwhile , this lady move through the world quite regardless of all the comment that be make in she praise or disfavour . she do not seem to know that she be admire or hate for be so perfect : but carry on calmly through life , say she prayer , love she family , help she neighbour , and do she duty . that even a woman should be faultless , however , be a arrangement not permit by nature , which assign to we mental defect , as it award to we headach , illness , or death ; without which the scheme of the world could not be carry on , -- nay , some of the best quality of mankind could not be bring into exercise . as pain produce or elicit fortitude and endurance ; difficulty , perseverance ; poverty , industry and ingenuity ; danger , courage and what not ; so the very virtue , on the other hand , will generate some vex : and , in fine , have that vice which and discover in she , namely , that of pride ; which do not vest itself so much in she own person , as in that of she family . she speak about ( a worthy little gentleman enough , but there be other as good as he ) with a awful reverence , as if he have be the Pope of on he throne , and she a cardinal kneeling at he foot , and give he incense . the major she hold to be a sort of among : and as for she son she worship that youth with a ardour which the young scapegrace accept almost as coolly as the statue of the in 's receive the rapturous osculation which the faithful deliver on he toe . this unfortunate superstition and idol - worship of this good woman be the cause of a great deal of the misfortune which befell the young gentleman who be the hero of this history , and deserve therefore to be mention at the outset of he story . 's schoolfellow at the state that , as a boy , he be in no way remarkable either as a dunce or as a scholar . he do , in fact , just as much as be require of he , and no more . if he be distinguished for anything it be for verse -writ : but be he enthusiasm ever so great , it stop when he have compose the number of line demand by the regulation ( unlike young , for instance , who , with no more of poetry in he composition than , yet would bring up a hundred dreary hexameter to the master after a half - holiday ; or young , who not only do he own verse , but all the fifth form 's beside ) . he never read to improve himself out of school - hour , but , on the contrary , devoure all the novel , play , and poetry , on which he could lay he hand . he never be flog , but it be a wonder how he escape the whipping - post . when he have money he spend it royally in tart for himself and he friend ; he have be know to disburse nine and sixpence out of ten shilling award to he in a single day . when he have no fund he go on tick . when he could get no credit he go without , and be almost as happy . he have be know to take a thrashing for a crony without say a word ; but a blow , ever so slight from a friend , would make he roar . to fight he be averse from he earliest youth , as indeed to , the , or any other exertion , and would engage in none of they , except at the last extremity . he seldom if ever tell lie , and never bully little boy . those master or senior who be kind to he , he love with boyish ardour . and though the doctor , when he do not know he Horace , or could not construe he play , say that that boy be a disgrace to the school , a candidate for ruin in this world , and perdition in the next ; a profligate who would most likely bring he venerable father to ruin and he mother to a dishonoured grave , and the like -- yet as the Doctor make use of these compliment to most of the boy in the place ( which have not turn out a unusual number of felon and pickpocket ) , little , at first uneasy and terrify by these charge , become gradually accustom to hear they ; and he have not , in fact , either murder he parent , or commit any act worthy of transportation or hang up to the present day . tutu there be many of the upper boy , among the with whom Pendennis be educate , who assume all the privileges of man long before they quit that seminary . many of they , for example , smoke cigar -- and some have already begin the practice of inebriation . one have fight a duel with a Ensign in a marching , in consequence of a row at the theatre -- another actually keep a buggy and horse at a livery stable in , and might be see drive any in with a groom with squared arm
arm and armorial buttons by he side . many of the senior be in love , and show each other in confidence poem address to , or letter and lock of hair receive from , young lady -- but , a modest and timid youth , rather envy these than imitate they as yet . he have not get beyond the theory as yet -- the practice of life be all to come . and by the way , ye tender mother and sober father of family , a prodigious thing that theory of life be as orally learn at a great public school . why , if you could hear those boy of fourteen who blush before mother and sneak off in silence in the presence of they daughter , talk among each other -- it would be the woman 's turn to blush then . before he be twelve year old and if while he mother fancie he a angel of candour , little have hear talk enough to make he quite awfully wise upon certain point -- and so , Madam , have you pretty little rosy - cheeked son , who be come home from school for the ensuing holiday . I do not say that the boy be lose , or that the innocence have leave he which he have from ' , which be we home , ' but that the shade of the prison - house be close very fast over he , and that we be help as much as possible to corrupt he . well -- have just make he public appearance in a coat with a tail , or cauda virilis , and be look most anxiously in he little study - glass to see if he whisker be grow , like those of more fortunate youth he companion ; and , instead of the treble voice with which he use to speak and s ( for he singing be a very sweet one , and he use when little to be make to perform ' Home , sweet home ,' ' my pretty page , ' and a french song or two which he mother have teach he , and other ballad for the delectation of the senior boy ) , have suddenly plunge into a deep bass diversify by a squeak , which when he be call upon to construe in school set the master and scholar laugh he be about sixteen year old , in a word , when he be suddenly call away from he academic study . it be at the close of the forenoon school , and have be unnoticed all the previous part of the morning till now , when the doctor put he on to construe in a play . he do not know a word of it , though little Timmins , he form - fellow , be prompt he with all he might . have make a sad blunder or two when the awful break out upon he . " Pendennis , sir , " he say , " you idleness be incorrigible and you stupidity beyond example . you be a disgrace to you school , and to you family , and I have no doubt will prove so in after - life to you country . if that vice , sir , which be describe to we as the root of all evil , be really what moralist have represent ( and I have no doubt of the correctness of they opinion ) , for what a prodigious quantity of future crime and wickedness be you , unhappy boy , lay the seed ! miserable trifler ! a boy who construe and , instead of de but , at sixteen year of age be guilty not merely of folly , and ignorance , and dulness inconceivable , but of crime , of deadly crime , of filial ingratitude , which I tremble to contemplate . a boy , sir , who do not learn he play cheat the parent who spend money for he education . a boy who cheat he parent be not very far from rob or forge upon he neighbour . a man who forge on he neighbour pay the penalty of he crime at the gallow . and it be not such a one that I pity ( for he will be deservedly cut off ) , but he madden and heart - broken parent , who be drive to a premature grave by he crime , or , if they live , drag on a wretch and dishonoure old age . go on , sir , and I warn you that the very next mistake that you make shall subject you to the punishment of the rod . who be that laugh ? what ill - condition boy be there that dare to laugh ? " shoute the Doctor . indeed , while the master be make this oration , there be a general titter behind he in the schoolroom . the orator have he back to the door of this ancient apartment , which be open , and a gentleman who be quite familiar with the place , for both major and have be at the school , be ask the fifth - form boy who sate by the door for Pendennis . the lad grinning point to the culprit against whom the Doctor be pour out the thunder of he just wrath -- major Pendennis could not help laugh . he remember have stood under that very pillar where the now stand , and have be assault by the Doctor 's predecessor year and year ago . the intelligence be 's pass round ' that it be 's uncle in a instant , and a hundred young face wonder and giggle , between terror and laughter , turn now to the new - comer and then to the awful doctor . the
the major ask the fifth - form boy to carry he card up to the Doctor , which the lad do with a arch look . major Pendennis have write on the card , " I must take a . P. home ; he father be very ill . " as the receive the card , and stop he harangue with rather a sear look , the laughter of the boy , half constrain until then , burst out in a general shout . " Silence ! " roar out the Doctor stamp with he foot . look up and see who be he deliverer ; the major beckon to he gravely with one of he white glove , and tumbl down he book , go across . the Doctor take out he watch . it be two minute to one . " we will take the at afternoon school , " he say , nodd to the , and all the boy understand the signal gather up they book and pour out of the hall . yong see by he uncle 's face that something have happene at home . " be there anything the matter with my mother ? " he say . he could hardly speak , though , for emotion , and the tear which be ready to start . " no , " say the major , " but you father 's very ill . go and pack you trunk directly ; I have get a postchaise at the gate . " go off quickly to he boarding - house to do as he uncle bay he ; and the Doctor , now leave alone in the schoolroom , come out to shake hand with he old schoolfellow . you would not have think it be the same man . as at a particular hour become , from a blazing and magnificent princess , quite a ordinary little maid in a grey petticoat , so , as the clock struck one , all the thundering majesty and awful wrath of the schoolmaster disappear . " there be nothing serious , I hope , " say the Doctor . " it be a pity to take the boy away unless there be . he be a very good boy , rather idle and unenergetic , but he be a very honest gentlemanlike little fellow , though I can not get he to construe as I wish . will not you come in and have some luncheon ? my wife will be very happy to see you . " but major Pendennis decline the luncheon . he say he brother be very ill , have have a fit the day before , and it be a great question if they should see he alive . " there be no other son , be there ? " say the Doctor . the major answer " no . " " and there be a good eh -- a good eh--property I believe ? " ask the other in a off - hand way . " h be -- so so , " say the major . Whereupon this colloquy come to a end . and get into the postchaise with he uncle never to come back to school any more . as the chaise drive through , the hostler stand whistl under the archway of the , wink the postilion ominously , as much as to say all be over . the gardener 's wife come and open the lodge - gate , and let the traveller through with a silent shake of the head . all the blind be down at -- the face of the old footman be as blank when he let they in . 's face be white too , with terror more than with grief . whatever of warmth and love the decease man might have have , and he adore he wife and love and admire he son with all he heart , he have shut they up within himself ; nor have the boy be ever able to penetrate that frigid outward barrier . but have be he father 's pride and glory through life , and he name the last which have try to articulate whilst he lay with he wife 's hand clasp he own cold and clammy palm , as the flicker spirit go out into the darkness of death , and life and the world pass away from he . the little girl , whose face have peer for a moment under the blind as the chaise come up , open the door from the stair into the hall , and take 's hand silently as he stoop down to kiss she , lead he upstairs to he mother . open the dining - room door for the major . the room be darken with the blind down , and surround by all the gloomy picture of the Pendennise . he drank a glass of wine . the bottle have be open for the four day before . he hat be brush , and laid on the hall table : he newspaper , and he letter - bag , with , , , engrave upon the brass plate , were there in waiting . the doctor and the lawyer from , who have see the chaise pass through , come up in a gig half a hour after the major 's arrival , and enter by the back door . the former give a detailed account of the seizure and demise of , enlarge on he virtue and the estimation in which the neighbourhood hold he ; on what a loss he would be to the magistrate 's bench , the , etc . bear up wonderfully , he say , especially since 's arrival . the lawyer stay and dine with major Pendennis , and they talk business all the evening . the major be he brother 's
's executor , and jous not guardian to the boy with . everything be leave unreservedly to she , except in case of a second marriage , -- a occasion which might offer itself in the case of so young and handsome a woman , gallantly say , when different provision be enact by the decease . the major would of course take entire superintendence of everything under this most impressive and melancholy occasion . aware of this authority , old the footman , when he bring major Pendennis the candle to go to bed , follow afterwards with the plate - basket ; and the next morning bring he the key of the hall clock -- the always use to wind it up of a , say . 's maid bring he message from she mistress . she confirm the doctor 's report , of the comfort which 's arrival have cause to he mother . what pass between that lady and the boy be not of import . a veil should be throw over those sacred emotion of love and grief . the maternal passion be a sacred mystery to I . what one see symbolise in the church in the image of the mother with a bosom bleed with love , I think one may witness ( and admire the bounty for ) every day . I see a jewish lady , only yesterday , with a child at she knee , and from whose face towards the child there shine a sweetness so angelical , that it seem to form a sort of glory round both . I protest I could have knelt before she too , and adore in she the beneficence in endow we with the maternal storge , which begin with we race and sanctify the history of mankind . so it be with this , in a word , that comforte herself on the death of she husband , whom , however , she always reverence as the best , the most upright , wise , high - minded , accomplish , and awful of man . if the woman do not make idol of we , and if they see we as we see each other , would life be bearable , or could society go on ? let a man pray that none of he womankind should form a just estimation of he . if you wife know you as you be , neighbou , she would not grieve much about be you widow , and would let you grave - lamp go out very soon , or perhaps not even take the trouble to light it . whereas put up the handsomest of memorial to she husband , and constantly renew it with the most precious oil . as for , after that awful shock which the sight of he dead father must have produce on he , and the pity and feel which such a event no doubt occasion , I be not sure that in the very moment of the grief , and as he embrace he mother and tenderly consol she , and promise to love she for ever , there be not spring up in he breast a feeling of secret triumph and exultation . he be the chief now and lord . he be Pendennis ; and all round about he be he servant and handmaid . " you will never send I away , " little say , trip by he , and hold he hand . " you will not send I to school , will you , ? " yoArthu kiss she and pat she head . no , she should not go to school . as for go himself , that be quite out of the question . he have determine that that part of he life should not be renew . in the midst of the general grief , and the corpse still lie above , he have leisure to conclude that he would have it all holiday for the future , that he would not get up till he like , or stand the bullying of the Doctor any more , and have make a hundred of such day - dream and resolve for the future . how one 's thought will travel ! and how quickly we wish beget they ! when he with in he hand go into the kitchen on he way to the dog - kennel , the fowl - house , and other he favourite haunt , all the servants there assemble in great silence with they friend , and the labouring man and they wife , and who go with the post-bag to , and the baker 's man from Clavering -- all there assemble and drink beer on the melancholy occasion -- rise up on he entrance and bow or curtsey to he . they never use to do so last holiday , he feel at once and with indescribable pleasure . the cook cry out , " o , " and whisper , " how master yoArthu do grow ! " , the groom , in the act of drink , put down the jug alarme before he master . 's master feel the honour keenly . he go through and look at the pointer . as put she nose up to he waistcoat , and , yell with pleasure , hurtle at he chain , patronise the dog , and say , " , , " in he most condescending manner . and then he go and look at 's hen , and at the pig , and at the orchard , and at the dairy ; perhaps he blush to think that it be only last holiday he have in a manner rob the great apple - tree , and be scold by the dairymaid for take cream . they bury , , " formerly a eminent medical practitioner
practitioner at , and subsequently a able magistrate , a benevolent landlord , and a benefactor to many charity and public institution in this neighbourhood and county , " with one of the most handsome funeral that have be see since be bury here , the clerk say , in the abbey church of Clavering 's . a fair marble slab , from which the above inscription be copy , be erect over the 's pew in the church . on it you may see the coat of arm , and crest , a eagle look towards the sun , with the motto ' nec tenui penna , ' to the present day . allude to the decease most handsomely and affectingly , as " we dear depart friend , " in he sermon next ; and reign in he stead . chapter iii in which appear as a very young man indeed be about sixteen year old , we have say , when he begin to reign ; in person ( for I see that the artist who be to illustrate this book , and who make sad work of the likeness , will never be able to take my friend off ) he have what he friend would call a dumpy , but he mamma style a neat little figure . he hair be of a healthy brown colour , which look like gold in the sunshine , he face be round , rosy , freckled , and good - humoured , he whisker ( when those facial ornament for which he sigh so ardently be awarded to he by nature ) be decidedly of a reddish hue ; in fact , without be a beauty , he have such a frank , good - natured kind face , and laugh so merrily at you out of he honest blue eye , that no wonder think he the pride of the whole county . between the ag of sixteen and eighteen he rise from five foot six to five foot eight inch in height , at which altitude he pause . but he mother wonder at it . he be three inch taller than he father . be it possible that any man could grow to be three inch taller than ? you may be certain he never go back to school ; the discipline of the establishment do not suit he , and he like be at home much better . the question of he return be debate , and he uncle be for he go back . the write he opinion that it be most important for 's success in after - life that he should know a play thoroughly , but adroitly manage to hint to he mother what a dangerous place Greyfriars be , and what sad wild fellow some of the chap there be , and the timid soul , take alarm at once , acced to he desire to stay at home . then uncle offer to use he influence with he the - in - , who be pleased to be very kind to he , and propose to get a commission in the . 's heart leape at this : he have be to hear the band at 's play on a , when he go out to he uncle . he have see , of the fourth form , who use to wear a jacket and trousers so ludicrously tight , that the elder boy could not forbear use he in the quality of a butt or ' cockshy ' -- he have see this very Ricketts array in crimson and gold , with a immense bear - skin cap on he head , stagger under the colour of the regiment . have recognise he and give he a patronising nod . , a little wretch whom he have cut over the back with a hockey - stick last quarter -- and there he be in the centre of the square , rally round the flag of he country , surround by bayonet , crossbelt , and scarlet , the band blow trumpet and ban cymbal -- talk familiarly to immense warrior with tuft to they chin and Waterloo medal . what would not Pen have give to wear such epaulette and enter such a service ? but , when this point be propose to she by she son , put on a face full of terror and alarm . she say she " do not quarrel with other who think differently , but that in she opinion a have no right to make the army a profession . never , never would have permit he son to be a soldier . finally , she should be very unhappy if he think of it . " now would have as soon cut off he nose and ear as deliberately , and of aforethotch malice , make he mother unhappy ; and , as he be of such a generous disposition that he would give away anything to any one , he instantly make a present of he visionary red coat and epaulette and he ardour for military glory to he mother . she think he the noblest creature in the world . but major Pendennis , when the offer of the commission be acknowledge and refuse , write back a curt and somewhat angry letter to the widow , and think he nephew be rather a spooney . he be contente , however , when he see the boy 's performance out hunt at , when the major come down as usual to Fairoaks . have a very good mare , and ride she with uncommon pluck and grace . he take he fence with great coolness , and yet with judgment , and without bravado . he write to the chap at school about he top - boot , and he feat across country . he begin to think
think seriously of a scarlet coat : and he mother must own that she think it would become he remarkably well ; though , of course , she pass hour of anguish during he absence , and daily expect to see he bring home on a shutter . with these amusement , in rather too great plenty , it must not be assume that neglect he study altogether . he have a natural taste for read every possible kind of book which do not fall into he school - course . it be only when they force he head into the water of knowledge , that he refuse to drink . he devoure all the book at home from 's to 's Farriery ; he ransack the neighbour book - case . he find at Clavering a old cargo of french novel , which he read with all he might ; and he would sit for hour perch upon the topmost bar of 's library step with a folio on he knee , whether it be 's , 's , , or 's Poems . he and the Vicar be very good friend , and from he Reverence , learn that honest taste for port wine which distinguished he through life . and as for that dear good woman , , who be not in the least jealous , though she avow himself in love with , whom he pronounce to be by far the finest lady in the county -- all she grief be , as she look up fondly at perch on the book - ladder , that she daughter , , be too old for he -- as indeed she be -- be at that period only two year younger than mother , and weighing as much as and together . be these detail insipid ? look back , good friend , at you own youth , and ask how be that ? I like to think of a well - nurture boy , brave and gentle , warm - hear and love , and look the world in the face with kind honest eye . what bright colour it wear then , and how you enjoy it ! a man have not many year of such time . he do not know they whilst they be with he . it be only when they be pass long away that he remember how dear and happy they be . in order to keep from indulging in that idleness of which he friend the doctor of the have prophesy such awful consequence , , 's curate , be engage at a liberal salary , to walk or ride over from and pass several hour dailly with the young gentleman . be a man perfectly faultless at a tea - table , wear a curl on he fair forehead , and tie he neck - cloth with a melancholy grace . he be a decent scholar and mathematician , and teach Pen as much as the lad be ever dispose to learn , which be not much . for have soon take the measure of he tutor , who , when he come ride into the court - yard at Fairoaks on he pony , turn out he toe so absurdly , and leave such a gap between he knee and the saddle , that it be impossible for any lad endow with a sense of humour to respect such a equestrian . he nearly kill with terror by put he on he mare , and take he a ride over a common , where the county fox - hound ( then bunt by that staunch old sportsman , , of ) happen to meet . , on Pen's mare , ( she be name after Pen's favourite heroine , the daughter of of ) , astounde the hound as much as he disgust the huntsman , lam one of the former by persisting in ride amongst the pack , and receive a speech from the latter , more remarkable for energy of language , than any oration he have ever hear since he leave the bargeman on the bank of . confide to he pupil he poem both and ; and present to a volume of the latter , print at , he native place . the two read the ancient poet together , and rattle through they at a pleasant rate , very different from that steady grubb pace with which the use to go over the classic ground , scent out each word as they go , and digge up every root in the way . never like to hal , but make he tutor construe when he be at fault , and thus gallop through the and the , the tragic playwriter , writer , and the charming wick ( whom he vow to be the greatest poet of all ) . but he go at such a pace that , though he certainly gallop through a considerable extent of the ancient country , he clean forget it in after - life , and have only such a vague remembrance of he early classic course as a man have in the house of Commons , let we say , who still keep up two or three quotation ; or a reviewer who , just for decency 's sake , hint at a little . we people be the most prosaic in the world , but the most faithful ; and with curious reverence we keep up and transmit , from generation to generation , the superstition of what we call the education of a gentleman . besides the ancient poets , you may be sure read the with great gusto . sigh and shake he head sadly both about and . but be a swear fire - worshipper and a Corsair ; he have they by heart , and use to take little into the window
window and say , " Zuleika , I be not thy brother , " in tone so tragic that they cause the solemn little maid to open she great eye still wider . she sit , until the proper hour for retirement , sew at 's knee , and listen to Pen read out to she of night without comprehende one word of what he read . he read to he mother ( which she say she like , but do not ) , and , and , and he favourite , which pleas she indifferently . but as for , and above all , this lady use to melt right away , and be absorb into she pocket - handkerchief , when read those authors to she in he kind boyish voice . the ' ' be a book which appear about that time . the son and the mother whisper it to each other with awe -- faint , very faint , and seldom in after-life Pendennis hear that solemn church-music : but he always love the remembrance of it , and of the time when it strike on he heart , and he walk over the field full of hope and void of doubt , as the church - bell rang on morning . it be at this period of he existence , that break out in the 's corner of the , with some verse with which he be perfectly well satisfied . he be the verse sign ' . ,' address 'to a tear ; ' 'On the of the of ; ' singe at the ; ' 'On 's ' ( a tremendous denunciation of , and a solemn warning to the people of to rally against emancipat the ) , etc. , etc .-- all which masterpiece , no doubt keep to this day , along with he first sock , the first cutting of he hair , he bottle , and other interesting relic of he infancy . he use to gallop over the neighbour Dumpling downs , or into the county town , which , if you please , we shall call , spout he own poem , and fill with quite a Byronic afflatus as he think . he genius at this time be of a decidedly gloomy cast . he bring he mother a tragedy , in which , though he kill sixteen people before the second act , it make she laugh so , that he thrust the masterpiece into the fire in a pet . he project a epic poem in blank verse , ' , or the of , and the 's . ' he write part of ' , or the , ' and ' in ;' classical piece , with choruse and stroph and antistroph , which sadly puzzl poor ; and begin a ' History of the , ' in which he lash that order with tremendous severity , and warne he Protestant fellow - countryman of they machination . he loyately do he mother 's heart good to witness . he be a staunch , unflinch - and - man in those day ; and at the election , when stand on the interest , against , 's son , a and a friend of , , with a immense bow for himself , which he mother make , and with a blue ribbon for , ride alongside of the , on he grey mare , and at the head of the Clavering voter , whom the bring up to plump for the . on that day make he first speech at the : and also , it appear , for the first time in he life -- take a little more wine than be good for he . ! what a scene it be at Fairoaks , when he ride back at ever so much o'clock at night . what move about of lantern in the court - yard and stable , though the moon be shin out ; what a gathering of servants , as come home , clatter over the bridge and up the stableyard , with half a score of the voter yell after he the song of the election . he want they all to come in and have some wine -- some very good Madeira -- some capital -- , go and get some , -- and there be no know what the farmer would have do , have not make she appearance in a white wrapper , with a candle -- and scare those zealous Blue so by the sight of she pale handsome face , that they touch they hat and ride off . besides these amusement and occupation in which indulge , there be one which form the main business and pleasure of youth , if the poet tell we aright , whom be always study ; and this young fellow 's heart be so ardent , and he imagination so eager , that it be not to be expect he should long escape the passion to which we allude , and which , lady , you have rightly guess to be that of love . sigh for it first in secret , and , like the love - sick swain in , open he breast and say , " Aura , veni . " what generous youth be there that have not court some such windy mistress in he time ? yes , begin to feel the necessity of a first love -- of a consum passion -- of a object on which he could concentrate all those vague float fancie under which he sweetly suffer -- of a young lady to whom he could really make verse , and whom he could set up and adore , in place of those unsubstantial Ianthes and Zuleika to whom he address the outpouring of he gushing muse . he read he favourite poem over
over and over again , he call upon Venus the delight of god and man , he translate 's ode , and pick out passage suitable to he complaint from , , , and the like . and he be never weary , in they interview , of discourse about love . the faithless tutor entertaine he with sentimental conversation in place of lecture on algebra and ; for be in love too . who could help it , be in daily intercourse with such a woman ? be madly in love ( as far as such a mild flame as 's may be call madness ) with . that honest lady , sit down below stair teach little to play the piano , or devise flannel petticoat for the poor round about she , or otherwise busy with the calm routine of she modest and spotless life , be little aware what storm be brew in two bosom upstairs in the study -- in Pen's , as he sate in he shooting jacket , with he elbow on the green study - table , and he hand clutch he curly brown hair , Homer under he nose , -- and in worthy 's , with whom he be read . here they would talk about and . " Andromache be like my mother , " use to avouch ; " but I say , Smirke , by I would cut off my nose to see ; " and he would spout certain favourite line which the reader will find in they proper place in the third book . he draw portrait of she -- they be extant still -- with straight nos and enormous eye , and ' delineavit et pinxit ' gallantly write underneath . as for he naturally prefer Andromache . and in consequence he be uncommonly kind to . he give he he , of which the boy be fond , and he little greek testament which he own mamma at have purchase and present to he . he buy he a silver pencil - case ; and in the matter of learning let he do just as much or as little as ever he please . he always seem to be on the point of unbosoming himself to : nay , he confess to the latter that he have a -- a attachment , a ardently cherished attachment , about which long to hear , and say , " tell we , old chap , be she handsome ? have she get blue eye or black ? " but 's curate , heaive a gentle sigh , cast up he eye to the ceiling , and beg faintly to change the conversation . poor Smirke ! he invite to dine at he lodging over 's , the milliner 's , in Clavering ; and once when it be rain , and , who have drive in she pony -chaise into Clavering with respect to some arrangement , about leave off mourning probably , be prevail upon to enter the curate 's apartment , he send out for pound - cake instantly . the sofa on which she sate become sacred to he from that day : and he keep flower in the glass which she drank from ever after . as be never tired of hear the praise of she son , we may be certain that this rogue of a_ tutor neglect no opportunity of conversing with she upon that subject . it might be a little tedious to he to hear the story about Pen's generosity , about he bravery in fight the big naughty boy , about he fun and joke , about he prodigious skill in , music , ride , etc. , but what price would he not pay to be in she company ? and the widow , after these conversation , think Smirke a very pleasing and well - inform man . as for she son , she have not settle in she mind whether he be to be and of , or double First class at , and . that all do not possess he peer , be a fact about which there be , in she mind , no manner of question . a simple person , of inexpensive habit , she begin forthwith to save , and , perhaps , to be a little parsimonious , in favour of she boy . there be no entertainment , of course , at Fairoaks , during the year of she weed . , indeed , do the Doctor 's silver dish - cover , of which he be so proud , and which be flourish all over with the arm of the Pendennise , and surmount with they crest , come out of the plate - chest again for long , long year . the household be diminish , and its expense curtail . there be a very blank anchorite repast when dine from home : and he himself head the remonstrance from the kitchen regard the deteriorate quality of the Fairoak beer . she be become miserly for . indeed , who ever accuse woman of be just ? they be always sacrifice themselves or somebody for somebody else 's sake . there happen to be no young woman in the small circle of friend who be in the widow 's intimacy whom could by any possibility gratify by endow she with the inestimable treasure of a heart which he be long to give away . some young fellow in this predicament bestow they young affections upon , the dairymaid , or cast the eye of tenderness upon , the blacksmith 's daughter . think a much too grand a personage to stoop so low . he be too high - minded for a vulgar intrigue , and , at the idea of a intrigue or a seduction , have he ever entertaine it , he heart
heart would have revolt as from the notion of any act of baseness or dishonour . be too old , too large , and too fond of read ' 's . ' the , 's daughter ( of 's , or of , as it be call ) , disgust with the air which they bring into the country , from , where they pass the season , and look down upon as a chit . 's ( , 50th Dragoon Guards ) three girl be in brown - holland pinafore as yet , with the end of they hair - plait tie up in dirty pink ribbon . not have acquire the art of dancing , the youth avoid such chance as he might have have of meeting with the fair sex at the 's ; in fine , he be not in love , because there be nobody at hand to fall in love with . and the young monkey use to ride out , day after day in quest , of ; and peep into the pony -chaise and gentlefolk ' carriage , as they drive along the broad turnpike roads , with a heart beat within he , and a secret tremor and hope that she might be in that yellow postchaise come swing up the hill , or one of those three girl in beaver bonnet in the back seat of the double gig , which the fat old gentleman in black be drive , at four mile a hour . the postchaise contain a snuffy old dowager of seventy , with a maid , she contemporary . the three girl in the beaver bonnet be no handsomer than the turnip that skirt the roadside . do as he might , and ride where he would , the fairy princess that he be to rescue and win , have not yet appear to honest . upon these point he do not discourse to he mother . he have a world of he own . what generous , ardent , imaginative soul have not a secret pleasure - place in which it disport ? let no clumsy pry or dull meddling of ours try to disturb it in we child . be a brute for want to push in where be bathing . leave he occasionally alone , my good madam , if you have a poet for a child . even you admirable advice may be a bore sometimes . you be faultless ; but it do not follow that everybody in you family be to think exactly like yourself . Yonder little child may have thoughts too deep even for you great mind , and fancie so coy and timid that they will not bear themselves when you ladyship sit by . Helen Pendennis by the force of sheer love divine a great number of she son 's secret . but she keep these thing in she heart ( if we may so speak ) , and do not speak of they . besides , she have make up she mind that he be to marry little , who would be eighteen when be six - and - twenty : and have finish he college career , and have make he grand tour , and be settle either in , astonish all the metropolis by he learning and eloquence at the bar , or better still in a sweet country parsonage surround with hollyhock and rose , close to a delightful romantic ivy -covered church , from the pulpit of which would utter the most beautiful sermon ever preach . while these natural sentiment be wage war and trouble in honest Pen's bosom , it chance one day that he ride into , for the purpose of carry to the a tremendous and thrill poem for the next week 's paper ; and put up he horse accord to custom , at the stable of the there , he fall in with a old acquaintance . a grand black tandem , with scarlet wheel , come rattling into the inn yard , as stand there in converse with the hostler about ; and the voice of the driver call out , " Hallo , , be that you ? " in a loud patronising manner . have some difficulty in recognising under the broad - brimmed hat and the vast great - coat and neckcloth , with which the new - comer be habit , the person and figure of he quondam schoolfellow , . a year 's absence have make no small difference in that gentleman . a youth who have be deservedly whip a few month previously , and who spend he pocket - money on tart and hardbake , now appear before in one of those costume to which the public consent , that I take to be quite as influential in this respect as ' 's , ' have award the title of " . ' he have a bull - dog between he leg , and in he scarlet shawl neckcloth be a pin represent another bull - dog in gold : he wear a fur waistcoat lace over with gold chain ; a green cutaway coat with basket - button , and a white upper- coat ornament with cheese - plate button , on each of which be engrave some stirr incident of the road or the chase ; all which ornament set off this young fellow 's figure to such advantage , that you would hesitate to say which character in life he must resemble , and whether he be a boxer en goguette , or a coachman in he gala suit . " leave that place for good , ? " say , descende from he landau and give a finger . " yes , this year -- or more , " say . " Beastly old hole , " remarke . " hate it . hate
hate the Doctor : hate , the second master ; hate everybody there . not a fit place for a gentleman . " " not at all , " say , with a air of the utmost consequence . " by gad , sir , I sometimes dream , now , that the Doctor 's walk into I , " continue ( and smile as he think that he himself have likewise fearful dream of this nature ) . " when I think of the diet there , by gad , sir , I wonder how I stand it . , brutal beef ; pudd on and , and that fit to poison you . just look at my leader -- do you ever see a prettier animal ? drive over from . come the nine mile in two - and - forty minute . not bad go , sir . " " be you stop at , ? " ask . " I be coach there , " say the other , with a nod . " what ? " ask , and in a tone of such wonder , that burst out laugh , and say , " he be blow if he do not think be such a flat as not to know what coaching mean . " " I be come down with a coach from . a tutor , do not you see , old boy ? he be coach I , and some other man , for the little go . I and have the drag between we . and I think I would just tool over and go to the play . do you ever see do the hornpipe ? " and begin to perform some step of that popular dance in the inn yard , look round for the sympathy of he groom and the stable - man . think he would like to go to the play too : and could ride home afterwards , as there be a moonlight . so he accept 's invitation to dinner , and the young man enter the inn together , where stop at the bar , and call upon , the landlady 's fair daughter , who preside there , to give he a glass of ' he mixture . ' and he family have be know at the ever since they come into the country ; and 's carriage and horse always put up there when he pay a visit to the county town . the landlady drop the heir of Fairoaks a very respectful curtsey , and compliment he upon he growth and manly appearance , and ask news of the family at Fairoaks , and of and the Claver people , to all of which question the young gentleman answer with much affability . but he speak to and . Rincer with that sort of good nature with which a young address he father 's subject ; never dream that those bonne gen be he equal in life . 's behaviour be quite different . he inquire for and the cold in he nose , tell Rincer a riddle , ask when she would be ready to marry he , and pay he compliment to , the other young lady in the bar , all in a minute of time , and with a liveliness and facetiousness which set all these lady in a giggle ; and he give a cluck , expressive of great satisfaction , as he toss off he mixture which prepare and hand to he . " have a drop , " say he to , " it be recommend to I by the faculty as a what - do - you - call - 'em -- a stomatic , old boy . give the young one a glass , , and score it up to yours truly . " poor take a glass , and everybody laugh at the face which he make as he put it down -- gin , bitter , and some other cordial be the compound with which be so delighted as to call it by the name of 's own . as chok , sputter , and make face , the other take occasion to remark to that the young fellow be green , very green , but that he would soon form he ; and then they proceed to order dinner -- which determine should consist of turtle and venison ; caution the landlady to be very particular about ice the wine . then Messrs . and stroll down the together -- the former have a cigar in he mouth , which he have draw out of a case almost as big as a portmanteau . he go in to replenish it at 's , and talk to that gentleman for a while , sit down on the counter : he then look in at the fruiterer 's , to see the pretty girl there , to whom he pay compliment similar to those before address to the bar at the ; then they pass the office , for which have he packet ready , in the shape of ' line to , ' but poor do not like to put the letter into the editor 's box while walk in company with such a fine gentleman as . they meet heavy dragoon of the regiment always quarter at ; and stop and talk about the ball , and what a pretty girl be , and what a dem fine woman be . it be in vain that recall to he own mind what a stupid ass Foker use to be at school -- how he could scarcely read , how he be not cleanly in he person , and notorious for he blunder and dulness . be no more like a gentleman now than in he school day : and yet feel a secret pride in strutt down with
with a young fellow who own tandem , talk to officer , and order turtle and champagne for dinner . he listen , and with respect too , to 's account of what the man do at the of which be a ornament , and encounter a long series of story about boat - racing , bump , grass - plat , and milk - punch -- and begin to wish to go up himself to College to a place where there be such manly pleasure and enjoyment . , who live close by Fairoaks , ride by at this minute and touch he hat to , the latter stop he , and send a message to he mother to say that he have meet with a old schoolfellow , and should dine in . the two young gentleman continue they walk , and be pass round the , where they could hear the music of the afternoon service ( a music which always exceedingly impressed and affect ) , but whither come for the purpose of inspect the nursery - maid who frequent the walk there , and who be uncommonly pretty at , and here they stroll until with a final burst of music the small congregation be play out . be one of the few who come from the venerable gate . , he come and shake he by the hand , and eye with Pen' friend , from whose mouth and cigar clouds of fragrance issue , which curl round the Doctor 's honest face and shovel hat . " a old schoolfellow of mine , , " say . the say " h be " : and scowl at the cigar . he do not mind a pipe in he study , but the cigar be a abomination to the worthy gentleman . " I come up on 's business , " the say . " we will ride home , , if you like ? " " I -- I be engage to my friend here , " answer . " you have better come home with I , " say the Doctor . " he mother know he be out , sir , " remark ; " do not she , ? " " but that do not prove that he have not better come home with I , " the Doctor grow , and he walk off with great dignity . " old boy do not like the weed , I suppose , " say . " ! who be here ?-- here be the general , and , the manager . how do , ? how do , ? " " how do my worthy and gallant young Foker ? " say the gentleman address as the general ; and who wear a shabby military cape with a mangy collar , and a hat cock very much over one eye . " trust you be very well , my very dear sir , " say the other gentleman , " and that the will have the honour of you patronage to - night . we perform ' the , ' in which you humble servant will --- " " can not stand you in tights and , , " young say . on which the general , with the irish accent , say , " but I think ye will like , in , or I name be not . " look at these individual with the greatest interest . he have never see a actor before ; and he see 's red face look over the Doctor 's shoulder , as he retreat from the , evidently quite dissatisfied with the acquaintance into whose hand have fall . perhaps it would have be much better for he have he take the parson 's advice and company home . but which of we know he fate ? return to the , and he guest sate down to a handsome repast in the coffee - room ; where bring in the first dish , and bow as gravely as if he be wait upon the lord- Lieutenant of the county . attack the turtle and venison with as much gusto as he have show the year before , when he use to make feast off ginger - beer and smuggle polony . Pen could not but respect he connoisseurship as he pronounce the champagne to be condemn gooseberry , and wink at the port with one eye . the latter he declare to be of the right sort ; and tell the waiter there be no way of humbugge he . all these attendant he know by they Christian name , and show a great interest in they family ; and as the coach drive up , which in those early day use to set off from the , flng the coffee - room window open , and call the guard and coachman by they Christian name , too , ask about they respective family , and imitat with great liveliness and accuracy the tooting of the horn as the ostler whip the horse 's clot off , and the carriage drive gaily away . " a bottle of sherry , a bottle of sham , a bottle of port and a shass caffy , it be not so bad , hay , ? " Foker say , and pronounce , after all these delicacies and a quantity of nut and fruit have be dispatch , that it be time to " toddle . " spring up with very bright eye , and a flush face ; and they move off towards the theatre , where they pay they money to the wheezy old lady slumber in the money - taker 's box . " Mrs . , 's mother - in - law , great in , " say to he companion . know she , too . they have almost they
they choice of place in the box of the theatre , which be no better fill than country theatre usually be in spite of the " universal burst of attraction and galvanic thrill of delight " advertise by in the play - bill . a score or so of people dot the pit - bench , a few more keep a kicking and whistl in the galleries , and a dozen other , who come in with free admission , be in the box where we young gentleman sate . Lieutenants Rodgers and Podgers , and young , of the , occupy a private box . the performer act to they , and these gentleman seem to hold conversation with the player when not engage in the dialogue , and applaude they by name loudly . the manager , who assume all the chief tragic and comic part except when he modestly retreate to make way for the star , who come down occasionally to , be great in the character of the ' . ' he be attire in the tight pantaloon and Hessian boot which the stage legend have give to that injured man , with a large cloak and beaver and a hearse feather in it droop over he raddle old face , and only partially conceal he great buck brown wig . he have the stage jewellery on too , of which he select the largest and most shiny ring for himself , and allow he little finger to quiver out of he cloak with a sham diamond ring cover the first joint of the finger and twiddl in the face of the pit . Bingley make it a favour to the young man of he company to go on in light comedy part with that ring . they flatter he by ask it be history . the stage have its traditional jewel as the Crown and all great family have . this have belong to , who have have it from , who may have buy it for a shilling . fancie the world be fascinate with its glitter . he be read out of the stage - book -- that wonderful stage - book which be not bound like any other book in the world , but be rouge and tawdry like the hero or heroine who hold it ; and who hold it as people never do hold book : and point with he finger to a passage , and wag he head ominously at the audience , and then lift up eye and finger to the ceiling professe to derive some intense consolation from the work between which and heave there be a strong affinity . anybody who have ever see one of we great light comedian , , in a chintz dressing - gown , such as nobody ever wore , and represent himself to the public as a young nobleman in he apartment , and whil away the time with light literature until he friend shall arrive , or he father shall come down to breakfast -- anybody , I say , who have see the great X . over a sham book have indeed have a great pleasure and a abiding matter for thought . directly the see the young man , he act at they ; eye they solemnly over he gilt volume as he lay on the stage - bank show he hand , he ring , and he . he calculate the effect that every one of these ornament would produce upon he victim : he be determined to fascinate they , for he know they have pay they money ; and he see they family come in from the country and fill the cane chair in he box . as he lay on the bank reading , he servant , , make remark upon he master . " again read , " say , " thus it be , from morn to night . to he nature have no beauty -- life no charm . for three year I have never see he smile " ( the gloom of 's face be fearful to witness during these comment of the faithful domestic ) . " nothing divert he . o , if he would but attach himself to any living thing , be it a animal -- for something man must love . " [ ( ) from the hut . ] he cry , " o , how refresh , after seven long week , to feel these warm sunbeam once again . thanks , bounteous heaven , for the joy I taste ! " he press he cap between he hand , look up and pray . the eye he attentively . to the stranger . " this old man 's share of earthly happiness can be but little . yet mark how grateful he be for he portion of it . " . " because though old , he be but a child in the leading - string of hope . " ( he look steadily at , who , however , continue to suck the top of he stick in a unconcerned manner . ) . " hope be the nurse of life . " . " and she cradle -- be the grave . " the utter this with the moan of a bassoon in agony , and fix he eye on so steadily , that the poor lad be quite put out of countenance . he think the whole house must be look at he ; and cast he eye down . as soon as ever he raise they 's be at he again . all through the scene the manager play at he . when he be about to do a good action , and send off with he book , so that that domestic should not witness the deed of benevolence which he meditate , Bingley mark the
the page carefully , so that he might continue the perusal of the volume off the stage if he like . but all be done in the direct face of , whom the manager be bend upon subjugating . how relieve the lad be when the scene end , and , tap with he cane , cry out " , ! " " give he a hand , Pendennis ; you know every chap like a hand , " say ; and the good - natured young gentleman , and laugh , and the dragoon in the opposite box , begin clapping hand to the best of they power . a chamber in close over 's hut and the stranger and he boot ; and servants appear bustling about with chair and table -- " that be and , " whisper . " pretty girl , be not she , ? but stop -- hurray -- bravo ! here be the . " the pit thrill and thump its umbrella ; a volley of applause be fire from the gallery : the officer and clap they hand furiously : you would have think the house be full , so loud be they plaudit . the red face and rag whisker of be see peering from the side - scene . 's eye open wide and bright as . enter with a downcast look , then rally at the sound of the applause , sweep the house with a grateful glance , and , fold she hand across she breast , sank down in a magnificent curtsey . more applause , more umbrellas ; Pen this time , flam with wine and enthusiasm , clap hand and sang " bravo " louder than all . see he , and everybody else , and old , the little first fiddler of the orchestra ( which be this night increase by a detachment of the band of the Dragoons , by the kind permission of ) , look up from the desk where he be perch , with he crutch beside he , and smile at the enthusiasm of the lad . those who have only see in later day , since she marriage and introduction into life , have little idea how beautiful a creature she be at the time when we friend first set eye on she : and I warn my reader , as beforehand , that the pencil which illustrate this work ( and can draw a ugly face tolerably well , but be sadly put out when it try to delineate a beauty ) can give no sort of notion of she . she be of the tallest of woman , and at she then age of six - and - twenty - for six - and - twenty she be , though she vow she be only nineteen -- in the prime and fulness of she beauty . she forehead be vast , and she black hair wav over it with a natural ripple ( that beauty of late day have try to imitate with the help of the crimping - iron ) , and be confine in shining and voluminous braid at the back of a neck such as you see on the shoulders of the -- that delight of god and man . she eye , when she lift they up to gaze on you , and ere she drop they purple deep - fringed lid , shone with tenderness and mystery unfathomable . and seem to look out from they and then retire coyly , as if asham to have be see at the lattice . who could have have such a commanding brow but a woman of high intellect ? she never laugh ( indeed she tooth be not good ) , but a smile of endless tenderness and sweetness play round she beautiful lip , and in the dimple of she cheek and she lovely ching . she nose defy description in those day . she ears be like two little pearl shell , which the earring she wore ( though the handsomest property in the theatre ) only insulte . she be dress in long flowing rob of black , which she manage and sweep to and for with wonderful grace , and out of the fold of which you only see she sandal occasionally ; they be of rather a large size ; but think they as ravish as the slipper of . but it be she hand and arm that this magnificent creature most excel in , and somehow you could never see she but through they . they surround she . when she fold they over she bosom in resignation ; when she drop they in mute agony , or raise they in superb command ; when in sportive gaiety she hand flutter and wave before she , like what shall we say ?-- like the snowy dove before the chariot of -- it be with these arm and hand that she beckon , repell , entreate , embrace , she admirer -- no single one , for she be arm with she own virtue , and with she father 's valour , whose sword would have leapt from its scabbard at any insult offer to he child -- but the whole house ; which rise to she , as the phrase be , as she curtsey and bow , and charme it . thus she stand for a minute -- complete and beautiful -- as stare at she . " I say , , be not she a stunner ? " ask . " Hush ! " say , " she be speak . " she begin she business in a deep sweet voice . those who know the play of the ' stranger , ' be aware that the remark make by the various character be not valuable in themselves , either for they sound sense ,
, they novelty of observation , or they poetic fancy . in fact , if a man be to say it be a stupid play , he would not be far wrong . nobody ever talk so . if we meet idiot in life , as will happen , it be a great mercy that they do not use such absurdly fine word . the 's talk be sham , like the book he read and the hair he wear , and the bank he sit on , and the diamond ring he make play with -- but , in the midst of the balderdash , there run that reality of love , child , and forgiveness of wrong , which will be listen to wherever it be preach , and set all the world sympathising . with what smother sorrow , with what gush patho , deliver she part ! at first , when as 's housekeeper , and prepare for he Excellency 's arrival , she have to give order about the bed and furniture , and the dinner , etc. , to be get ready , she do so with the calm agony of despair . but when she could get rid of the stupid servants and give vent to she feeling to the pit and the house , she overflow to each individual as if he be she particular confident , and she be cry out she grief on he shoulder : the little fiddler in the orchestra ( whom she do not seem to watch , though he follow she ceaselessly ) twitch , twiste , nod , point about , and when she come to the favourite passage , " I have a too , if he be still alive -- ah , yes , if he be still alive . he little sister , too ! why , Fancy , dost thou rack I so ? why dost thou image my poor child faint in sickness , and cry to -- to -- they mum --um --other , " when she come to this passage little bury he face in he blue cotton handkerchief , after cry out " . " all the house be affect . , for he part , take out a large yellow bandanna , weep piteously . as for , he be go too far for that . he follow the woman about and about -- when she be off the stage , it and the house be blank ; the light and the red officer , reel wildly before he sight . he watch she at the side - scene -- where she stand wait to come on the stage , and where she father take off she shawl : when the reconciliation arrive , and she fling herself down on 's shoulders , whilst the child clung to they knee , and the Countess ( ) and ( perform with great liveliness and spirit by Garbetts ) -- while the rest of the character for a group round they , hot eye only see , . the curtain fall upon he like a pall . he do not hear a word of what say , who come forward to announce the play for the next evening , and who take the tumultuous applause , as usual , for himself . be not even distinctly aware that the house be call for , nor do the manager seem to comprehend that anybody else but himself have cause the success of the play . at last he understand it -- step back with a grin , and presently appear with on he arm . how beautiful she look ! she hair have fall down , the officer throw she flower . she clutch they to she heart . she put back she hair , and smile all round . she eye meet Pen's . down go the curtain again : and she be gone . not one note could he hear of the overture which the brass band of the dragoon blow by kind permission of . " she be a crusher , be not she now ! " ask of he companion . do not know exactly what Foker say , and answer vaguly . he could not tell the other what he feel ; he could not have speak , just then , to any mortal . besides , do not quite know what he feel yet ; it be something overwhelming , madden , delicious ; a fever of wild joy and undefined long . and now and come on to dance the favourite double hornpipe , and abandon himself to the delight of this ballet , just as he have to the tear of the tragedy , a few minute before . do not care for it , or indeed think about the dance , except to remember that that woman be act with she in the scene where she first come in . it be a mist before he eyes . at the end of the dance he look at he watch and say it be time for he to go . " hang it , stay to see the of the - , " say , " 's splendid in it ; he wear red tight , and have to carry over the Pine - bridge of the Cataract , only she be too heavy . it be great fun , do stop . " look at the bill with one lingering fond hope that 's name might be hide , somewhere , in the list of the actor of the after - piece , but there be no such name . go he must . he have a long ride home . he squeeze 's hand . he be chok to speak , but he could not . he quit the theatre and walk frantically about the town , he know not
not how long ; then he mount at the and ride homeward , and Claver clock sang out one as he come into the yard at Fairoaks . the lady of the house might have be awake , but she only hear he from the passage outside he room as he dash into bed and pull the clothes over he head . Pen have not be in the habit of pass wakeful nights , so he at once fall off into a sound sleep . even in later day and with a great deal of care and other thoughtful matter to keep he awake , a man from long practice or fatigue or resolution begin by go to sleep as usual : and get s a nap in advance of Anxiety . but she soon come up with he and jog he shoulder , and say , " come , my man , no more of this laziness , you must wake up and have a talk with I . " then they fall to together in the midnight . well , whatever might afterwards happen to he , poor little be not come to this state yet ; he tumble into a sound sleep -- do not wake until a early hour in the morning , when the rook begin to cee from the little wood beyond he bedroom window ; and -- at that very instant and as he eye start open , the beloved image be in he mind . " my dear boy , " he hear she say , " you be in a sound sleep and I would not disturb you : but I have be close by you pillow all this while : and I do not intend that you shall leave I . I be love ! I bring with I fever and passion : wild long , madden desire ; restless craving and seek . many a long day ere this I hear you call out for I ; and behold now I be come . " be frightene at the summon ? not he . he do not know what be come : it be all wild pleasure and delight as yet . and as , when three year previously , and on enter the fifth form at the , he father have make he a present of a gold watch which the boy take from under he pillow and examine on the instant of wake : for ever rub and polish it up in private and retire into corner to listen to its ticking : so the young man exult over he new delight ; feel in he waistcoat pocket to see that it be safe ; wound it up at night , and at the very first moment of waking hug it and look at it .-- by the way , that first watch of Pen's be a showy ill - manufacture piece : it never go well from the beginning , and be always get out of order . and after put it aside into a drawer and forget it for some time , he swap it finally away for a more useful time - keeper . feel himself to be ever so many year older since yesterday . there be no mistake about it now . he be as much in love as the best hero in the best romance he ever read . he tell to bring he shaving water with the utmost confidence . he dress himself in some of he finest clothes that morne : and come splendidly down to breakfast , patronise he mother and little , who have be strumm she music lesson for hour before ; and who after he have read the prayer ( of which he do not heed one single syllable ) wonder at he grand appearance , and ask he to tell she what the play be about ? laugh and decline to tell what the play be about . in fact it be quite as well that she should not know . then she ask he why he have get on he fine pin and beautiful new waistcoat ? blush and tell he mother that the old schoolfellow with whom he have dine at be read with a tutor at , a very learned man ; and as he be himself to go to , and as there be several young man pursue they study at -- he be anxious to ride over -and - and just see what the course of they reading be . make a long face . look hard at she son , trouble more than ever with the vague doubt and terror which have be haunt she ever since the last night , when bring back the news that would not return home to dinner . 's eye defy she . she try to conseal herself , and drive off she fear . the boy have never tell she a untruth . conduct himself during breakfast in a very haughty and supercilious manner ; and , take leave of the elder and younger lady , be presently hear ride out of the stablecourt . he go gently at first , but gallop like a madman as soon as he think that he be out of hearing . Smirke , think of he own affair , and softly ride with he toe out , to give he three hour ' reading at , meet he pupil , who shoot by he like the wind . 's pony shy , as the other thunder past he ; the gentle curate go over he head among the stinging - nettle in the hedge . laugh as they meet , point towards the road , and be go half a mile in that direction before poor have pick himself up . have resolve in he mind that he must see Foker that morning ; he
he must hear about she ; know about she ; be with somebody who know she ; and honest , for he part , sit up among the stinging - nettle , as he pony crop quietly in the hedge , think dismally to himself , ought he to go to Fairoaks now that he pupil be evidently go away for the day . yes , he think he might go , too . he might go and ask when yoArthu would be back ; and hear she 's . he get up on the little pony -- both be used to he slipping off -- and advanc upon the house from which he scholar have just rush away in a whirlwind . thus love make fools of all of we , big and little ; and the curate have tumble over head and heel in pursuit of it , and have start in the first heat of the mad race . at without slacken she pace , the mare gallop on to , where put she up at the inn stable , and run straightway to 's lodging , which he know from the direction give to he by that gentleman on the previous day . on reach these apartment , which be over a chemist 's shop whose stock of cigar and sodawater go off rapidly by the kind patronage of he young inmate , only find , 's friend , and part owner of the tandem which the latter have drive into , who be smoke , and teach a little dog , a friend of he , trick with a bit of biscuit . 's healthy red face , fresh from the gallop , compare oddly with the waxy debauch little feature of 's chum ; the latter remark it . " who be that man ? " he think , " he look as fresh as a bean . he hand do not shake of a morning , I would bet five to one . " Foker have not come home at all . here be a disappointment !-- could not say when he friend would return . sometimes he stop a day , sometimes a week . of what college be ? would he have anything ? there be a very fair tap of ale . be enable to know 's name , on the card which the latter take out and lay down ( perhaps in these day be rather proud of have a card ) -- and so the young man take leave . then go down the rock , and walk about on the sand , bite he nail by the shore of the much - sound sea . it stretch before he bright and immeasurable . the blue water come roll into the bay , foam and roar hoarsely : look they in the face with blank eye , hardly regard they . what a tide there be pour into the lad 's own mind at the time , and what a little power have he to check it ! fling stone into the sea , but it still keep come on . he be in a rage at not see . he want to see . he must see . " suppose I go on -- on the road , just to see if I can meet he , " thought . be saddl in another half hour , and gallop on the grass by the road . about four mile from , the Clavering road branch off , as everybody know , and the mare naturally be for taking that turn , but , cut she over the shoulder , pass the turning , and ride on to the turnpike without see any sign of the black tandem and red wheel . as he be at the turnpike he might as well go on : that be quite clear . so ride to the , and the hostler tell he that be there sure enough , and that " he have be a makin a tremendous row the night afore , a drinkin and a singin , and want to fight Tom the postboy : which I be think he would have have the worst of it , " the man add , with a grin . " have you carry up you master 's 'ot water to shave with ? " he add , in a very satirical manner , to 's domestic , who here come down the yard bear he master 's clothes , most beautifully brush and arrange . " show up to , " and follow the man at last to the apartment , where , in the midst of a immense bed , lay repose . the feather bed and bolster swell up all round , so that you could hardly see he little sallow face and red silk nightcap . " Hullo ! " say . " who go there ? brother , quickly tell ! " sang out the voice from the bed . " what ! again ? be you acquaint with you absence ? do you sup with we last night ? no stop -- who sup with we last night , ? " " there be the three officer , sir , and , sir , and , sir , " the man answer , who receive all 's remark with perfect gravity . " ah yes : the cup and merry jest go round . we chant and I remember I want to fight a postboy . do I thrash he , ? " " no , sir . fight do not come off , sir , " say , still with perfect gravity . he be arrange 's dressing - case -- a trunk , the gift of a fond mother , without which the young fellow never travell . it contain a prodigious apparatus in
in plate ; a silver dish , a silver mug , silver box and bottle for all sort of essences , and a choice of razor ready against the time when 's beard should come . " do it some other day , " say the young fellow , yawn and throw up he little lean arm over he head . " no , there be no fight ; but there be chanting . chant , I chant , the general chant -- Costigan I mean .-- do you ever hear he s ' the pig under the , ' ? " " the man we meet yesterday , " say , all in a tremor , " the father of --- " " of the , -- the very man . be not she a , ? " " Please , 's in the sittin - room , sir , and say , sir , you ask he to breakfast , sir . call five time , sir ; but would not wake you on no account ; and have be here since eleven o'clock , sir --- " " how much be it now ? " " one , sir . " " what would the best of mother say , " cry the little sluggard , " if she see I in bed at this hour ? she send I down here with a grinder . she want I to cultivate my neglect genus -- he , be ! I say , , this be not quite like seven o'clock school , -- be it , old boy ? " -- and the young fellow burst out into a boyish laugh of enjoyment . then he add -- " go in and talk to the general whilst I dress . and I say , , ask he to s you ' the pig under the ;' it be capital . " go off in great perturbation , to meet , and commence he toilet . of 's two grandfather , the one from whom he inherit a fortune be a brewer ; the other be a earl , who endow he with the most do mother in the world . the Foker have be at the Cistercian school from father to son ; at which place , we friend , whose name could be see over the playground wall , on a public - house sign , under which ' 's ' be paint , have be dreadfully bully on account of he trade , he uncomely countenance , he inaptitude for learning and cleanliness , he gluttony and other weak point . but those who know how a susceptible youth , under the tyranny of he schoolfellow , become silent and a sneak , may understand how in a very few month after he liberation from bondage , he develop himself as he have do ; and become the humorous , the sarcastic , the brilliant Foker , with whom we have make acquaintance . a dunce he always be , it be true ; for learn can not be acquire by leave school and enter at college as a fellow - commoner ; but he be now ( in he own peculiar manner ) as great a dandy as he before have be a slattern , and when he enter he sitting - room to join he two guest , arrive scent and array in fine linen , and perfectly splendo in appearance . or -- for the latter be the rank which he prefer to assume -- be seat in the window with the newspaper hold before he at arm 's length . the 's eye be somewhat dim ; and he be spell the paper , with the help of he lip , as well as of those bloodshot eye of he , as you see gentleman do to whom reading be a rare and difficult occupation . he hat be cocke very much on one ear ; and as one of he foot lay up in the window - seat , the observer of such matter might remark , by the size and shabbiness of the boot which the wore , that time do not go very well with he . Poverty seem as if it be dispose , before it take possession of a man entirely , to attack he extremity first : the coverings of he head , foot , and hand be its first prey . all these part of the 's person be particularly rakish and shabby . as soon as he see he descende from the window - seat and salute the new - comer , first in a military manner , by convey a couple of he finger ( cover with a break black glove ) to he hat , and then remove that ornament altogether . the be inclin to be bald , but he bring a quantity of lank iron - grey hair over he pate , and have a couple of whisp of the same fall down on each side of he face . much whisky have spoilead what complexion may have possess in he youth . he once handsome face have now a copper tinge . he wear a very high stock , scarr and stain in many place ; and a dress - coat tightly buttone up in those part where the button have not part company from the garment . " the young gentleman to whom I have the honour to be introjuice yesterday in the , " say the , with a splendid bow and wave of he hat . " I hope I see you well , sir . I mark ye in the thayatre last night during I daughter 's perfawrumance ; and miss ye on my return . I do but conduct she home , sir , for , though poor , be a gentleman ; and
and when I reinter the house to pay I respect to I joyous young friend , -- ye be gone . we have a jolly night of ut , sir -- , the three gallant young dragoon , and you ' umble servant . , sir , it put I in mind of one of we old night when I bear he 's commission in the and . " and he pull out a old snuff box , which he present with a stately air to he new acquaintance . be a great deal too much flurry to speak . this shabby - look buck be -- be she father . the be perfume with the recollection of the last night 's cigar , and pull and twist the tuft on he ching as jauntily as any young dandy . " I hope , -- , be well , sir , " say , flush up . " she -- she give I greater pleasure , than -- than I -- I -- I ever enjoy at a play . I think , sir -- I think she be the finest actress in the world , " he gas out . " you hand , young man ! for ye speak from you heart , " cry the . " thank ye , sir , a old soldier and a fond father thanks ye . she be the finest actress in the world . I have see the Siddon , sir , and the O'Nale -- they be great , but what be they compare to ? I do not wish she should ashume she own name while on the stage . I family , sir , be proud people ; and the of think that a honest man , who have borne she Majesty 's colour in the and third , would demean himself , by permit he daughter to earn she old father 's bread . " " there can not be a more honourable duty , surely , " say . " Honourable ! , sir , I would like to see the man who say would consent to anything dishonourable . I have a heart , sir , though I be poor ; I like a man who have a heart . you have : I read it in you honest face and steady eye . and would you believe it " ? he add , after a pause , and with a pathetic whisper , " that that who have make he fortune by I child , give she but two guinea a week : out of which she find herself in dress , and which , add to I own small means , make we all ? " now the 's means be so small as to be , it may be say , quite invisible . but nobody know how the wind be tempere to shorn irish lamb , and in what marvellous place they find pasture . if , whom I have the honour to know , would but have tell he history , it would have be a great moral story . but he neither would have tell it if he could , nor could if he would ; for the be not only unaccustomed to tell the truth , -- he be unable even to think it -- and fact and fiction reel together in he muzzy , whiskify brain . he begin life rather brilliantly with a pair of colour , a fine person and leg , and one of the most beautiful voice in the world . to he latest day he sang with admirable patho and humour those wonderful irish ballad which be so mirthful and so melancholy : and be always the first himself to cry at they patho . poor cos ! he be at once brave and maudlin , humorous and a idiot ; always good - natured , and sometimes almost trustworthy . up to the last day of he life he would drink with any man , and back any man 's bill : and he end be in a spunging - house , where the heriff 's officer , who take he , be fond of he . in he brief morning of life , form the delight of regimental mess , and have the honour of singe he song , bacchanalian and sentimental , at the table of the most illustrious generals and commander - in - chief , in the course of which period he drank three time as much claret as be good for he , and spend he doubtful patrimony . what become of he subsequently to he retirement from the army , be no affair of ours . I take it , no foreigner understand the life of a irish gentleman without money , the way in which he manage to keep afloat -- the wind - raising conspiracies , in which he engage with heroe as unfortunate as himself -- the means by which he contrive , during most day of the week , to get he portion of whisky - and - water : all these be mystery to we inconceivable : but suffice it to say , that through all the storm of life have float somehow , and the lamp of he nose have never go out . before he and have have a half - hour 's conversation , the manage to extract a couple of sovereign from the young gentleman for ticket for he daughter 's benefit , which be to take place speedily ; and be not a bona fide transaction such as that of the last year , when poor have lose fifteen shilling by she venture ; but be a arrangement with the manager , by which the lady be to have the sale of a certain number of ticket , keep for herself a large portion of
of the sum for which they be sell . have but two pound in he purse , and he hand they over to the for the ticket ; he would have be afraid to offer more lest he should offend the latter 's delicacy . scrawl he a order for a box , lightly slipp the sovereign into he waistcoat , and slap he hand over the place where they lay . they seem to warm he old side . " faith , sir , " say he , " the bullion 's scarcer with I than it use to be , as be the case with many a good fellow . I win six hundthred of 'em in a single night , sir , when I kind friend , he the of , be in . " and he straightway pour out to a series of story regard the claret drink , the bet make , the races ride by the garrison there , with which he keep the young gentleman amuse until the arrival of they host and he breakfast . then it be good to see the 's behaviour before the devilled turkey and the mutton chop ! he story pour forth unceasingly , and he spirit rise as he chat to the young man . when he get a bit of sunshine , the old lazzarone bask in it ; he prate about he own affair and past splendour , and all the lord , general , and Lord-Lieutenants he have ever kny . he describe the death of he darling , the late , and the challenge he have send to , of the Slasher , for look rude at as she be on she kyar in the Phaynix ; and then he describe how the captain apologise , give a dinner at the , where six of they drank twinty - one bottle of claret , etc . he announce that to sit with two such noble and generous young fellow be the happiness and pride of a old soldier 's existence ; and have have a second glass of , be so happy that he begin to cry . altogether we should say that the captain be not a man of much strength of mind , or a very eligible companion for youth ; but there be worse man , hold much better place in life , and more dishonest , who have never commit half so many roguery as he . they walk out , the hold a arm of each of he dear young friend , and in a maudlin state of contentment . he wink at one or two tradesman 's shop where , possibly , he owe a bill , as much as to say , " see the company I be in -- sure I will pay you , my boy , " -- and they part finally with at a billiard - room , where the latter have a particular engagement with some gentleman of 's regiment . and the shabby still walk the street together ; the , in he sly way , make inquirie about 's fortune and station in life . tell he how 's father be a celebrated brewer , and he mother be , 's daughter . the break out into a strain of exaggerate compliment and panegyric about , whose " native aristocracie , " he say , " could be see with the twinkling of a oi -- and only serve to adawrun other quality which he possess , a foin intellect and a generous heart , " -- in not one word of which speech do the accurately believe . walk on , listen to he companion 's prate , wonder , amuse , and puzzl . it have not as yet enter into the boy 's head to disbelieve any statement that be make to he ; and be of a candid nature himself , he take naturally for truth what other people tell he . have never have a better listener , and be highly flatter by the attentiveness and modest bearing of the young man . so much pleased be he with the young gentleman , so artless , honest , and cheerful do seem to be , that the finally make he a invitation , which he very seldom accord to young man , and ask if he would do he the fever to enter he humble abode , which be near at hand , where the would have the honour of inthrojuicing he young friend to he daughther , ? be so delightfully shocke at this invitation , and be so stricken down by the happiness thus suddenly offer to he , that he think he should have drop from the 's arm at first , and tremble lest the other should discover he emotion . he gas out a few incoherent word , indicative of the high gratification he should have in be present to the lady for whose -- for whose talents he have conceive such a admiration -- such a extreme admiration ; and follow the , scarcely know whither that gentleman lead he . he be go to see she ! he be go to see she ! in she be the centre of the universe . she be the kernel of the world for . yesterday , before he know she , see a period ever so long ago -- a revolution be between he and that time , and a new world about to begin . the conduct he young friend to that quiet little street in , which be call 's , which lie in the ecclesiastical quarter of the town , close by 's Green and the canons 's house , and be overlook by the enormous towers of the cathedral ; there the dwelt modestly in the first floor of a low gable house , on
on the door of which be the brass plate of ' , and - . ' be dead , however . he widow be a pew -opener in the cathedral hard by ; he eldest son be a little scamp of a choir - boy , who play toss - halfpenny , lead he little brothers into mischief , and have a voice as sweet as a angel . a couple of the latter be sit on the door - step , down which you go into the passage of the house ; and they jump up with great alacrity to meet they lodger , and plunge wildly , and rather to surprise , at the swallow - tail of the 's dress - coat ; for the truth be , that the good - nature gentleman , when he be in cash , generally bring home a apple or a piece of gingerbread for these child . " Whereby the widdy never press I for rint when not convanient , " as he remark afterwards to , wink knowingly , and lay a finger on he nose . tumble down the step , and as he follow he companion up the creaking old stair , he knee tremble under he . he could hardly see when he enter , follow the , and stand in the room -- in she room . he see something black before he , and wave as if make a curtsey , and hear , but quite indistinctly , make a speech over he , in which the , with he usual magniloquence , express to " I child " he wish to make she know to " he dear and admirable young friend , , a young gentleman of property in the neighbourhood , a person of refoin moind , and enviable manners , a sincare lover of poethry , and a man possest of a feeling and affectionate heart . " " it be very fine weather , " say , in a irish accent , and with a deep rich melancholy voice . " very , " say . in this romantic way they conversation begin ; and he find himself seat on a chair , and have leisure to look at the young lady . she look still handsomer off the stage , than before the lamps . all she attitude be naturally grand and majestical . if she go and stand up against the mantelpiece she robe drape itself classically round she ; she ching support itself on she hand , the other line of she form arrange themselves in full harmonious undulation -- she look like a Muse in contemplation . if she sate down on a cane - bottom chair , she arm round itself over the back of the seat , she hand seem as if it ought to have a sceptre put into it , the fold of she dress fall naturally round she in order , like lady of honour round a throne , and she look like a empress . all she movement be graceful and imperial . in the morning you could see she hair be blue - black , she complexion of dazzling fairness , with the faintest possible blush flickering , as it be , in she cheek . she eye be grey , with prodigious long lash ; and as for she mouth , have give I subsequently to understand , that it be of a staring red colour , with which the most brilliant geranium , sealing - wax , or 's coat , could not vie . " and very warm , " continue this empress and of . again assent , and the conversation roll on in this manner . she ask whether he have have a pleasant evening at the , and he recount the supper and the tumbler of punch . then the father ask she how she have be employ the morning . " Bow come , " say she , " at ten , and we study . it be for the twenty - fourth , when I hope , sir , we shall have the honour of see ye . " " indeed , indeed , you will , " cry ; wonder that she should say ' , ' and speak with a irish inflection of voice naturally , who have not the least Hibernian accent on the stage . " I have secure 'um for you benefit , dear , " say the , tap he waistcoat pocket , wherein lay Pen's sovereign , and wink at , with one eye , at which the boy blush . " --- the gentleman 's very obleging , " say . " my name be , " say , blush . " I -- I -- hope you 'll -- you will remember it . " he hebe thump so as he make this audacious declaration , that he almost chok in utter it . " Pendennis " -- she answer slowly , and look he full in the eyes , with a glance , so straight , so clear , so bright , so kill , with a voice so sweet , so round , so low , that the word and the glance shot through and through , and perfectly transfix he with pleasure . " I never know the name be so pretty before , " say . " 'Tis a very pretty name , " say . " be not a pretty name . remember , papa , when we be on the , yong , who use to play second old man , and marry , the ; they be both engage in now , at the 's , and get five pound a week . be not he real name . ' give it he , I do not know why . he name be ;
; that be , he real name be Pott ; fawther a clergyman , very respectable . be in , and get in debt . ye remember ; he come out in , to 's . " " and a pretty she be , " the interpose ; " a woman of fifty , and a mother of ten child . ' Tis you ought to have be , or my name be not . " " I do not take the lead business then , " say modestly ; " I be not fit for r't till teach I . " " true for you , my dear , " say the : and bend to , he add , " Rejuice in circumstance , sir , I be for some time a fencing - master in ( there be only three man in the empire could touch I with the foil once , but 's get old and stiff now , sir ) , and my daughter have a engagement at the thayater there ; and ' twas there that my friend , , who see she capability , and be a uncommon ' cute man , give she lesson in the dramatic art , and make she what ye see . what have ye do since go , ? " " sure , I have make a pie , " Emily say , with perfect simplicity . she pronounce it " . " " if ye will try it at four o'clock , sir , say the word , " say gallantly . " that girl , sir , make the best veal and ham pie in , and I think I can promise ye a glass of punch of the right flavour . " have promise to be at home to dinner at six o'clock , but the rascal thought he could accommodate pleasure and duty in this point , and be only too eager to accept this invitation . he look on with delight and wonder whilst busy herself about the room , and prepare for the dinner . she arrange the glass , and laid and smoothe the little cloth , all which duty she perform with a quiet grace and good humour , which enchant she guest more and more . the " poy " arrive from the baker 's in the hand of one of the little choir - boy 's brother at the proper hour : and at four o'clock find himself at dinner -- actually at dinner with the greatest tragic actress in the world , and she father -- with the handsomest woman in all creation -- with he first and only love , whom he have adore ever since when ?-- ever since yesterday , ever since for ever . he eat a crust of she make , he pour she out a glass of beer , he see she drink a glass of punch -- just one wine - glass full -- out of the tumbler which she mix for she papa . she be perfectly good - natured , and offer to mix one for too . it be prodigiously strong ; have never in he life drunk so much spirit and water . be it the punch , or the punch - maker who intoxicate he ? during dinner , when the , whom he daughter treat most respectfully , cease prattling about himself and he adventur , try to engage the Fotheringay in conversation about poetry and about she profession . he ask she what she think of 's madness , and whether she be in love with or not ? " in love with such a little ojous wretch as that stunt manager of a ? " she bristle with indignation at the thought . explain it be not of she he speak , but of of the play . " oh , indeed ; if no offence be mean , none be take : but as for , indeed , she do not value he -- not that glass of punch . " next try she on . " ? who be he ? " --" the author of the play in which she have be perform so admirably . " " she do not know that -- the man 's name at the beginning of the book be , " she say . laugh at she adorable simplicity . he tell she of the melancholy fate of the author of the play , and how have kill he . it be for the first time in she life that have ever hear of 's existence , but she look as if she be very much interested , and she sympathy suffice for honest . and in the midst of this simple conversation , the hour and a quarter which poor Pen could afford to allow himself , pass away only too quickly ; and he have take leave , he be gone , and away on he rapid road homeward on the back of . she be call upon to show she mettle in the three journey which she make that day . " what be that he be talk about , the madness of , and the theory of the great german critic on the subject ? " Emily ask of she father . " ' deed then I do not know , Milly dear , " answer the captain . " we will ask when he come . " " anyhow , he be a nice , fair - speak pretty young man , " the lady say : " how many ticket do he take of you ? " " faith , then , he take six , and hageve I two guinea , , " the say . " I suppose they young chap be not too flush of coin . " " he be full of book
book - learn , " continue . " ! he , he , what a droll name indeed , now ; and the poor fellow kill by , too ! do ye ever hear such a thing ? I will ask Bows about it , papa , dear . " " a queer death , sure enough , " ejaculate the , and change the painful theme . " 'Tis a elegant mare the young gentleman ride , " go on to say ; " and a grand breakfast , intirely , that young give we . " " he be good for two private box , and at leest twenty ticket , I should say , " cry the daughter , a prudent lass , who always keep she fine eye on the main chance . " I will go bail of that , " answer the papa , and so they conversation continue awhile , until the tumbler of punch be finish ; and they hour of departure soon come , too ; for at half - past six be to appear at the theatre again , whither she father always accompany she ; and stood , as we have see , in the side - scene watch she , and drank spirit - and - water in the green - room with the company there . " how beautiful she be , " think , canter homeward . " how simple and how tender ! how charme it be to see a woman of she commanding genius busy herself with the delightful , though humble , office of domestic life , cook dish to make she old father comfortable , and brew drink for he with she delicate finger ! how rude it be of I to begin to talk about professional matter , and how well she turn the conversation ! by the way , she talk about professional matters herself ; but then with what fun and humour she tell the story of she comrade , , as he be call ! there be no humour like irish humour . she father be rather tedious , but thoroughly amiable ; and how fine of he , give lesson in fencing after he quit the army , where he be the pet of the of ! Fencing ! I should like to continue my fencing , or I shall forget what teach I . uncle always like I to fence -- he say it be the exercise of a gentleman . hang it . I will take some lesson of . go along , -- up the hill , old lady . , -- how she speak the word ! Emily , Emily ! how good , how noble , how beautiful , how perfect , she be ! " now the reader , who have have the benefit of overhear the entire conversation which have with , can judge for himself about the power of she mind , and may perhaps be dispose to think that she have not say anything astonishingly humorous or intellectual in the course of the above interview . she have married , and take she position in the world as the most spotless and irreproachable lady since , and I have have the pleasure of make she acquaintance : and must certainly own , against my friend Pen's opinion , that he adore be not a clever woman . the truth be , she have not only never hear of , but she have never hear of , or , or any dramatist in whose play she have not a part : and of these dramas she only know the part which concern herself . a wag once tell she that be bear at Algiers : and ask she ,-- which write first , ' , ' or ' every man in he humour . ' but she have the best of the joke , for she have never hear of or every man in he humour , or , or perhaps Algier . it be all one to she . she act what little tell she -- where he tell she to sob , she sob -- where he tell she to laugh , she laugh . she give the tirade or the repartee without the slightest notion of its meaning . she go to church and go every , with a reputation perfectly intact , and be ( and be ) as guiltless of sense as of any other crime . but what do we Pen know of these thing ? he see a pair of bright eye , and he believe in they -- a beautiful image , and he fall down and worship it . he suppli the meaning which she word want ; and create the divinity which he love . be the first who fall in love with a ass , or the only artist who have go crazy about a stone ? he have find she ; he have find what he soul thirst after . he fling himself into the stream and drank with all he might . let those say who have be thirsty once how delicious that first dratch is . as he ride down the avenue towards home -- shriek with laughter as he see the once more come demurely away from on he pony . have dawdle and stay at the cottage on the way , and then dawdle with over she lesson -- and then look at 's garden and improvement until he have perfectly bore out that lady : and he have take he leave at the very last minute without that invitation to dinner which he fondly expect . be full of kindness and triumph . " what , pick up and sound ? " he cry out laugh . " come along back , old fellow , and eat my dinner -- I have have
have mine : but we will have a bottle of the old wine and drink she health , . " poor Smirke turn the pony 's head round , and jog along with . he mother be charme to see he in such high spirit , and welcome for he sake , when say he have force the curate back to dine . he give a most ludicrous account of the play of the night before , and of the acting of the manager , in he rickety , and the enormous as the Countess , in rumple green satin and a polish cap ; he mimick they , and delighte he mother and little , who clap she hand with pleasure . " and ? " say . " she be a stunner , ma 'am , " say , laugh , and use the word of he rever friend , . " a what , ? " ask the lady . " what be a stunner , ? " cry , in the same voice . so he give they a queer account of , and how he use to be call Vats and Grains , and by other contumelious name at school : and how he be now exceedingly rich , and a fellow Commoner at . but gay and communicative as he be , do not say one syllable about he ride to that day , or about the new friend whom he have make there . when the two lady retire , , with flash eye , fill up two great bumper of , and look full in the face say , " here be to she ! " " here be to she , " say the curate with a sigh , lifte the glass and empty it , so that he face be a little pink when he put it down . have even less sleep that night than on the night before . in the morning , and almost before dawn , he go out and saddle that unfortunate himself , and ride she on the down like mad . again have rouse he -- and say , " , , I be here . " that charme fever -- that delicious long -- and fire , and uncertainty ; he hug they to he -- be would not have lose they for all the world . both and and do not occupy much for some time after this , and honest have a very easy time with he pupil . be the animal who suffer most in the present state of Pen's mind , for , besides those day when he could publicly announce he intention of go to to take a fencing - lesson , and go thither with the knowledge of he mother , whenever he see three hour clear before he , the young rascal make a rush for the city , and find he way to 's . he be as frantic with vexation when go lame , as at , when he horse be kill under he : and get deeply into the book of the man who keep the hunting - stable at for the doctoring of he own , and the hire of another animal . then , and perhaps once in a week , under pretence of go to read a play with , this young reprobate set off so as to be in time for the Competitor down coach , stay a couple of hour in , and return on the which leave for at ten at night . once he secret be nearly lose by 's simplicity , of whom ask whether they have read a great deal the night before , or a question to that effect . be about to tell the truth , that he have never see at all , when the latter 's boot - heel come grind down on 's toe under the table , and warn the curate not to betray he . they have have conversation on the tender subject , of course . it be good sport ( if you be not yourself engage in the conversation ) to hear two man in love talk . there must be a confident and depositary somewhere . when inform , under the most solemn vows of secrecy , of Pen's condition of mind , the curate say , with no small tremor , " that he hope it be no unworthy object -- no unlawful attachment , which have form " -- for if so , the poor fellow feel it would be he duty to break he vow and inform Pen's mother , and then there would be a quarrel , he feel , with sickening apprehension , and he would never again have a chance of see what he must like in the world . " unlawful , unworthy ! " bounce out at the curate 's question . " she be as pure as she be beautiful ; I would give my heart to no other woman . I keep the matter a secret in my family , because -- because -- there be reasons of a weighty nature which I be not at liberty to disclose . but any man who breath a word against she purity insult both she honour and mine , and -- and dammy , I will not stand it . " Smirke , with a faint laugh , only say , " well , well , do not call I out , , for you know I can not fight ; " but by this compromise the wretched curate be put more than ever into the power of he pupil , and the greek and mathematics suffer correspondingly . if the reverend gentleman have have much discernment , and look into the poet 's corner of the , as it arrive in the 's bag ,
, he might have see ' . ,' ' passion and ,' ' line to , of the , ' appear every week ; and other verse of the most gloomy , thrill , and passionate cast . but as these poem be no longer sign NEP by they artful composer , but subscribe EROS , neither the tutor nor , the good soul , who cut all she son 's verse out of the paper , know that be no other than that flam , who sang so vehemently the character of the new actress . " who be the lady , " at last ask , " whom you rival be always singe in the ? he write something like you , dear Pen , but yours be much the best . have you see ? " say yes , he have ; that night he go to see the " , " she act . by the way , she be go to have a benefit , and be to appear in -- suppose we be to go -- , you know , mother -- we can get horse from the Clavering Arms . spring up with delight , she longe for a play . introduce " Shakspeare , you know , " because the decease Pendennis , as become a man of he character , profess a uncommon respect for the bard of , in whose work he safely say there be more poetry than in all ' 's ' put together . and though do not much read the work in question , yet he enjoin to peruse they , and often say what pleasure he should have , when the boy be of a proper age , in take he and mother to see some good play of the immortal poet . the ready tear well up in the kind mother 's eye as she remember these speech of the man who be gone . she kiss she son fondly , and say she would go . jump for joy . be happy ?--wa he asham ? as he hold he mother to he , he longe to tell she all , but he keep he counsel . he would see how he mother like she ; the play should be the thing , and he would try he mother like 's . Helen , in she good humour , ask to be of the party . that ecclesiastic have be breed up by a fond parent at , who have a objection to dramatic entertainment , and he have never yet see a play . but , !-- but to go with in she carriage , and sit a whole night by she side !-- he could not resist the idea of so much pleasure , and make a feeble speech , in which he speak of temptation and gratitude , and finally accept 's most kind offer . as he speak he give she a look , which make she exceedingly uncomfortable . she have see that look more than once , of late , pursue she . he become more positively odious every day in the widow 's eye . we be not go to say a great deal about Pen's courtship of , for the reader have already have a specimen of she conversation , much of which need surely not be report . Pen sate with she hour after hour , and pour forth all he honest boyish soul to she . everything he know , or hope , or feel , or have read , or fancie , he tell to she . he never ti of talk and long . one after another , as he thought rise in he hot eager brain , he clothed they in word , and tell they to she . she part of the tete - a - tete be not to talk , but to appear as if she understand what talk ( a difficult matter , for the young fellow blur out no small quantity of nonsense ) , and to look exceedingly handsome and sympathising . the fact be , whilst he be make one of he tirade -- and delighted , perhaps , and wonder at he own eloquence , the lad would go on for twenty minute at a time -- the lovely Emily , who could not comprehend a tenth part of he talk , have leisure to think about she own affair , and would arrange in she own mind how they should dress the cold mutton , or how she would turn the black satin , or make herself out of she scarf a bonnet like 's new one , and so forth . spout and ; passion and poetry : she business be to throw up she eye , or fix they for a moment on he face , to cry , " oh , ' ttis beautiful ! ah , how exquisite ! repeat those line again . " and off the boy go , and she return to she own simple thought about the turned gown , or the hashed mutton . in fact Pen' passion be not long a secret from the lovely or she father . upon he second visit , he admiration be quite evident to both of they , and on he departure the old gentleman say to he daughter , as he wink at she over he glass of grog , " , darling , I think ye have hook that chap . " " Pooh , ' tis only a boy , papa dear , " remarke . " sure he be but a child . " Pen would have be very much pleased if he have hear that phrase -- he be gallop home wild with pleasure , and shout out she name as he ride . " ye have hook 'um any how
how , " say the , " and let I tell ye he be not a bad fish . I ask at the , and , the grocer , where he mother dale -- fine fortune -- drive in she chariot -- splendid park and grounds -- -- only son --property all he own at twenty - one -- ye might go further and not fare so well , . " " they boy be mostly talk , " say , seriously . " ye know at how ye go on about young , and I have a whole desk full of verse he write I when he be in Trinity College ; but he go abroad , and he mother marry he to a . " " be a young nobleman ; and in they it be natural : and ye be not in the position in which ye be now , Milly dear . but ye must not encourage this young chap too much , for , bedad , will not have any thrilling with he daughter . " " no more will he daughter , papa , you may be sure of that , " say . " a little sip more of the punch ,-- sure , ' ttis beautiful . ye need not be afraid about the young chap -- I think I be old enough to take care of myself , . " so use to come day after day , rush in and gallop away , and grow more wild about the girl with every visit . sometimes the be present at they meeting ; but have a perfect confidence in he daughter , he be more often inclin to leave the young couple to themselves , and cock he hat over he eye , and strut off on some errand when enter . how delightful those interview be ! the 's drawing - room be a low wainscote room , with a large window look into the 's . there Pen sate and talk -- and talk -- Emily , look beautiful as she sate at she work -- look beautiful and calm , and the sunshine come stream in at the great window , and light up she superb face and form . in the midst of the conversation , the great bell would begin to boom , and he would pause smile , and be silent until the sound of the vast music die away -- or the rook in the cathedral elm would make a great noise towards sunset -- or the sound of the organ and the chorister would come over the quiet air , and gently hush talk . by the way , it must be say that , in a plain shawl and a close bonnet and veil , go to church every of she life , accompany by she indefatigable father , who give the response in a very rich and fine brogue , join in the psalm and chanting , and behave in the most exemplary manner . , the house - friend of the family , be exceedingly wroth at the notion of 's marriage with a stripling seven or eight year she junior . , who be a cripple , and own that he be a little more deform even than the manager , so that he could not appear on the stage , be a singular wild man of no small talents and humour . attract first by 's beauty , he begin to teach she how to act . he shriek out in he crack voice the part , and he pupil learn they from he lip by rote , and repeat they in she full rich tone . he indicate the attitude , and set and move those beautiful arm of hers . those who remember this grand actress on the stage can recall how she use always precisely the same gesture , look , and tone ; how she stand on the same plank of the stage in the same position , roll she eye at the same instant and to the same degree , and weep with precisely the same heart - rende patho and over the same pathetic syllable . and after she have come out trembl with emotion before the audience , and look so exhausted and tearful that you fancie she would faint with sensibility , she would gather up she hair the instant she be behind the curtain , and go home to a mutton - chop and a glass of brown stout ; and the harrow labour of the day over , she go to be and snor as resolutely and as regularly as a porter . Bows then be indignant at the notion that he pupil should throw she chance away in life by bestow she hand upon a little country squire . as soon as a manager see she he prophesy that she would get a engagement , and a great success . the misfortune be that the managers have see she . she have play in three year before , and fail from utter stupidity . since then it be that have take she in hand and teach she part after part . how he work and scream , and twist , and repeat line over and over again , and with what indomitable patience and dulness she follow he ! she know that he make she : and let herself be make . she be not grateful , or ungrateful , or unkind , or ill - humoured . she be only stupid ; and be madly in love with she . the post-horse from the arrive in due time , and carry the party to the theatre at , where be gratify in perceive that a tolerably large audience be assemble . the young gentleman from have a box , in the front of which sate and he
he friend , splendidly attired in the most full - blown evening costume . they salute in a cordial manner , and examine he party , of which they approve , for little be a pretty little red - cheek girl with a quantity of shining brown ringlet , and , dress in black velvet with the diamond cross which she sport on great occasion , look uncommonly handsome and majestic . behind these sate , and the gentle Smirke with the curl repose on he fair forehead , and he white tie in perfect order . he blush to find himself in such a place -- but how happy be he to be there ! he and bring book of ' Hamlet ' with they to follow the tragedy , as be the custom of honest countryfolk who go to a play in state . , coachman , groom , and gardener to , take he place in the pit , where 's man be also visible . it be dot with non-commissioned officer of the Dragoon , whose band , by kind permission of , were , as usual , in the orchestra ; and that corpulent and distinguished warrior himself , with he Waterlo medal and a number of he young man , make a handsome show in the box . " who be that odd - look person bow to you , ? " ask of she son . blush a great deal . " he name be , , " he say -- " a Peninsular officer . " in fact it be the in a new shoot of clothes , as he call they , and with a large pair of white kid glove , one of which he wave to , whilst he lay the other sprawling over he heart and coat - button . do not say any more . and how be to know that be the father of ? , from , be the Hamlet of the night , modestly contente himself with the part of , and reserve he chief strength for in ' - , ' which be the second piece . we have nothing to do with the play : except to say that look lovly , and perform with admirable wild patho laugh , weep , gaze wildly , wave she beautiful white arm , and flinge about she snatch of flower and song with the most charming madness . what a opportunity she splendo black hair have of tossing over she shoulders ! she make the most charming corpse ever see ; and while and be battle in she grave , she be look out from the back scene with some curiosity towards Pen' box , and the family party assemble in it . there be but one voice in she praise there . be in ecstasy with she beauty . be bewilder by the piece , and the Ghost , and the play within the play ( during which , as lay at 's knee , feel that he would have like to strangle ) , but cry out great praise of that beautiful young creature . be charme with the effect which she produce on he mother -- and the clergyman , for he part , be exceedingly enthusiastic . when the curtain fall upon that group of slaughtere personage , who be despatch so suddenly at the end of ' , ' and whose demise astonished poor little not a little , there be a immense shouting and applause from all quarter of the house ; the intrepid Smirke , violently excited , clap he hand , and cry out " , , " as loud as the officer themselves . these be greatly move ,-- ils s'agitaient sur leur banc , -- to borrow a phrase from we neighbour . they be lead cheering into action by the portly Swallowtail , who wave he cap -- the non-commissioned officer in the pit , of course , gallantly follow they chiefs . there be a roar of bravo ring through the house ; bellow with the loudest , " ! Fotheringay ! " and . and give the view - halloo from they box . even begin to wave about she pocket - handkerchief , and little dance , laugh , clap , and look up at with . lead the beneficiaire forward , amidst burst of enthusiasm -- and she look so handsome and radiant , with she hair still over she shoulders , that hardly could contain himself for rapture : and he lean over he mother 's chair , and shoute , and hurray , and wave he hat . it be all he could do to keep he secret from , and not say , " look ! that be the woman ! be not she peerless ? I tell you I love she . " but he disguise these feeling under a enormous bellowing and hurray . as for and she behaviour , the reader be refer to a former page for a account of that . she go through precisely the same business . she survey the house all round with glance of gratitude ; and tremble , and almost sank with emotion , over she favourite trap - door . she seize the flower ( discharge a prodigious bouquet at she , and even make a feeble shy with a rose , and blush dreadfully when it fall into the pit ) . she seize the flower and press they to she swell heart -- etc. , etc . -- in a word -- we refer the reader to earlier page . Twinkl in she breast poor old see a locket which he have buy of in , with the last shilling he be worth , and a sovereign borrowed from . - ' follow , at which sweet story we gentle - hear friend be
be exceedingly charme and affect : and in which , with a russet gown and a pink ribbon in she cap , look to the full as lovely as . be great in . Goll , as the , look like the figure - head of a seventy - four ; and Garbetts , as , a miscreant who form a plan for carry off - eye , and wave a immense cock hat say , " come what may , he will be the ruin of she " -- all these perform they part with they accustom talent ; and it be with a sincere regret that all we friend see the curtain drop down and end that pretty and tender story . if have be alone with he mother in the carriage as they go home , he would have tell she all , that night ; but he sate on the box in the moonshine smoke a cigar by the side of , who warm himself with a comforter . 's tandem and lamp whir by the sober old Clavering poster as they be a couple of mile on they road home , and salute 's carriage with some considerable variation of on the key - bugle . it happen two day after the above gaiety that of entertaine a few select clerical friend at dinner at he . that they drank uncommonly good port wine , and abuse the Bishop over they dessert , be very likely matter : but with such we have nothing at present to do . we friend , of , be one of the 's guest , and be a gallant man , and see from he place at the mahogany the 's lady walk up and down the grass , with she child sport around she , and she pink parasol over she lovely head -- the steep out of the french window of the dining - room into the lawn , which skirt that apartment , and leave the other white neckcloth to gird at my lord Bishop . then the go up and offer . Dean he arm , and they saunter over the ancient velvet lawn , which have be mow and roll for immemorial Deans , in that easy , quiet , comfortable manner , in which people of middle age and good temper walk after a good dinner , in a calm golden summer evening , when the sun have but just sunk behind the enormous cathedral - towers , and the sickle - shaped moon be grow every instant brighter in the heaven . now at the end of the 's garden there be , as we have state , 's house , and the window of the first - floor room be open to admit the pleasant summer air . a young lady of six - and - twenty , whose eye be perfectly wide open , and a luckless boy of eighteen , blind with love and infatuation , be in that chamber together ; in which person , as we have before see they in the same place , the reader will have no difficulty in recognising and . the poor boy have take the plunge . Trembl with passionate emotion , he heart beat and throbb fiercely , tear rush forth in spite of he , he voice almost chok with feeling , poor have say those word which he could withhold no more , and fling himself and he whole store of love , and admiration , and ardour at the foot of this mature beauty . be he the first who have do so ? have none before or after he stak all they treasure of life , as a savage do he land and possession against a dratch of the fair - skins ' fire - water , or a couple of bauble eye ? " do you mother know of this , ? " say , slowly . he seize she hand madly and kiss it a thousand time . she do not withdraw it . " do the old lady know it ? " think to herself , " well , perhaps she may , " and then she remember what a handsome diamond cross have on the night of the play , and think , " sure 'twill go in the family . " " calm yourself , dear Arthur , " she say , in she low rich voice , and sniff sweetly and gravely upon he . then , with she disengage hand , she put the hair lightly off he throbbing forehead . he be in such a rapture and whirl of happiness that he could hardly speak . at last he gas out , " my mother have see you , and admire you beyond measure . she will learn to love you soon : who can do otherwise ? she will love you because I do . " " ' deed then , I think you do , " say , perhaps with a sort of pity for . she do ! of course here go off into a rhapsody through which , as we have perfect command over we own feeling , we have no reason to follow the lad . of course , love , truth , and eternity be produce : and word be try but find impossible to plumb the tremendous depth of he affection . this speech , we say , be no business of ours . it be most likely not very wise , but what right have we to overhear ? let the poor boy fl out he simple heart at the woman 's foot , and deal gently with he . it be best to love wisely , no doubt : but to love foolishly be better than not to be able to love at all . some of we can not
not : and be proud of we impotence too . at the end of he speech again kiss the imperial hand with rapture -- and I believe it be at this very moment , and while and be engage in conversation , that young master , she son , pull he mother by the back of she capacious dress and say -- " I say , ma ! look up there " -- and he waggle he innocent head . that be , indeed , a view from the 's garden such as seldom be see by -- or be write in Chapters . there be poor Pen perform a salute upon the rosy finger of he charmer , who receive the embrace with perfect calmness and good humour . master look up and grinned , little look at she brother , and open the mouth of astonishment . 's countenance defy expression , and as for , when he beheld the scene , and see he prime favourite and dear pupil Pen , he stand mute with rage and wonder . spy the party below at the same moment , and give a start and a laugh . " sure there be somebody in the 's garden , " she cry out ; and withdraw with perfect calmness , whilst dart away with he face glow like coal . the garden party have re-enter the house when he venture to look out again . the sickle moon be blaze bright in the heaven then , the star be glitter , the bell of the cathedral toll nine , the 's guest ( all save one , who have call for he horse Dumpling , and ride off early ) be partaking of tea and butter cake in 's drawing - room -- when take leave of . arrive at home in due time afterwards , and be go to slip off to bed , for the poor lad be greatly wear and agitate , and he high - strung nerve have be at almost a madden pitch when a summon come to he by the old footman , whose countenance bear a very ominous look , that he mother must see he below . on this he tie on he neckcloth again , and go downstairs to the drawing - room . there sate not only he mother , but she friend , the . 's face look very pale by the light of the lamp -- the Doctor 's be flushed , on the contrary , and quiver with anger and emotion . see at once that there be a crisis , and that there have be a discovery . " now for it , " he think . " where have you be , ? " say in a trembling voice . " how can you look that -- that dear lady , and a clergyman in the face , sir ? " bounce out the , in spite of 's pale , appeal look . " where have he be ? where he mother 's son should have be asham to go . for you mother be a angel , sir , a angel . how dare you bring pollution into she house , and make that spotless creature wretch with the thought of you crime ? " " ! " say . " do not deny it , sir , " roar the Doctor . " do not add lie , sir , to you other infamy . I see you myself , sir . I see you from the 's . I see you kiss the hand of that infernal pain -- - " " , " say , clapp he fist on the table , till the lamp flicker up and shake , " I be a very young man , but you will please to remember that I be a gentleman -- I will hear no abuse of that lady . " " lady , sir , " cry the Doctor , " that a lady -- you -- you -- you stand in you mother 's presence and call that -- that woman a lady !--- " " in anybody 's presence , " shoute out . " she be worthy of any place . she be as pure as any woman . she be as good as she be beautiful . if any man but you insult she , I would tell he what I think ; but as you be my oldest friend , I suppose you have the privilege to doubt of my honour . " " no , no , , dearest , " cry out in a excess of joy . " I tell , I tell you , Doctor , he be not -- not what you think : " and the tender creature come trembl forward flng herself on Pen's shoulder . feel himself a man , and a match for all the doctor in . he be glad this explanation have come . " you see how beautiful she be , " he say to he mother , with a soothing , protect air , like with in the play . " I tell you , dear mother , she be as good . when you know she you will say so . she be of all , except you , the simplest , the kindest , the most affectionate of woman . why should she not be on the stage ?-- she maintain she father by she labour . " " old reprobate , " grow the Doctor , but do not hear or heed . " if you could see , as I have , how orderly she life be , how pure and pious she whole conduct , you would -- as I do -- yes , as I do " --( with a savage look at the Doctor ) --"
--" spurn the slanderer who da to do she wrong . she father be a officer , and distinguished himself in . he be a friend of he the of , and be intimately know to the of , and some of the first officer of we army . he have meet my uncle at 's , he think . he own family be one of the most ancient and respectable in , and indeed be as good as we own . the be king of . " " why , bless my soul , " shriek out the Doctor , hardly know whether to burst with rage or laughter , " you do not mean to say you want to marry she ? " put on he most princely air . " what else , , " he say , " do you suppose would be my desire ? " utterly foil in he attack , and knock down by this sudden lunge of , the Doctor could only gasp out , " , ma'am , send for the major . " " send for the major ? with all my heart , " say of and of , with a most superb wave of the hand . and the colloquy terminate by the writing of those two letter which be laid on major Pendennis 's breakfast - table , in , at the commencement of 's most veracious history . in which the major make he appearance we acquaintance , major , arrive in due time at Fairoaks , after a dreary night pass in the mail - coach , where a stout fellow - passenger , swell preternaturally with great - coat , have crowd he into a corner , and keep he awake by snoring indecently ; where a widow lady , opposite , have not only shut out the fresh air by closing all the window of the vehicle , but have fill the interior with fume of rum and water , which she suck perpetually from a bottle in she reticule ; where , whenever he catch a brief moment of sleep , the twanging of the horn at the turnpike - gate , or the scuffling of he huge neighbour wedge he closer and closer , or the play of the widow 's foot on he own tender toe , speedily wake up the poor gentleman to the horror and reality of life - - a life which have pass away now and become impossible , and only life in fond memory . eight mile a hour , for twenty or five - and - twenty hour , a tight mail - coach , a hard seat , a gouty tendency , a perpetual change of coachman grumbl because you do not fee they enough , a fellow - passenger partial to spirit - and - water , -- who have not borne with these evils in the jolly old time ? and how could people travel under such difficulty ? and yet they do , and be merry too . next the widow , and by the side of the major 's servant on the roof , be a couple of school - boy go home for the midsummer holiday , and wonder to see they sup at the inn at , where they take in a cargo of ham , egg , pie , pickle , tea , coffee , and boil beef , which surprise the poor major , sipp a cup of very feeble tea , and think with a tender dejection that 's dinner be come off at that very moment . the ingenuous ardour of the boy , however , amuse the major , who be very good - natured , and he become the more interested when he find that the one who travel inside with he be a lord 's son , whose noble father Pendennis , of course , have meet in the world of fashion which he frequent . the little lord sleep all night through , in spite of the squeezing , and the horn - blowing , and the widow ; and he look as fresh as paint ( and , indeed ; pronounce himself to be so ) when the major , with a yellow face , a bristly beard , a wig out of curl , and strong rheumatic grief shoot through various limb of he uneasy body , descende at the little lodge - gate at , where the porteress and gardener 's wife reverentially greet he , and , still more respectfully , , he man . be on the look - out for this expect guest , and see he from she window . but she do not come forward immediately to greet he . she know the major do not like to be see at a surprise , and require a little preparation before he care to be visible . , when a boy , have incur sad disgrace by carry off from the major 's dressing - table a little morocco box , which it must be confess contain the major 's back tooth , which he naturally would leave out of he jaw in a jolting mail - coach , and without which he would not choose to appear . , he man , make a mystery of mystery of he wig : curl they in private place : introduce they mysteriously to he master 's room ;-- nor without he head of hair would the major care to show himself to any member of he family , or any acquaintance . he go to he apartment then and supply these deficiency ; he groan , and moan , and wheeze , and curse through he toilet , as a old buck will , who have be up all night with a rheumatism , and have a long duty to perform . and finally
finally be belt , curl , and set straight , he descende upon the drawing - room , with a grave majestic air , such as befit one who be at once a man of business and a man of fashion . be not there , however ; only Helen , and little sew at she knee ; and to whom he never present more than a forefinger , as he do on this occasion after salut he sister - in - law . take the finger trembl and drop it -- and then fle out of the room . major Pendennis do not want to keep she , or indeed to have she in the house at all , and have he private reason for disapproving of she : which we may mention on some future occasion . meanwhile disappear and wander about the premise seek for : whom she presently find in the orchard , pace up and down a walk there in earnest conversation with Smirke . he be so occupy that he do not hear 's clear voice singe out , until pull he by the coat and point towards she as she come running . she run up and put she hand into he . " come in , , " she say , " there be somebody come ; uncle Arthur 's come . " " he be , be he ? " say , and she feel he grasp she little hand . he look round at with uncommon fierceness , as much as to say , I be ready for he or any man .-- cast up he eye as usual and heav a gentle sigh . " lead on , , " say , with a half fierce , half comic air -- " lead on , and say I wait upon my uncle . " but he be laugh in order to hide a great anxiety : and be screw he courage inwardly to face the ordeal which he know be now before he . have take into he confidence in the last two day , and after the outbreak attendent on the discovery of , and during every one of those forty - eight hour which he have pass in 's society , have do nothing but talk to he tutor about -- -- , etc. , to all which talk listen without difficulty , for he be in love himself , most anxious in all thing to propitiate , and indeed very much himself enrapture by the personal charms of this goddess , whose like , never have be before at a theatrical representation , he have not beheld until now . 's fire and volubility , he hot eloquence and rich poetical trope and figure , he manly heart , kind , ardent , and hopeful , refuse to see any defect in the person he love , any difficulty in they position that he might not overcome , have half convinced that the arrangement propose by be a very feasible and prudent one , and that it would be a great comfort to have settle at , in the yellow room , establish for life there , and marry at eighteen . and it be a fact that in these two day the boy have almost talk over he mother , too ; have parry all she objection one after another with that indignant good sense which be often the perfection of absurdity ; and have bring she almost to acquiesce in the belief that if the marriage be doom in heaven , why doom it be -- that if the young woman be a good person , it be all that she for she part have to ask ; and rather to dread the arrival of the guardian uncle who she foresee would regard Pen's marriage in a manner very different to that simple , romantic , honest , and utterly absurd way in which the widow be already dispose to look at question of this sort . for as in the old allegory of the gold and silver shield , about which the two knights quarrell , each be right accord to the point from which he look : so about marriage ; the question whether it be foolish or good , wise or otherwise , depend upon the point of view from which you regard it . if it mean a snug house in , and pretty little dinner - party , and a pretty little brougham to drive in the , and a decent provision not only for the young people , but for the little to come ; and if these be the necessary of life ( and they be with many honest people ) , to talk of any other arrangement be a absurdity : of love in lodging -- a babyish folly of affection : that can not pay coach - hire or afford a decent milliner -- as mere wicked balderdash and childish romance . if on the other hand you opinion be that people , not with a assure subsistence , but with a fair chance to obtain it , and with the stimulus of hope , health , and strong affection , may take the chance of for better or worse , and share it be good or its evil together , the polite theory then become a absurdity in its turn : worse than a absurdity , a blasphemy almost , and doubt of Providence ; and a man who wait to make he chosen woman happy , until he can drive she to church in a neat little carriage with a pair of horse , be no better than a coward or a trifler , who be neither worthy of love nor of fortune . I do not say that the town folk be not right , but be a country - breed woman ,
, and the book of life , as she interpret it , tell she a different story to that page which be read in city . like most soft and sentimental woman , matchmak , in general , form a great part of she thought , and I daresay she have begin to speculate about she son 's fall in love and marry long before the subject have ever enter into the brain of the young gentleman . it please she ( with that dismal pleasure which the idea of sacrificing themselves give to certain woman ) to think of the day when she would give up all to , and he should bring he wife home , and she would surrender the key and the best bedroom , and go and sit at the side of the table , and see he happy . what do she want in life , but to see the lad prosper ? as a empress certainly be not too good for he , and would be honoure by become . ; so if he select humble instead of , she would be content with he lordship 's choice . never mind how lowly or poor the person might be who be to enjoy that prodigious honour , be willing to bow before she and welcome she , and yield she up the first place . but a actress -- a mature woman , who have long cease blushing except with rouge , as she stand under the eager glance of thousand of eye -- a illiterate and ill - breed person , very likely , who must have live with light associate , and have hear doubtful conversation -- oh ! it be hard that such a one should be choose , and that the matron should be depose to give place to such a Sultana . all these doubt the widow lay before during the two day which have of necessity to elapse ere the uncle come down ; but he meet they with that happy frankness and ease which a young gentleman exhibit at he time of life , and route he mother 's objection with infinite satisfaction to himself . be a paragon of virtue and delicacy ; she be as sensitive as the most timid maiden ; she be as pure as the unsullied snow ; she have the finest manners , the most graceful wit and genius , the most charming refinement and justness of appreciation in all matters of taste ; she have the most admirable temper and devotion to she father , a good old gentleman of high family and fall fortune , who have liv , however , with the best society in : he be in no hurry , and could afford to wait any time , -- till he be one - and - twenty . but he felt ( and here he face assume a awful and harrow solemnity ) that he be engage in the one only passion of he life , and that death alone could close it . tell he , with a sad smile and shake of the head , that people survive these passion , and as for long engagement contract between very young man and old woman -- she know a instance in she own family -- 's poor father be a instance -- how fatal they be . , however , be resolve that death must be he doom in case of disappointment , and rather than this -- rather than baulk he , in fact -- this lady would have submit to any sacrifice or personal pain , and would have go down on she knee and have kiss the foot of a daughter - in - law . yoArthu know he power over the widow , and the young tyrant be touch whilst he exercise it . in those two day he bring she almost into submission , and patronise she very kindly ; and he pass one evening with the lovely pie -maker at , in which he brag of he influence over he mother ; and he spend the other night in compose a most flaming and conceit copy of verse to he divinity , in which he vow , like , that he would make she famous with he sword and glorious by he pen , and that he would love she as no mortal woman have be adore since the creation of womankind . it be on that night , long after midnight , that wakeful Helen , pass stealthily by she son 's door , see a light stream through the chink of the door into the dark passage , and hear Pen tossing and tumbling , and mumbl verse in he bed . she wait outside for a while , anxiously listen to he . in infantile fever and early boyish illness , many a night before , the kind soul have so kept watch . she turn the lock very softly now , and go in so gently , that for a moment do not see she . he face be turn from she . he papers on he desk be scatter about , and more be lie on the bed round he . he be bite a pencil and think of rhyme and all sort of folly and passion . he be jump into 's grave : he be the stranger take to he arm , beautiful , with the raven ringlet fall over she shoulders . and , and all the love of the , and , and all the love - songs he have ever read , be work and seethe in this young gentleman 's mind , and he be at the very height and paroxysm of the imaginative frenzy when he mother find he . " , " say the mother 's soft silver voice : and he start up and turn
turn round . he clutch some of the papers and push they under the pillow . " why do not you go to sleep , my dear ? " she say , with a sweet tender smile , and sate down on the bed and take one of he hot hand . look at she wildly for a instant --" I could not sleep , " he say -- " I -- I be -- I be write . " -- and hereupon he fling he arm round she neck and say , " o mother ! I love she , I love she ! " -- how could such a kind soul as that help soothing and pity he ? the gentle creature do she best : and think with a strange wonderment and tenderness that it be only yesterday that he be a child in that bed ; and how she use to come and say she prayer over it before he wake upon holiday morning . they be very grand verse , no doubt , although do not understand they ; but old cos , with a wink and a know finger on he nose , say , " put they up with th ' other letther , darling . 's pome be nothing to this . " so Milly lock up the manuscript . when then , the major be dress and presentable , present himself to , he find in the course of ten minute ' colloquy that the poor widow be not merely distress at the idea of the marriage contemplate by , but actually more distressed at think that the boy himself be unhappy about it , and that he uncle and he should have any violent altercation on the subject . she besotch major Pendennis to be very gentle with : " he have a very high spirit , and will not brook unkind word , " she hint . " speak to he rather roughly -- and I must own unjustly , the other night -- for my dearest boy 's honour be as high as any mother can desire -- but Pen's answer quite frightene I , it be so indignant . Recollect he be a man now ; and be very -- very cautious , " say the widow , lay a fair long hand on the major 's sleeve . he take it up , kiss it gallantly and look in she alarmed face with , and a scorn which he be too polite to show . " ! " think the old negotiator , " the boy have actually talk the woman round , and she would get he a wife as she would a toy if master cry for it . why be there no such thing as lettre - de - cachet -- and a Bastille for young fellow of family ? " the major live in such good company that he might be excuse for feeling like a .-- he kiss the widow 's timid hand , press it in both he , and lay it down on the table with one of he own over it , as he smile and look she in the face . " confess , " say he , " now , that you be think how you possibly can make it up to you conscience to let the boy have he own way . " she blush and be move in the usual manner of female . " I be think that he be very unhappy -- and I be too ---- " " to contradict he or to let he have he own wish ? " ask the other ; and add , with great comfort to he inward self , " I be would ---- if he shall . " " to think that he should have form so foolish and cruel and fatal a attachment , " the widow say , " which can but end in pain whatever be the issue . " " the issue sha not be marriage , my dear sister , " the major say resolutely . " we be not go to have a , the head of the house , marry a strolling mountebank from a booth . no , no , we will not marry into , . " " if the match be break suddenly off , " the widow interpose , " I do not know what may be the consequence . I know 's ardent temper , the intensity of he affections , the agony of he pleasure and disappointment , and I tremble at this one if it must be . indeed , indeed , it must not come on he too suddenly . " " my dear madam , " the major say , with a air of the deepest commiseration " I 've no doubt yoArthu will have to suffer confoundedly before he get over the little disappointment . but be he , think you , the only person who have be so render miserable ? " " no , indeed , " say , hold down she eye . she be think of she own case , and be at that moment seventee again -- and most miserable . " I , myself , " whisper she brother - in - law , " have undergone a disappointment in early life . a young woman with fifteen thousand pound , niece to a -- most accomplish creature -- a third of she money would have run up my promotion in no time , and I should have be a lieutenant -- colonel at thirty : but it might not be . I be but a penniless lieutenant : she parent interfere : and I embark for , where I have the honour of be secretary to , when commander - in - without she . what happen ? we return
return we letter , send back we lock of hair ( the major here pass he finger through he wig ) , we suffer -- but we recover . she be now a baronet 's wife with thirteen grow - up child ; alte , it be true , in person ; but she daughter remind I of what she be , and the third be to be present early next week . " Helen do not answer . she be still think of old time . I suppose if one life to be a hundr : there be certain passage of one 's early life whereon the recollection will always carry we back to again , and that be think of one of these . " look at my own brother , my dear creature , " the major continue gallantly : " he himself , you know , have a little disappointment when he start in the -- the medical profession -- a eligible opportunity present itself . , I remember the name , be daughter of a apoth -- a practitioner in very large practice ; my brother have very nearly succeed in he suit .-- but difficulty arise : disappointment superven , and -- and I be sure he have no reason to regret the disappointment , which give he this hand , " say the major , and he once more politely presse 's finger . " those marriage between people of such different rank and age , " say , " be sad thing . I have know they produce a great deal of unhappiness .-- 's father , my cousin , who -- who be bring up with I " -- she add , in a low voice , " be a instance of that . " " most injudicious , " cut in the major . " I do not know anything more painful than for a man to marry he superior in age or he inferior in station . Fancy marry a woman of low rank of life , and have you house fill with she confound tag - rag - and - bobtail of relation ! Fancy you wife attach to a mother who drop she h 's , or call ! how be you to introduce she into society ? my dear , I will name no name , but in the very best circle of society I have see man suffer the most excruciating agony , I have know they to be cut , to be lose utterly , from the vulgarity of they wife 's connection . what do do last year at she dejeune dansant after the Bohemian Ball ? she tell that he might bring he daughter or send they with a proper chaperon , but that she would not receive who be a druggist 's daughter , or some such thing , and as remark of she , never want medicine certainly , for she never have a h in she life . , what would have be the trifling pang of a separation in the first instance to the endure infliction of a constant misalliance and intercourse with low people ? " " what , indeed ! " say , dimly dispose towards laughter , but yet check the inclination , because she remember in what prodigious respect she decease husband hold major Pendennis and he story of the great world . " then this fatal woman be ten year older than that silly young scapegrace of a Arthur . what happen in such case , my dear creature ? I do not mind tell you , now we be alone that in the highest state of society , misery , undeviat misery , be the result . look at come into a room with he wife -- why , good Ged , she look like 's mother . what be the case between and , whose love match be notorious ? he have already cut she down twice when she have hang herself out of jealousy for , the dancer ; and mark my word , good g , one day he will not cut the old woman down . no , my dear madam , you be not in the world , but I be : you be a little romantic and sentimental ( you know you be -- woman with those large beautiful eye always be ) ; you must leave this matter to my experience . marry this woman ! at eighteen a actress of thirty -- bah bah !-- I would as soon he send into the kitchen and marry the cook . " " I know the evils of premature engagement , " sigh out : and as she have make this allusion no less than thrice in the course of the above conversation , and seem to be so oppressed with the notion of long engagement and unequal marriage , and as the circumstance we have to relate will explain what perhaps some person be anxious to know , namely who little be , who have appear more than once before we , it will be as well to clear up these point in another chapter . in which be keep wait at the door , while the reader be inform who little be . once upon a time , then , there be a young gentleman of who come to pass the long vacation at the village where young be live with she mother , the widow of the lieutenant slain at . this gentleman , whose name be the , be nephew to , and by consequence , own cousin to , so that it be very right that he should take lodging in he aunt 's house , who live in a very small way ; and there he pass the long vacation , read with three or four pupil who accompany he to
to the village . be fellow of a college , and famous in the for he learn and skill as a tutor . he two kinswoman understood pretty early that the reverend gentleman be engage to be marry , and be only wait for a college live to enable he to fulfil he engagement . he intend bride be the daughter of another parson , who have act as 's own private tutor in 's early life , and it be whilst under 's roof , indeed , and when only a boy of seventeen or eighteen year of age , that the impetuous young have fling himself at the foot of , whom he be help to pick pea in the garden . on he knee , before those pea and she , he pledge himself to a endless affection . be by many year the young fellow 's senior and she own heart have be lacerate by many previous disappointment in the matrimonial line . no less than three pupil of she father have trifle with those young affections . the apothecary of the village have despicably jilt she . the dragoon officer , with whom she have dance so many many time during that happy season which she pass at with she gouty grandmamma , one day gaily shook he bridle - rein and gallop away never to return . wound by the shaft of repeat ingratitude , can it be wonder at that the heart of should pant to find rest somewhere ? she listen to the proposal of the gawky gallant honest boy , with great kindness and good - humour ; at the end of he speech she say , " law , bell , I be sure you be too young to think of such thing ; " but intimate that she too would revolve they in she own virgin bosom . she could not refer to she mamma , for be a widower , and be immerse in he book , be of course unable to take the direction of so frail and wondrous a article as a lady 's heart , which have to manage for herself . a lock of she hair , tie up in a piece of blue ribbon , convey to the happy the result of the 's conference with herself . Thrice before have she snipt off one of she auburn ringlet , and give they away . the possessor be faithless , but the hair have grow again : and have indeed occasion to say that man be deceiver when she hand over this token of love to the simple boy . number 6 , however , be a exception to former passion -- be the most faithful of lover . when he time arrive to go to college , and it become necessary to acquaint of the arrangement that have be make , the latter cry , " bless my soul , I have not the least idea what be go on ; " as be indeed very likely , for he have be take in three time before in precisely a similar manner ; and go to the resolve to conquer honour , so as to be able to lay they at the foot of he beloved . this prize in view make he labour prodigiously . news come , term after term , of the honour he win . he send the prize - book for he college essays to old , and he silver declamation cup to . in due season he be high among the Wrangler , and a fellow of he college ; and during all the time of these transaction a constant tender correspondence be keep up with , to whose influence , and perhaps with justice , he attribute the success which he have win . by the time , however , when the , , and and of he College , be twenty - six year of age , it happen that be thirty - four , nor have she charms , she manners , or she temper improve since that sunny day in the springtime of life when he find she pick pea in the garden . have achieve he honour he relax in the ardour of he study , and he judgment and taste also perhaps become cooler . the sunshine of the pea-garden fade away from , and poor find himself engage -- and he hand pledge to that bond in a thousand letter -- to a coarse , ill - tempere , ill - favoured , ill - mannered , middle - aged woman . it be in consequence of one of many altercation ( in which 's eloquence shone , and in which therefore she be frequently pleased to indulge ) that refuse to take he pupil to 's , where 's living be , and where be in the habit of spend the summer : and he bethotch he that he would pass the vacation at he aunt 's village , which he have not see for many year -- not since little be a girl and use to sit on he knee . down then he come and live with they . be grow a beautiful young woman now . the cousin be nearly four month together , from to . they walk in the summer evening : they meet in the early morn . they read out of the same book when the old lady doze at night over the candle . what little , tatch she . she sang to he : she give she artless heart to he . she be aware of all he story . have he make any secret ?-- have he not show the picture of the woman to whom he be engage , and with a blush , -- she letter , hard , eager , and cruel ?-- the day go
go on and on , happier and closer , with more kindness , more confidence , and more pity . at last one morning in come , when go back to college , and the poor girl feel that she tender heart be go with he . too wake up from the delightful midsummer dream to the horrible reality of he own pain . he gnash and tore at the chain which bound he . he be frantic to break it and be free . should he confess ?-- give he savings to the woman to whom he be bound , and beg he release ?-- there be time yet -- he temporise . no living might fall in for year to come . the cousins go on corresponding sadly and fondly : the betrothed woman , hard , jealous , and dissatisfie , complain bitterly , and with reason , of she 's altered tone . at last thing come to a crisis , and the new attachment be discover . own it , car not to disguise it , rebuk with she violent temper and angry imperiousness , and , worst of all , with she inferiority and she age . she reply be , that if he do not keep he promise she would carry he letter into every court in the kingdom -- letter in which he love be pledge to she ten thousand time ; and , after expose he to the world as the perjurer and traitor he be , she would kill herself . have one more interview with , whose mother be dead then , and who be liive companion with old , -- one more interview , where it be resolve that he be to do he duty ; that be , to redeem he vow ; that be , to pay a debt cozen from he by a sharper ; that be , to make two honest people miserable . so the two judge they duty to be , and they part . the live fell in only too soon ; but yet be quite a grey and worn - out man when he be induct into it . write he a letter on he marriage , begin " my dear cousin , " and end " always truly yours . " she send he back the other letter , and the lock of he hair -- all but a small piece . she have it in she desk when she be talk to the major . live for three or four year in he living , at the end of which time , the Chaplainship of fal vacant , apply for it privately , and have procure it , announce the appointment to he wife . she object , as she do to everything . he tell she bitterly that he do not want she to come : so she go . go out in 's time , and be very intimate with that gentleman in he later year . and it be in , year after he own marriage , and five year after he have hear of the birth of 's boy , that he own daughter be bear . she be not the daughter of the first Mr . bell , who die of island fever very soon after and she husband , to whom have tell everything , write to inform of the birth of they child . " I be old , be I ? " say . bell the first ; " I be old , and she inferior , be I ? but I marry you , , and keep you from marry she ? " and hereupon she die . marry a colonial lady , whom be love fondly . but he be not doom to prosper in love ; and , this lady die in childbirth , give up too : send he little girl home to and she husband , with a parting prayer that they would befriend she . the little thing come to Fairoaks from , which be not very far off , dress in black , and in company of a soldier 's wife , she nurse , at part from whom she weep bitterly . but she soon dry up she grief under 's motherly care . Round she neck she have a locket with hair , which have give , ah how many year ago ! to poor , dead and bury . this child be all that be leave of he , and she cherish , as so tender a creature would , the legacy which he have bequeath to she . the girl 's name , as he die letter state , be . but , though he accept the trust , be always rather jealous of the orphan ; and gloomily order that she should be call by she own mother 's name ; and not by that first one which she father have give she . she be afraid of , to the last moment of he life . and it be only when she husband be go that da openly to indulge in the tenderness which she feel for the little girl . thus it be that become 's daughter . neither she husband nor that gentleman 's brother , the major , view she with very favourable eye . she remind the first of circumstance in he wife 's life which he be force to accept , but would have forget much more willingly and as for the second , how could he regard she ? she be neither related to he own family of Pendennis , nor to any nobleman in this empire , and she have but a couple of thousand pound for she fortune . and now let come in , who have be wait all this while . have string up he nerve , and
and prepare himself , without at the door , for the meeting , he come to it , determined to face the awful uncle . he have settle in he mind that the encounter be to be a fierce one , and be resolved on bear it through with all the courage and dignity of the famious family which he represent . and he fling open the door and enter with the most severe and warlike expression , arm cap - a -pie as it be , with lance couch and plume display , and glance at he adversary , as if to say , " come on , I be ready . " the old man of the world , as he survey the boy 's demeanour , could hardly help a grin at he admirable pompous simplicity . major Pendennis too have examine he ground ; and find that the widow be already half win over to the enemy , and have a shrewd notion that threat and tragic exhortation would have no effect upon the boy , who be inclin to be perfectly stubborn and awfully serious , the major laid aside the authoritative manner at once , and with the most good - humoure natural smile in the world , hold out he hand to , shook the lad 's passive finger gaily , and say , " well , , my boy , tell we all about it . " be delighted with the generosity of the major 's good - humour . on the contrary , it quite take aback and disappoint poor Pen , whose nerve be string up for a tragedy , and who feel that he grand entree be altogether baulked and ludicrous . he blush and wince with mortified vanity and bewilderment . he feel immensely inclined to begin to cry --" I -- I -- I do not know that you be come till just now , " he say : " be -- be -- town very full , I suppose ? " if could hardly gulp he tear down , it be all the major could do to keep from laughter . he turn round and shoot a comical glance at , who too feel that the scene be at once ridiculous and sentimental . and so , have nothing to say , she go up and kiss : as he think of she tenderness and soft obedience to he wish , it be very possible to the boy be melte . " what a couple of fool they be , " think the old guardian . " if I have not come down , she would have drive over in state to pay a visit and give she blessing to the young lady 's family . " " come , come , " say he , still grinn at the couple , " let we have as little sentiment as possible , and , , my good fellow , tell we the whole story . " get back at once to he tragic and heroical air . " the story be , sir , " say he , " as I have write it to you before . I have make the acquaintance of a most beautiful and most virtuous lady ; of a high family , although in reduce circumstance : I have find the woman in whom I know that the happiness of my life be centre ; I feel that I never , never can think about any woman but she . I be aware of the difference of we ag and other difficulty in my way . but my affection be so great that I feel I could surmount all these ; that we both could : and she have consent to unite she lot with mine , and to accept my heart and my fortune . " " how much be that , my boy ? " say the major . " have anybody leave you some money ? I do not know that you be worth a shilling in the world . " " you know what I have be he , " cry out . " good heaven , madam , hold you tongue ! " be what the guardian be dispose to say ; but he keep he temper , not without a struggle . " no doubt , no doubt , " he say . " you would sacrifice anything for he . everybody know that . but it be , after all then , you fortune which be offer to the young lady ; and of which he wish to take possession at eighteen . " " I know my mother will give I anything , " say , look rather disturbed . " yes , my good fellow , but there be reason in all thing . if you mother keep the house , it be but fair that she should select she company . when you give she house over she head , and transfer she banker 's account to yourself for the benefit of what - d '- you-call -'em -- -- do not you think you should at least have consult my sister as one of the principal party in the transaction ? I be speak to you , you see , without the least anger or assumption of authority , such as the law and you father 's will give I over you for three year to come -- but as one man of the world to another , -- and I ask you , if you think that , because you can do what you like with you mother , therefore you have a right to do so ? as you be she dependent , would it not have be more generous to wait before you take this step , and at least to have pay she the courtesy to ask
ask she leave ? " hold down he head , and begin dimly to perceive that the action on which he have pride himself as a most romantic , generous instance of disinterested affection , be perhaps a very selfish and headstrong piece of folly . " I do it in a moment of passion , " say , flounder ; " I be not aware what I be go to say or to do " ( and in this he speak with perfect sincerity ) " but now it be say , and I stand to it . no ; I neither can nor will recall it . I will die rather than do so . and I -- I do not want to burthen my mother , " he continue . " I will work for myself . I will go on the stage , and act with she . she -- she say I should do well there . " " but will she take you on those term ? " the major interpose . " mind , I do not say that be not the most disinterested of woman : but , do not you suppose now , fairly , that you position as a young gentleman of ancient birth and decent expectation form a part of the cause why she find you address welcome ? " " I will die , I say , rather than forfeit my to she , " say , double he fists and turn red . " who ask you , my dear friend ? " answer the imperturbable guardian . " no gentleman break he word , of course , when it have be give freely . but after all , you can wait . you owe something to you mother , something to you family -- something to I as you father 's representative . " " oh , of course , " say , feel rather relieved . " well , as you have pledge you word to she , give we another , will you Arthur ? " " what be it ? " yoArthu ask . " that you will make no private marriage -- that you will not be take a trip to , you understand . " " that would be a falsehood . never tell he mother a falsehood , " say . hang down he head again , and he eye fill with tear of shame . have not this whole intrigue be a falsehood to that tender and confid creature who be ready to give up all for he sake ? he give he uncle he hand . " no , sir -- on my word of honour , as a gentleman , " he say , " I will never marry without my mother 's consent ! " and give a bright parting look of confidence and affection unchangeable , the boy go out of the drawing - room into he own study . " he be a angel -- he be a angel , " the mother cry out in one of she usual rapture . " he come of a good stock , ma 'am , " say she brother - in - law -- " of a good stock on both side . " the major be greatly pleased with the result of he diplomacy -- so much so , that he once more salute the tip of 's glove , and drop the curt , manly , and straightforward tone in which he have conduct the conversation with the lad , assume a certain drawl which he always adopt when he be most conceited and fine . " my dear creature , " say he , in that he politest tone , " I think it certainly as well that I come down , and I flatter myself that last botte be a successful one . I tell you how I come to think of it . three year ago my kind friend send for I in the greatest state of alarm about she son , whose affair you remember , and implor I to use my influence with the young gentleman , who be engage in a affaire de coeur with a clergyman 's daughter , . I implor , I entreate gentle measure . but be furious , and try the high hand . be sulky and silent , and he parent think they have conquer . but what be the fact , my dear creature ? the young people have be marry for three month before kknow anything about it . and that be why I extract the promise from " " yoArthu would never have do so , " say . " he have not , -- that be one comfort , " answer the brother - in - law . like a wary and patient man of the world , major do not press poor Pen any farther for the moment , but hope the best from time , and that the young fellow 's eye would be open before long to see the absurdity of which he be guilty . and have find out how kee the boy 's point of honou be , he work kindly upon that kindly feel with great skill , discourse he over they wine after dinner , and point out to the necessity of a perfect uprightness and openness in all he dealings , and entreat that he communication with he interesting young friend ( as the major politely call ) should be carry on with the knowledge , if not approbation , of . " after all , , " the major say , with a convenient frankness that do not displease the boy , whilst it advance the interest of the negotiator , " you must bear in mind that you be throw yourself away . you mother may submit to you
you marriage as she would to anything else you desire , if you do but cry long enough for it : but be sure of this , that it can never please she . you take a young woman off the board of a country theatre and prefer she , for such be the case , to one of the finest lady in . and you mother will submit to you choice , but you can not suppose that she will be happy under it . I have often fancie , entre nous , that my sister have it in she eye to make a marriage between you and that little ward of hers -- , -- what be she name ? and I always determi to do my small endeavour to prevent any such match . the child have but two thousand pound , I be give to understand . it be only with the utmost economy and care that my sister can provide for the decent maintenance of she house , and for you appearance and education as a gentleman ; and I do not care to own to you that I have other and much higher view for you . with you name and birth , sir -- with you talents , which I suppose be respectable , with the friend whom I have the honour to possess , I could have place you in a excellent position -- a remarkable position for a young man of such exceed small means , and have hope to see you , at least , try to restore the honour of we name . you mother 's softness stop one prospect , or you might have be a general , like we gallant ancestor who fight at and . I have another plan in view : my excellent and kind friend , , who be very well dispose towards I , would , I have little doubt , have attach you to he mission at , and you might have advanced in the diplomatic service . but , pardon I for recurring to the subject ; how be a man to serve a young gentleman of eighteen , who propose to marry a lady of thirty , whom he have select from a booth in a fair ?--well , not a fair ,-- a barn . that profession at once be close to you . the public service be close to you . be close to you . you see , my good friend , to what you bring yourself . you may get on at the bar to be sure , where I be give to understand that gentleman of merit occasionally marry out of they kitchens ; but in no other profession . or you may come and live down here -- down here , mon ! for ever " ( say the major , with a dreary shrug , as he think with inexpressible fondness of ) , " where you mother will receive the that be to be , with perfect kindness ; where the good people of the county will not visit you ; and where , by , sir , I shall be shy of visit you myself , for I be a plain - speak man , and I own to you that I like to live with gentleman for my companion ; where you will have to live , with rum -and - water -- drink gentleman --farmer , and drag through you life the young husband of a old woman , who , if she do not quarrel with you mother , will at least cost that lady she position in society , and drag she down into that dubious caste into which you must inevitably fall . it be no affair of mine , my good sir . I be not angry . you downfall will not hurt I farther than that it will extinguish the hope I have of see my family once more take it be place in the world . it be only you mother and yourself that will be ruin . and I pity you both from my soul . pass the claret : it be some I send to you poor father ; I remember I buy it at poor 's sale . but of course , " add the major , smack the wine , " have engage yourself , you will do what become you as a man of honour , however fatal you promise may be . however , promise we on we side , my boy , what I set out by entreat you to grant , -- that there shall be nothing clandestine , that you will pursue you study , that you will only visit you interesting friend at proper interval . do you write to she much ? " blush and say , " why , yes , he have write . " " I suppose verse , eh! as well as prose ? I be a dab at verse myself . I recollect when I first join , I use to write verse for the fellows in the regiment ; and do some pretty thing in that way . I be talk to my old friend about some line I dash off for he in the year 1806 , when we be at the cape , and , , he remember every line of they still ; for he would use th'ey so often , the old rogue , and have actually try th'ey on , sir -- who bring he sixty thousand pound . I suppose you have try verse , eh , ? " blush again , and say , " why , yes , he have write verse . " " and do the fair one respond in poetry or prose ? " ask the major , eye he nephew with the queerest expression ,
, as much as to say , " of and green Spectacle ! what a fool the boy be . " blush again . she have write , but not in verse , the young lover own , and he give he breast - pocket the benefit of a squeeze with he left arm , which the major remark , accord to he wont . " you have get the letter there , I see , " say the old campaigner , nodd at and point to he own chest ( which be manfully wad with cotton by ) . " you know you have . I would give twopence to see th'ey . " " why , " say , twiddl the stalk of the strawberry , " I -- I , " but this sentence never finish ; for Pen's face be so comical and embarrassed , as the watch it , that the elder could contain he gravity no longer , and burst into a fit of laughter , in which chorus himself be oblige to join after a minute : when he break out fairly into a guffaw . it send they with great good - humour into 's drawing - room . she be pleased to hear they laugh in the hall as they cross it . " you sly rascal ! " say the major , put he arm gaily on shoulder , and give a playful push at the boy 's breast - pocket . he feel the papers crack there sure enough . the young fellow be delighted -- conceit --triumphant -- and in one word , a spoony . the pair come to the tea - table in the highest spirit . the major 's politeness be beyond expression . he have never taste such good tea , and such bread be only to be have in the country . he ask for one of she charme song . he then make s , and be delighted and astonished at the beauty of the boy 's voice : he make he nephew fetch he map and drawing , and praise they as really remarkable work of talent in a young fellow : he compliment he on he french pronunciation : he flatter the simple boy as adroitly as ever flatter a mistress : and when bedtime come , mother and son go to they several room perfectly enchant with the kind major . when they have reach those apartment , I suppose take to she knee as usual : and read over he letter before go to be : just as if he do not know every word of they by heart already . in truth there be but three of those document and to learn they contents require no great effort of memory . in no. 1 , present grateful compliment to , and in she papa 's name and she own beg to thank he for he most beautiful present . they will always be keep carefully ; and and will never forget the delightful evening which they pass on last . no. 2 say -- dear , we shall have a small quiet party of social friend at we humble board , next evening , at a early tea , when I shall wear the beautiful scarf which , with its accompanying delightful verse , I shall ever , ever cherish : and papa bid I say how happy he will be if you will join ' the feast of reason and the flow of soul ' in we festive little party , as I be sure will be you truly grateful . no . 3 be somewhat more confidential , and show that matters have proceed rather far . you be odious yesterday night , the letter say . why do you not come to the stage - door ? could not escort I on account of he eye ; he have a accident , and fall down over a loose carpet on the stair on night . I see you look at all night ; and you be so enchanted with you scarcely once look at . I could have crush , I be so angry . I play on : will you come then ? perform --ever you e . . these three letter use to read at interval , during the day and night , and embrace with that delight and feravor which such beautiful composition surly warrant . a thousand time at least he have kiss fondly the musky satin paper , make sacr to he by the hand of . this be all he have in return for he passion and flame , he vow and protest , he rhyme and simile , he wakeful night and endless thought , he fondness , fear and folly . the young wiseacre have pledge away he all for this : sign he name to endless promissory note , conferr he heart upon the bearer : bound himself for life , and get back twopence as a equivalent . for be a young lady of such perfect good - conduct and self - command , that she never would have think of give more , and reserve the treasure of she affection until she could transfer they lawfully at church . , be content with what token of regard he have get , and mumble over he three letter in a rapture of high spirit , and go to sleep delighted with he kind old uncle from , who must evidently yield to he wish in time ; and , in a word , in a preposterous state of contentment with himself and all the world . in which the major opend the campaign let those who have a real and heartfelt relish for society and the privilege of a entree into its most select circle , admit that be a man of no ordinary generosity
generosity and affection , in the sacrifice which he now make . he give up in , -- he newspaper and he morning -- he afternoons from club to club , he little confidential visit to my Lady , he ride in , he dinner , and he stall at the , he rapid escapade to or on and , he bow from my or my at the great entertainment , and he name in the of the succeeding day , -- he quieter little festival , more select , secret , and delightful -- all these he resign to lock himself into a lone little country house , with a simple widow and a greenhorn of a son , a mawkish curate , and a little girl of ten year of age . he make the sacrifice , and it be the greater that few know the extent of it . he letter come down frank from town , and he show the invitations to Hel with a sigh . it be beautiful and tragical to see he refuse one party after another -- at least to those who could understand , as do not , the melancholy grandeur of he self - denial . Helen do not , or only smile at the awful patho with which the major spoke of the in general : but young look with great respect at the great name upon the superscription of he uncle 's letter , and listen to the major 's story about the fashionable world with constant interest and sympathy . the elder 's rich memory be store with thousand of these delightful tale , and he pour they into Pen's willing ear with unfailing eloquence . he know the name and pedigree of everybody in the Peerage , and everybody be relation . " my dear boy , " he would say , with a mournful earnestness and veracity , " you can not begin you genealogical study too early ; I wish to you would read in every day . not so much the historical part ( for the pedigree , between ourselves , be many of they very fabulous , and there be few family that can show such a clear descent as we own ) as the account of family alliances , and who be related to whom . I have know a man 's career in life blast by ignorance on this important , this all - important subject . why , only last month , at dinner at my 's , a young man , who have lately be receive among we , young ( author of a work , I believe ) , begin to speak lightly of 's conduct for rat to , in what I must own be the most audacious manner . but who do you think sate next and opposite to this ? why -- why , next to he be 's daughter , and opposite to he be 's son - in - law . the infatuate young man go on cut he joke at the 's expense , fancie that all the world be laugh with he , and I leave you to imagine 's feeling -- 's !-- those of every well - breed man , as the wretch intru be so expose himself . he will never dine again in . I promise you that . " with such discourse the major entertain he nephew , as he pace the terrace in front of the house for he two hour ' constitutional walk , or as they sate together after dinner over they wine . he grieve that Clavering have not come down to the park , to live in it since he marriage , and to make a society for the neighbourhood . he mourn that be not in the country , that he might take and present he to he lordship . " he have daughter , " the major say . " who know ? you might have marry or ; but all those dream be over ; my poor fellow , you must lie on the bed which you have make for yourself . " these thing to hear do yong Pendennis seriously incline . they be not so interesting in print as when deliver orally ; but the major 's anecdote of the great , of the , of the statesman , beauty , and fashionable lady of the day , fill young Pen' soul with longing and wonder ; and he find the conversation with he guardian , which sadly bore and perplex poor , for he own part never tedious . it can not be say that Pen's new guide , philosopher , and friend discourse he on the most elevated subject , or treat the subject which he choose in the most elevated manner . but he morality , such as it be , be consistent . it might not , perhaps , tend to a man 's progress in another world , but it be pretty well calculate to advance he interests in this ; and then it must be remember that the major never for one instant doubt that he view be the only view practicable , and that he conduct be perfectly virtuous and respectable . he be a man of honour , in a word : and have he eye , what he call , open . he take pity on this young greenhorn of a nephew , and want to open he eye too . no man , for instance , go more regularly to church when in the country than the old bachelor . " it do not matter so much in town , , " he say , " for there the woman go and the man be not miss . but when a gentleman be sur s terre , he must give a example to the country people
people : and if I could turn a tune , I even think I should s . the of 's , whom I have the honour of knowing , always sings in the country , and let I tell you , it have a doosed fine effect from the family pew . and you be somebody down here . as long as the Clavering be away you be the first man in the parish : and as good as any . you might represent the town if you play you card well . you poor dear father would have do so have he liv ; so might you .-- not if you marry a lady , however amiable , whom the country people will not meet .-- well , well : it be a painful subject . let we change it , my boy . " but if change the subject once he recur to it a score of time in the day : and the moral of he discourse always be , that be throw himself away . now it do not require much coaxing or wheedling to make a simple boy believe that he be a very fine fellow . take he uncle 's counsel to heart . he be glad enough , we have say , to listen to he elder 's talk . the conversation of become by no means pleasant to he , and the idea of that tipsy old father - in - law haunt he with terror . he could not bring that man , unshaven and reek of punch , to associate with he mother . even about -- he falter when the pitiless guardian begin to question he . " be she accomplish ? " he be oblige to own , no . " be she clever ? " well , she have a very good average intellect : but he could not absolutely say she be clever . " come , let we see some of she letter . " so confess that he have but those three of which we have make mention -- and that they be but trivial invitation or answer . " she be cautious enough , " the major say , drily . " she be older than you , my poor boy ; " and then he apologise with the utmost frankness and humility , and fling himself upon Pen's good feeling , begge the lad to excuse a fond old uncle , who have only he family 's honour in view -- for be ready to flame up in indignation whenever 's honesty be doubt , and swore that he would never have she name mention lightly , and never , never would part from she . he repeat this to he uncle and he friend at home , and also , it must be confess , to and the amiable family , at , with whom he still continue to spend some portion of he time . be alarm when she hear of the arrival of guardian , and rightly conceive that the major come down with hostile intention to herself . " I suppose ye intend to leave I , now you grand relation have come down from town . he will carry ye off , and you will forget you poor , ! " forget she ! in she presence , in that of , the and 's confidential friend of the company , in the presence of the himself , swore he never could think of any other woman but he belov ; and the captain , look up at he foil which be hang as a trophy on the wall of the room where and he use to fence , grimly say , he would not advoise any man to meddle rashly with the affections of he darling child ; and would never believe he gallant young , whom he treat as he son , whom he call he son , would ever be guilty of conduct so revolt to every idaya of honour and humanity . he go up and embrace after speak . he cry , and wip he eye with one large dirty hand as he clasp with the other . yoArthu shudder in that grasp , and think of he uncle at home . he father - in -law look unusually dirty and shabby ; the odour of whisky - and - water be even more decided than in common . how be he to bring that man and he mother together ? he tremble when he think that he have absolutely write to ( enclose to he a sovereign , the loan of which the worthy gentleman have need ) , and say that one day he hope to sign himself he affectionate son , . he be glad to get away from that day ; from the confidante ; from the old toping father - in - law ; from the divine Emily herself . " o , , , " he cry inwardly , as he rattle homeward on , " you little know what sacrifice I be make for you !-- for you who be always so cold , so cautious , so mistrustful ; " and he think of a character in to whom he have often involuntarily compare she . never ride over to upon a certain errand , but the major find out on what errand the boy have be . faithful to he plan , give he nephew no let or hindrance ; but somehow the constant feel that the senior 's eye be upon he , a uneasy shame attendant upon that inevitable confession which the evening 's conversation would be sure to elicit in the most natural simple manner , make go less frequently to sigh away he soul at the foot of he charmer than he have be will not to do previous to
to he uncle 's arrival . there be no use try to deceive he ; there be no pretext of dining with , or read play with ; feel , when he return from one of he fly visit , that everybody know whence he come , and appear quite guilty before he mother and guardian , over they book or they game at picquet . once have walk out half a mile , to the , beyond the Lodge gate , to be in readiness for the Competitor coach , which change horsis there , to take a run for , a man on the roof touch he hat to the young gentleman : it be he uncle 's man , , who be go on a message for he master , and have be take up at the , as he say . and come back by the , too ; so that have the pleasure of that domestic 's company both way . nothing be say at home . the lad seem to have every decent liberty ; and yet he feel himself dimly watch and guard , and that there be eye upon he even in the presence of he Dulcinea . in fact , Pen's suspicion be not unfounded , and he guardian have send forth to gather all possible information regard the lad and he interesting young friend . the discreet and ingenious , a confidential valet , whose fidelity could be trust , have be to more than once , and make every inquiry regard the past history and present habits of the and he daughter . he delicately cross -examin the waiter , the ostler , and all the inmate of the bar at the , and get from they what little they know respect the worthy . he be not hold in very great regard there , as it appear . the waiter never see the colour of he money , and be warn not to furnish the poor gentleman with any liquor for which some other party be not responsible . he swagger sadly about the coffee - room there , consum a toothpick , and look over the paper , and if any friend ask he to dinner he stay . hear at the of acquaintance with , and he go over to to enter into relation with that gentleman 's man ; but the young student be go to a , and he servant , of course , travel in charge of the dressing - case . from the servant of the officers at the barrack find that the have so frequently and outrageously inebriate himself there , that have forbidden he the messroom . the indefatigable then put himself in communication with some of the inferior actor at the theatre , and pump they over they cigar and punch , and all agree that be poor , shabby , and give to debt and to drink . but there be not a breath upon the reputation of : she father 's courage be report to have display itself on more than one occasion towards person dispose to treat he daughter with freedom . she never come to the theatre but with she father : in he most inebriated moment , that gentleman keep a watch over she ; finally , from he own experience add that he have be to see she act , and be uncommon deligh with the performance , besides think she a most splendid woman . , the pew-opener , confirm these statement to , who examine she personally , and threaten she with the terror of the one day after afternoon service . have nothing unfavourable to she lodger to divulge . she see nobody ; only one or two lady of the theatre . the do intoxicate himself sometimes , and do not always pay he rent regularly , but he do when he have money , or rather do . since the young gentleman from have be and take lesson in fencing , one or two more have come from the barrack ; , and he young friend , , which be often together ; and which be always drive over from in the tandem . but on the occasion of the lesson , be very seldom present , and generally come downstairs to 's own room . the Doctor and the major consult together as they often do , groan in spirit over that information . major Pendennis openly express he disappointment ; and , I believe , the divine himself be ill pleased at not be able to jack a hole in poor 's reputation . even about himself , 's report be desperately favourable . " whenever he come , " say , " she always have I or one of the child with she . and , marm , say she , if you please , marm , you will on no account leave the room when that young gentleman 's here . and many be the time I have see he a lookin ' as if he wish I be away , poor young man : and he take to come in service - time , when I be not at home , of course : but she always have one of the boy up if she be not at home , or old with she a teaching of she she lesson , or one of the young lady of the theayter . " it be all true : whatever encouragement might have be give he before he avow he passion , the prudence of be prodigious after have declare himself : and the poor fellow chaf against she hopeless reserve , which maintain he ardour as it excit he anger . the major survey the state of thing with a sigh . " if it be but a temporary liaison , " the excellent man
man say , " one could bear it . a young fellow must sow he wild oat , and that sort of thing . but a virtuous attachment be the deuce . it come of the ----d romantic notion boy get from be bring up by woman . " " allow I to say , major , that you speak a little too like a man of the world , " reply the Doctor . " nothing can be more desirable for Pen than a virtuous attachment for a young lady of he own rank and with a corresponding fortune -- this present infatuation , of course , I must deplore as sincerely as you do . if I be he guardian I should command he to give it up . " " the very means , I tell you , to make he marry to - morrow . we have get time from he , that be all , and we must do we best with that . " I say , major , " say the Doctor , at the end of the conversation in which the above subject be discuss -- " I be not , of course , a play - go man -- but suppose , I say , we go and see she . " the major laugh -- he have be a fortnight at Fairoaks , and strange to say , have not think of that . " well , " he say , " why not ? after all , it be not my niece , but the actress , and we have as good a right as any other of the public to see she if we pay we money . " so upon a day when it be arrange that be to dine at home , and pass the evening with he mother , the two elderly gentleman drive over to in the 's chaise , and there , like a couple of jolly bachelors , dine at the , before proceed to the play . only two other guest be in the room , -- a officer of the regiment quarter at , and a young gentleman whom the think he have somewhere see . they leave they at they meal , however , and hasten to the theatre . it be Hamlet over again . be . of stout old 's creed , to which he always make a point of testifying publicly at least once in a year . we have describe the play before , and how those who see perform in see precisely the same thing on one night as on another . both the elderly gentleman look at she with extraordinary interest , think how very much young be char with she . " , " say the major , between he tooth , as he survey she when she be call forward as usual , and sweep she curtsy to the scanty audience , " the young rascal have not make a bad choice . " the applaude she loudly and loyally . " upon my word , " say he , " she be a very clever actress ; and I must say , major , she be endow with very considerable personal attraction . " " so that young officer think in the stage - box , " major Pendennis answer , and he point out to 's attention the young dragoon of the coffee - room , who sate in the box in question , and applaude with immense enthusiasm . she look extremely sweet upon he too , think the major : but that be they way -- and he shut up he natty opera - glass and pocket it , as if he wish to see no more that night . do the Doctor , of course , propose to stay for the after - piece , so they rise and leave the theatre ; the Doctor return to , who be on a visit at the Deanery , and the major walk home full of think towards the , where he have bespeak a bed . face the slowly homewards , major Pendennis reach the presently , and find , he faithful valet , await he at the door of the , who stop he master as he be about to take a candle to go to bed , and say , with he usual air of know deference , " I think , sir , if you would go into the coffee - room , there be a young gentleman there as you would like to see . " " what , be here ? " the major say , in great anger . " no , sir -- but he great friend , , sir . 's son be here , sir . he be be asleep in the coffee - room since he take he dinner , and have just ring for he coffee , sir . and I think , p'raps , you might like to git into conversation with he , " the valet say , open the coffee - room door . the major enter ; and there indeed be , the only occupant of the place . he be rub he eye , and sate before a table rate with empty decanter and relic of dessert . he have intend to go to the play too , but sleep have overtake he after a copious meal , and he have fling up he leg on the bench , and indulge in a nap instead of the dramatic amusement . the major be meditat how to address the young man , but the latter prevent he that trouble . " like to look at the evening paper , sir ? " say , who be always communicative and affable ; and he take up the from he table , and offer it
it to the new-comer . " I be very much oblige to you , " say the major , with a grateful bow and smile . " if I do not mistake the family likeness , I have the pleasure of speak to , 's son . I have the happiness to name she ladyship among my acquaintance -- and you bear , sir , a face . " " Hullo ! I beg you pardon , " say , " I take you , " -- he be go to say --" I take you for a commercial gent . " but he stop that phrase . " to whom have I the pleasure of speaking ? " he add . " to a relative of a friend and schoolfellow of yours -- , my nephew , who have often speak to I about you in term of great regard . I be major Pendennis , of whom you may have hear he speak . may I take my soda - water at you table ? I have have the pleasure of sitting at you grandfather 's . " " sir , you do I proud , " say , with much courtesy . " and so you be 's uncle , be you ? " " and guardian , " add the major . " he be as good a fellow as ever step , sir , " say . " I be glad you think so . " " and clever , too -- I be always a stupid chap , I be -- but you see , sir , I know th'ey when they be clever , and like 'em of that sort . " " you show you taste and you modesty , too , " say the major . " I have hear repeatedly speak of you , and he say you talents be very good . " " I be not good at the book , " say , wag he head -- " never could manage that -- could -- he use to do half the chap ' verse -- and yet " -- the young gentleman break out , " you be he guardian ; and I hope you will pardon I for say that I think he be what we call flat , " the candid young gentleman say . the major find himself on the instant in the midst of a most interesting and confidential conversation . " and how be a flat ? " he ask , with a smile . " you know , " answer , wink at he -- he would have wink at the of with just as little scruple , for he be in that state of absence , candour , and fearlessness which a man sometimes possess after drink a couple of bottle of wine -- " you know 's a flat , -- about woman I mean . " " he be not the first of we , my dear , " answer the major . " I have hear something of this -- but pray tell I more . " " why , sir , you see -- it be partly my fault . he go to the play one night -- for you see I be down here readin ' for my little go during the Long , only I come over from pretty often in my drag -- well , sir , we go to the play , and be strike all of a heap with -- she real name be -- a uncommon fine gal she be too ; and the next morning I introduce he to the general , as we call she father -- a regular old scamp and such a boy for the whisky - and - water !-- and he be gone on be intimate there . and he be fall in love with she -- and I be bless if he have not propose to she , " say , slapp he hand on the table , until all the dessert begin to jingle . " what ! you know it too ? " ask the major . " know it ! do not I ? and many more too . we be talk about it at mess , yesterday , and chaff -- until he be as mad as a hatter . Oaks ? we dine together , and he go to the play : we be stand at the door smoke , I remember , when you pass in to dinner . " " I remember , he father , before he be a Baronet or a Knight ; he live in - square , and be physician to . " " the young one be make the money spin , I can tell you , " say . " and be , " the major say , with great delight and anxiety , " another soupirant ? " " another what ? " inquire . " another admirer of ? " " bless you ! we call he , , and , and , , and . but mind you , nothing wrong ! no , no ! be a deal too wide - awake for that , major Pendennis . she play one off against the other . what you call two string to she bow . " " I think you seem tolerably wide - awake , too , , say , laugh . " pretty well , thank you , sir -- how be you ? " Foker reply , imperturbably . " I be not clever , p'rap : but I be rather downy ; and partial friend say I know what 's o'clock tolerably well . can I tell you the time of day in any way ? " " upon my word , " the major answer , quite delighted , " I think
think you may be of very great service to I . you be a young man of the world , and with such one like to deal . and as such I need not inform you that we family be by no means delighte at this absurd intrigue in which be engage . " " I should rather think not , " say . " not eligible . too much beer drink on the premise . no irish need apply . that I take to be you meaning . " the major say it be , exactly ; though in truth he do not quite understand what 's meaning be : and he proceed to examine he new acquaintance regard the amiable family into which he nephew propose to enter , and soon get from the candid witness a number of particular regard the of . we must do Foker the justice to say that he speak most favourably of and 's moral character . " you see , " say he , " I think the general be fond of the jovial bowl , and if I want to be very certain of my money , it be not in he pocket I would invest it -- but he have always keep a watchful eye on he daughter , and neither he nor she will stand anything but what be honourable . 's attention to she be talk about in the whole company , and I hear all about they from a young lady who use to be very intimate with she , and with whose family I sometimes take tea in a friendly way . say , Oaks have be hang about ever since he regiment have be down here ; but have come in and cut he out lately , which have make the so mad , that he have be very near on the point of propose too . wish he would ; and you would see which of the two would jump at . " " I think as much , " the major say . " you give I a great deal of pleasure , . I wish I could have see you before . " " do not like to put in my oar , " reply the other . " do not speak till I be ask , when , if there be no objection , I speak pretty freely . hear you man have be hanker about my servant -- do not know myself what be go on until and have the row about the ostrich feather , when tell I everything . " " , I gather , be the confidante of the other . " " Confidant ? I believe you . why , she be twice as clever a girl as , and literary and that , while can not do much more than read . " " she can write , " say the major , remember Pen's breast - pocket . Foker break out into a sardonic " he , he ! write she letter , " he say ; " every one of th'ey ; and since they have quarrell , she do not know how the deuce to get on . be a uncommon pretty hand , whereas the old one make dreadful work of the writing and spell when be not by . be be settin ' she copy lately -- she write a beautiful hand , do . " " I suppose you know it pretty well , " say the major archly upon which wink at he again . " I would give a great deal to have a specimen of she hand -writing , " continue major Pendennis , " I dare say you could give I one . " " no , no , that would be too bad , " reply . " perhaps I ought not to have say as much as I have . F.'s writin ' be not so very bad , I dare say ; only she get to write the first letter , and have go on ever since . but you mark my word , that till they be friend again the letter will stop . " " I hope they will never be reconcile , " the major say with great sincerity ; " and I can not tell you how delighte I be to have have the good fortune of make you acquaintance . you must feel , my dear sir , as a man of the world , how fatal to my nephew 's prospects in life be this step which he contemplate , and how eager we all must be to free he from this absurd engagement . " " he have come out uncommon strong , " say ; " I have see he verse ; copy th'ey . and I say to myself when I see 'em , ' catch I writin's verse to a woman , -- that be all . ' " " he have make a fool of himself , as many a good fellow have before he . how can we make he see he folly , and cure it ? I be sure you will give we what aid you can in extricat a generous young man from such a pair of schemer as this father and daughter seem to be . love on the lady 's side be out of the question . " " love , indeed ! " say . " if have not two thousand a year when he come of age -- -- " " if Pen have not want ? " cry out the major in astonishment . " two thousand a year : have not he get two thousand a year ?-- the general say he have . " " my dear friend , " shriek out the major , with a eagerness which this
this gentleman rarely show , " thank you !-- thank you !-- I begin to see now .-- two thousand a year ! why , he mother have but five hundred a year in the world .-- she be likely to live to eighty , and have not a shilling but what she can allow he . " " what ! he be not rich then ? " ask . " upon my honour he have no more than what I say . " " and you be not go to leave he anything ? " the major have sunk every shilling he could scrape together on a annuity , and of course be go to leave nothing ; but he do not tell Foker this . " how much do you think a major on half - pay can save ? " he ask . " if these people have be look at he as a fortune , they be utterly mistaken - and - and you have make I the happiest man in the world . " " Sy to you , " say , politely , and when they part for the night they shook hand with the greatest cordiality ; the younger gentleman promise the elder not to leave without a further conversation in the morning . and as the go up to he room , and smoke he cigar against the door pillars of the , , very likely , ten mile off ; be lie in bed kiss the letter from he Emily . the next morning , before drive off in he drag , the insinuating major have actually get a letter of 's in he own pocket - book . let it be a lesson to woman how they write . and in very high spirit major Pendennis go to call upon at the Deanery , and tell he what happy discoveries he have make on the previous night . as they sate in confidential conversation in the 's oak breakfast - parlour they could look across the lawn and see 's window , at which poor Pen have be only too visible some three week since . the Doctor be most indignant against , the landlady , for she duplicity , in concealing 's constant visit to she lodger , and threaten to excommunicate she out of the . but the wary major think that all thing be for the best ; and , have take counsel with himself over night , feel himself quite strong enough to go and face . " I be go to fight the dragon , " he say , with a laugh , to . " and I shrive you , sir , and bid good fortune go with you , " answer the Doctor . perhaps he and and , as they sate with they friend , the 's lady , in she drawing - room , look up more than once at the enemy 's window to see if they could perceive any sign of the combat . the major walk round , accord to the direction give he , and soon find 's little door . he pass it , and as he ascend to 's apartment , he could hear a stamping of foot , and a great shouting of " , ha ! " within . " it be take he fencing lesson , " say the child , who pilote major Pendennis . " he take it , , and . " the major knock , and at length a tall gentleman come forth , with a foil and mask in one hand , and a fencing glove on the other . Pendennis make he a deferential bow . " I believe I have the honour of speak to -- my name be major Pendennis . " the bring he weapon up to the salute , and say , " major , the honer be moine ; I be deloight to see ye . " the and be old soldier and accustom to face the enemy , so we may presume that they retain they presence of mind perfectly ; but the rest of the party assemble in 's sitting - room be , perhaps , a little flurried at 's apparition . 's slow heart begin to beat no doubt , for she cheek flush up with a great healthy blush , as look at she with a scowl . the little crook old man in the window - seat , who have be witnesse the fencing - match between the two gentleman ( whose stampe and jump have be such as to cause he to give up all attempt to continue write the theatre music , in the copying of which he have be engage ) look up eagerly towards the new -comer as the major of the well - blacked boot enter the apartment distribute the most graceful bow to everybody present . " I daughter -- I friend , -- I gallant young pupil and friend , I may call , , " say , splendidly wave he hand , and point each of these individual to the major 's attention . " in one moment , , I be you humble servant , " and to dash into the little adjoining chamber where he sleep , to give a twist to he lank hair with he hair - brush ( a wonderful and ancient piece ) , to tear off he old stock and put on a new one which Emily have construct for he , and to assume a handsome clean collar , and the new coat which have be order upon the occasion of 's benefit , be with the still active the work of a minute . after he enter , and presently emerge from the same apartment , where he also case himself in he little shell - jacket , which
which fit tightly upon the young officer 's big person ; and which he , and , and poor too , perhaps , admire prodigiously . meanwhile conversation be engage between the actress and the new - comer ; and the usual remark about the weather have be interchange before re-enter in he new ' shoot , ' as he call it . " I need not apologoise to ye , , " he say , in he richest and most courteous manner , " for receive ye in I shirt - sleeve . " " a old soldier can not be better employ than in teach a young one the use of he sword , " answer the major , gallantly . " I remember in old time hear that you could use yours pretty well , . " " what , ye have hear of , major , " say the other , greatly . the major have , indeed ; he have pump he nephew concern he new friend , the irish officer ; and whether he have no other knowledge of the than what he have thus gain , or whether he actually remember he , we can not say . but major be a person of honour and undoubted veracity , and say that he perfectly well recollect meet , and hear he s at 's table at . at this information , and the bland and cordial manner in which it be convey , look up , entirely puzzl . " but we will talk of these matter another time , " the major continue , perhaps not wish to commit himself ; " it be to miss Fotheringay that I come to pay my respects to - day ; " and he perform another bow for she , so courtly and gracious , that if she have be a duchess he could not have make it more handsome . " I have hear of you performance from my nephew , madam , " the major say , " who rave about you , as I believe you know pretty well . but be but a boy , and a wild enthusiastic young fellow , whose opinion one must not take au pie de la lettre ; and I confess I be anxious to judge for myself . permit I to say you performance delight and astonished I . I have see we best actress , and , on my word , I think you surpass they all . you be as majestic as . " " faith , I always say so , " say , wink at he daughter ; " major , take a chair . " rise at this hint , take a uuripped satin garment off the only vacant seat , and bring the latter to major Pendennis with one of she finest curtsey . " you be as pathetic as , " he continue , bow and seat himself ; " you snatch of song remind I of in she best time , when we be young man , ; and you manner remind I of . do you ever see the , ? " " there be two Maher in , " remark ; " be well enough , but be no great thing . " " sure , the major mean the god of war , , my dear , " interpose the parent . " it be not that I mean , though , I suppose , may be pardoned for think about he , " the major replie with a smile direct in full to , who now re-enter in he shell - jacket ; but the lady do not understand the word of which he make use , nor do the compliment at all pacify , who , probably , do not understand it either , and at any rate receive it with great sulkiness and stiffness , scowl uneasily at , with a expression which seem to ask what the deuce do this man here ? major Pendennis be not in the least annoye by the gentleman 's ill - humour . on the contrary , it delighte he . " so , " think he , " a rival be in the field ; " and he offer up vow that might be , not only a rival , but a winner too , in this love - match in which he and be engage . " I fear I interrupt you fencing lesson ; but my stay in be very short , and I be anxious to make myself know to my old fellow - campaigner , and to see a lady nearer who have charme I so much from the stage . I be not the only man tepris last night , ( if I must call you so , though you own family name be a very ancient and noble one ) . there be a reverend friend of mine , who go home in rapture with ; and I see fl a bouquet which no actress ever merit better . I should have bring one myself , have I know what I be go to see . be not those the very flower in a glass of water on the mantelpiece yonder ? " " I be very fond of flower , " say , with a languishing ogle at -- but the Baronet still scowl sulkily . " sweet to the sweet -- be not that the expression of the play ? " ask , bend upon be good - humoured . " ' pon my life , I do not know . very likely it be . I be not much of a literary man , " answer . " be it possible ? " the major continue , with a air of surprise . you do not inherit you father 's love of letter ,
, then , ? he be a remarkably fine scholar , and I have the honour of know he very well . " " indeed , " say the other , and give a sulky wag of he head . " he save my life , " continue . " do he now ? " cry , rol she eye first upon the major with surprise , then towards with gratitude -- but the latter be proof against those glance : and far from appear to be pleased that the , he father , should have save 's life , the young man actually look as if he wish the event have turn the other way . " my father , I believe , be a very good doctor , " the young gentleman say by way of reply . " I be not in that line myself . I wish you good morning , sir . I have get a appointment -- cos , bye - bye -- , good morning . " and , in spite of the young lady 's imploring look and appeal smile , the bow stifinitely out of the room , and the clatter of he sabre be hear as he strode down the creak stair ; and the angry tone of he voice as he curse little , who be disport in the passage , and whose peg-top kick away with a oath into the street . the major do not smile in the least , though he have every reason to be amused . " Monstrous handsome young man that -- as fine a look soldier as ever I see , " he say to . " a credit to the army and to human nature in general , " answer . " a young man of refoin manners , polite affabilitee , and princely fortune . he table be sumptuous : he be adawr have in the regiment : and he ride sixteen stone . " " a perfect champion , " say the major , laugh . " I have no doubt all the lady admire he . " " he be very well , in spite of he weight , now he be young , " say ; " but he be no conversation . " " he be best on horseback , " say ; on which Milly reply , that the Baronet have ride third in the steeple - chase on he horse , and the major begin to comprehend that the young lady herself be not of a particular genius , and to wonder how she should be so stupid and act so well . , with irish hospitality , of course press refreshment upon he guest : and the major , who be no more hungry than you be after a 's dinner , declare that he should like a biscuit and a glass of wine above all thing , as he feel quite faint from long fasting -- but he know that to receive small kindness flatter the donor very much , and that people must need grow well dispose towards you as they give you they hospitality . " some of the old , , love , " say , wink to he child -- and that lady , turn to she father a glance of intelligence , go out of the room , and down the stair , where she softly summon she little emissary master : and give he a piece of money , order he to go buy a pint of wine at the Grapes , and sixpennyworth of sort biscuit at the baker 's , and to return in a hurry , when he might have two biscuit for himself . whilst be go on this errand , sate below with , tell she landlady how 's uncle , the major , be above - stair ; a nice , soft - spoken old gentleman ; that butter would not melt in he mouth : and how have go out of the room in a rage of jealousy , and think what must be do to pacify both of they . " she keep the key of the cellar , major , " say , as the girl leave the room . " upon my word you have a very beautiful butler , " answer , gallantly , " and I do not wonder at the young fellow rave about she . when we be of they age , , I think plainer woman would have do we business . " " faith , and ye may say that , sir -- and lucky be the man who get she . ask I friend here whether 's moind be not even shuparior to she person , and whether she do not possess a cultiveate intellect , a refoin understanding , and a emiable disposition ? " " of of course , " say , rather drily . " here come Hebe blush from the cellar . do not you think it be time to go to rehearsal , ? you will be fine if you be later " -- and he give the young lady a look , which intimate that they have much better leave the room and the two elder together . at this order take up she bonnet and shawl , look uncommonly pretty , good - humoured , and smile : and gather up he roll of papers , and hobble across the room for he hat and cane . " must you go ? " say the major . " can not you give we a few minute more , ? before you leave we , permit a old fellow to shake you by the hand , and believe that I be proud to have have the honour of make you acquaintance , and be most sincerely anxious to be you friend . " make
make a low curtsey at the conclusion of this gallant speech , and the major follow she retreat step to the door , where he squeeze she hand with the kindest and most paternal pressure . Bows be puzzl with this exhibition of cordiality : " the lad 's relative can not be really want to marry he to she , " he think -- and so they depart . " now for it , " think major Pendennis ; and as for he profit instantaneously by he daughter 's absence to drink up the rest of the wine ; and toss off one bumper after another of the from the , with a eager shaking hand . the major come up to the table , and take up he glass and drain it with a jovial smack . if it have be 's particular , and not public - house cape , he could not have appear to relish it more . " , , " he say . " where do you get it ? I drink the health of that charme creature in a bumper . , , I do not wonder that the man be wild about she . I never see such eye in my life , or such a grand manner . I be sure she be as intellectual as she be beautiful ; and I have no doubt she be as good as she be clever . " " a good girl , sir , -- a good girl , sir , " say the delighted father ; " and I pledge a toast to she with all my heart . shall I send to the -- to the cellar for another pint ? it be handy by . no ? well , indeed sir , ye may say she be a good girl , and the pride and glory of she father -- honest old . the man who get she will have a jew'l to a wife , sir ; and I drink he health , sir , and ye know who i mean , major . " " I be not surprise at young or old fall in love with she , " say the major , " and frankly must tell you , that though I be very angry with my poor nephew Arthur , when I hear of the boy 's passion -- now I have see the lady I can pardon he any extent of it . by , I should like to enter for the race myself , if I be not a old fellow and a poor one . " " and no better man , major , I be sure , " cry enrapture . " you friendship , sir , delight I . you admiration for my girl bring tear to I eye -- tear , sir -- manlee tear -- and when she leave I humble home for you own more splendid mansion , I hope she will keep a place for she poor old father , poor old . " -- the suite the action to the word , and he bloodshot eye be suffuse with water , as he address the major . " you sentiment do you honour , " the other say . " but , , I can not help smile at one thing you have just say . " " and what be that , sir ? " ask , who be at a too heroic and sentimental pitch to descmend from it . you be speak about we splendid mansion --my sister 's house , I mean . " I mane the park and mansion of , , of , whom I hope to see a Mimber of parliament for he native town of , when he be of ege to take that responsible stetion , " cry the captain with much dignity . the major smile as he recognise a shaft of he own bow . it be he who have set upon the idea of sitting in parliament for the neighbouring borough -- and the poor lad have evidently be brag on the subject to and the lady of he affections . " , my dear sir , " he say . " do you know we history ? we be of excessively ancient family certainly , but I begin life with scarce enough money to purchase my commission , and my eldest brother be a country apothecary : who make every shilling he die possessed of out of he pestle and mortar . " " I have consent to waive that objection , sir , " say majestically , " in consideration of the know respectability of you family . " " curse you impudence , " think the major ; but he only smile and bow . " the , too , have meet with misfortune ; and we house of be by no mane what it be . I have know very honest man apothecary , sir , and there be some in that have have the honour of dining at the 's teeble . " " you be very kind to give we the benefit of you charity , " the major continue : " but permit I to say that be not the question . you speak just now of my little nephew as here of and I do not know what besides . " " fund property , I 've no doubt , , and something handsome eventually from yourself . " " my good sir , I tell you the boy be the son of a country apothecary , " cry out major Pendennis ; " and that when he come of age he will not have a shilling . " " Pooh , major , you be laugh at I , " say , " I young friend , I make no doubt , be here
here to two thousand pound a year . " " two thousand fiddlestick ! I beg you pardon , my dear sir ; but have the boy be humbugge you ?-- it be not he habit . upon my word and honour , as a gentleman and a executor to my brother 's will too , he leave little more than five hundred a year behind he . " " and with aconomy , a handsome sum of money too , sir , " the answer . " faith , I have know a man drink he cla r't , and drive he coach - and - four on five hundred a year and strict aconomy , in , sir . we will manage on it , sir -- trust for that . " " my dear -- I give you my word that my brother do not leave a shilling to he son . " " be ye joke with I , ? " cry . " be ye thrifl with the feeling of a father and a gentleman ? " " I be tell you the honest truth , " say major Pendennis . " every shill my brother have , he leave to he widow : with a partial reversion , it be true , to the boy . but she be a young woman , and may marry if he offend she -- or she may outlive he , for she come of a uncommonly long - liv family . and I ask you , as a gentleman and a man of the world , what allowance can my sister , Pendennis , make to she son out of five hundr a year , which be all she fortune , -- that shall enable he to maintain himself and you daughter in the rank befitt such a accomplished young lady ? " " be I to understand , sir , that the young gentleman , you nephew , and whom I have fosther and cherish as the son of I bosom , be a imposther who have be thrifl with the affections of I beloved child ? " exclaim the general , with a outbreak of wrath .--" have you yourself be work upon the feeling of the young man 's susceptible nature to injuice he to break off a engagement , and with it I adore 's heart ? have a care , sir , how you thrifle with the honour of . if I think any mortal man mean to do so , be heaven I would have he blood , sir -- be he old or young . " " ! " cry out the major . " can protect he own and he daughter 's honour , and will , sir , " say the other . " look at that chest of dthrawer , it contain heap of letther that that viper have address to that innocent child . there be promise there , sir , enough to fill a bandbox with ; and when I have drag the scoundthrel before the court of law , and show up he perjury and he dishonour , I have another remedy in yondther mahogany case , sir , which shall set I right , sir , with any individual -- ye mark I word , major Pendennis -- with any individual who have counsel you nephew to insult a soldier and a gentleman . what ? I daughter to be jilt , and I grey hair dishonoure by a apothecary 's son . by the law of , , I should like to see the man that shall do it . " " I be to understand then that you threat in the first place to publish the letter of a boy of eighteen to a woman of eight - and - twenty : and afterwards to do I the honour of call I out , " the major say , still with perfect coolness . " you have describe my intentions with perfect accuracy , , " answer the , as he pull he rag whisker over he ching . " well , well ; these shall be the subject of future arrangement , but before we come to powder and ball , my good sir , -- do have the kindness to think with yourself in what earthly way I have injure you ? I have tell you that my nephew be dependent upon he mother , who have scarcely more than five hundr a year . " " I have my own opinion of the correctness of that assertion , " say the . " will you go to my sister 's lawyer , Messrs . here , and satisfy yourself ? " " I decline to meet those gentleman , " say the , with rather a disturbed air . " if it be as you say , I have be athrociously deceive by some one , and on that person I will be revenge . " " be it my nephew ? " cry the major , start up and put on he hat . " do he ever tell you that he property be two thousand a year ? if he do , I be mistaken in the boy . to tell lie have not be a habit in we family , , and I do not think my brother 's son have learn it as yet . try and consider whether you have not deceive yourself ; or adopt extravagant report from hearsay -- as for I , sir , you be at liberty to understand that I be not afraid of all the in , and know quite well how to defend myself against any threat from any quarter . I come here as the boy 's guardian to protest against a marriage , most absurd and unequal , that can not but bring poverty and
and misery with it : and in prevent it I conceive I be quite as much you daughter 's friend ( who I have no doubt be a honourable young lady ) as the friend of my own family : and prevent the marriage I will , sir , by every means in my power . there , I have say my say , sir . " " but I have not say mine , major Pendennis -- and ye shall hear more from I , " say , with a look of tremendous severity . " ' Sdeath , sir , what do you mean ? " the major ask , turn round on the threshold of the door , and look the intrepid in the face . " ye say , in the coorse of conversation , that ye be at the , I think , " say in a stately manner . " a friend shall wait upon ye there before ye leave town , sir . " " let he make haste , , " cry out the major , almost beside himself with rage . " I wish you a good morning , sir . " and bow a magnificent bow of defiance to major Pendennis over the landing - place as the latter retreat down the stair . in which a be propose Early mention have be make in this history of , , a promising and athletic young actor , of jovial habit and irregular inclination , between whom and there be a considerable intimacy . they be the chief ornament of the convivial club hold at the ; they help each other in various bill transaction in which they have be engage , with the mutual loan of each other 's valuable signature . they be friend , in fine : although seldom call at 's house , be dislike by , of whom in she turn be considerably jealous . the truth be , that Garbett have pay he court to and be refuse by she , before he offer he hand to . g . they history , however , form no part of we present scheme -- suffice it , be call in by immediately after he daughter and have quit the house , as a friend proper to be consult at the actual juncture . he be a large man , with a loud voice and fierce aspect , who have the finest leg of the whole company , and could break a poker in mere sport across he stalwart arm . " , , " say to the little messenger , " and fetch from he lodging over the tripe shop , ye know , and tell them to send two glass of whisky - and - water , hot , from the Grapes . " so go he way ; and presently and the whisky come . do not disclose to he the whole of the previous event , of which the reader be in possession ; but , with the aid of the spirit - and - water , he compose a letter of a threatening nature to 's address , in which he call upon that gentleman to offer no hindrance to the marriage project between and he daughter , , and to fix a early day for its celebration : or , in any other case , to give he the satisfaction which be usual between gentleman of honour . and should major Pendennis be disinclin to this alternative , the hint , that he would force he to accept by the use of a horsewhip , which he should employ upon the major 's person . the precise term of this letter we can not give , for reason which shall be specify presently ; but it be , no doubt , couch in the 's finest style , and seal elaborately with the great silver seal of the -- the only bit of the family plate which the possess . Garbetts be despatch then with this message and letter ; and bid the squeeze he ambassador 's hand , and see he depart . then he take down he venerable and murderous duelling -pistol , with flint lock , that have do the business of many a pretty fellow in : and have examine these , and see that they be in a satisfactory condition , he bring from the drawer all letter and poem which he keep there , and which he always read before he permit he Emily to enjoy they perusal . in a score of minute come back with a anxious and crestfallen countenance . " ye have see ? " the say . " why , yes , " say . " and when be it for ? " ask , try the lock of one of the ancient pistol , and bring it to a level with he oi -- as he call that bloodshot orb . " when be what for ? " ask . " the meeting , my dear fellow ? " " you do not mean to say , you mean mortal combat , , " Garbetts say , aghast . " what the else do i mean , ?-- I want to shoot that man that have trajuice I honor , or meself dthrop a victim on the sod . " " d --- if I carry challenge , " reply . " I be a family man , , and will have nothing to do with pistol -- take back you letter ; " and , to the surprise and indignation of , he emissary flng the letter down , with its great sprawling superscription and blotch seal . " ye do not mean to say ye see 'um and do not give 'um the letter ? " cry out the in a fury . " I see he ,
, but I could not have speech with he , , " say . " and why the not ? " ask the other . " there be one there I car not to meet , nor would you , " the tragedian answer in a sepulchral voice . " the be there , . " " the cowardly scoundthrel ! " roar . " he be frightened , and already go to swear the peace against I . " " I will have nothing to do with the fighting , mark that , " the tragedian doggedly say , " and I wish I have not see neither , nor that bit of ---- " " hold you tongue , . it be my belief ye be no better than a coward , " say , quote , which character he have perform with credit , both off and on the stage , and after some more parley between the couple they separate in not very good humour . they colloquy have be here condense , as the reader know the main point upon which it turn . but the latter will now see how it be impossible to give a correct account of the letter which the write to major Pendennis , as it be never open at all by that gentleman . when come home from rehearsal , which she do in the company of the faithful , she find she father pace up and down they apartment in a great state of agitation , and in the midst of a powerful odour of spirit - and - water , which , as it appear , have not succeed in pacify he disorder mind . the papers be on the table surround the empty goblet and now useless teaspoon which have serve to hold and mix the 's liquor and he friend 's . as enter he seize she in he arm , and cry out , " prepare yourself , I child , I bless child , " in a voice of agony , and with eye brimful of tear . " ye be tipsy again , , " say , push back she sire . " ye promise I ye would not take spirit before dinner . " " it be to forget I sorrow , I poor girl , that I have take just a drop , " cry the bereaved father -- " it be to dry I care that I drain the bowl . " " you care take a deal of drowning , dear , " say , mimick he friend 's accent ; " what have happen ? have that soave - speak gentleman in the wig be vex you ? " " the oily miscreant ! I will have he blood ! " roar . , it must be premise , have fle to she room out of he embrace , and be take off she bonnet and shawl there . " I think he mean mischief . he be so uncommon civil , " the other say . " what have he come to say ? " " of ! he have overwhellum have I , " the say . " there be a hellish conspiracy on foot against I poor girl ; and it be I opinion that both they Pendennise , nephew and uncle , be two infernal thrator and scoundthrel , who should be conshume from off the face of the earth . " " what be it ? what have happen ? " say , grow rather excited . then tell he the major 's statement that the young Pendennis have not two thousand , nor two hundred pound a year ; and express he fury that he should have permit such a impostor to coax and wheedle he innocent girl , and that he should have nourished such a viper in he own personal bosom . " I have shake the reptile from I , however , " say ; " and as for he uncle , I will have such a revenge on that old man , as shall make rue the day he ever insult a . " " what do you mean , ? " say . " I mean to have he life , Bows -- he villanous , skulking life , my boy ; " and he rap upon the batter old pistol - case in a ominous and savage manner . Bows have often hear he appeal to that box of death , with which he propose to sacrifice he enemy ; but the do not tell he that he have actually write and send a challenge to major Pendennis , and therefore rather disregard the pistol in the present instance . at this juncture return to the common sitting - room from she private apartment , look perfectly healthy , happy , and unconcerned , a striking and wholesome contrast to she father , who be in a delirious tremor of grief , anger , and other agitation . she bring in a pair of ex-white satin shoe with she , which she propose to rub as clean as might be with bread-crumb : intend to go mad with they upon next evening in , in which character she be to reappear on that night . she look at the papers on the table ; stop as if she be go to ask a question , but think better of it , and go to the cupboard , select a eligible piece of bread wherewith she might operate on the satin slipper : and afterwards come back to the table , seat herself there commodiously with the shoe , and then ask she father , in she honest , irish brogue , " what have ye get they letther , and pothry , and stuff , of 's out for , ? sure ye do not want
want to be read over that nonsense . " " of ! " cry the , " that boy whom I love as the boy of mee bosom be only a scoundthrel , and a deceiver , mee poor girl : " and he look in the most tragical way at , opposite ; who , in he turn , gaze somewhat anxiously at . " he ! pooh ! sure the poor lad 's as simple as a schoolboy , " she say . " all they child write verse and nonsense . " " he be be act the part of a viper to this fireside , and a traitor in this familee , " cry the . " I tell ye he be no better than a impostor . " " what have the poor fellow do , ? " ask Emily . " done ? he have deceive we in the most athrocious manner , " 's papa say . " he have thrifle with you affections , and outrage my own fine feeling . he have represent himself as a man of property , and it turrun out that he be no betther than a beggar . have not I often tell ye he have two thousand a year ? he be a pauper , I tell ye , ; a depindent upon the bountee of he mother ; a good woman , who may marry again , who be likely to live for ever , and who have but five hundred a year . how dar he ask ye to marry into a family which have not the means of provide for ye ? ye have be grossly deceive and put upon , , and it be my belief he old ruffian of a uncle in a wig be in the plot against we . " " that soave old gentleman ? what have he be do , ? " continue Emily , still imperturbable . inform , that when she be go , major Pendennis tell he in he double - face Pall mall polite manner , that young have no fortune at all , that the major have ask he ( ) to go to the lawyer ( " wherein he know the scoundthrel have a bill of mine , and I can not meet they , " the parenthetically remark ) , and see the lad 's father 's will and finally , that a infernal swindle have be practise upon he by the pair , and that he be resolve either on a marriage , or on the blood of both of they . look very grave and thoughtful , rub the white satin shoe . " sure , if he be no money , there be no use marry he , , " she say sententiously . " why do the villain say he be a man of prawpertee ? " ask . " the poor fellow always say he be poor , " answer the girl . " 'Tbe you would have it he be rich , -- and make I agree to take he . " " he should have be explicit and tell we he income , , " answer the father . " a young fellow who ride a blood mare , and make present of shawl and bracelet , be a impostor if he have no money ; -- and as for he uncle , bedad I will pull off he wig whenever I see 'um . Bows , here , shall take a message to he and tell he so . either it be a marriage , or he meet I in the field like a man , or I tweak 'um on the nose in front of he hotel or in the gravel walk of before all the county , bedad . " " , you may send somebody else with the message , " say , laugh . " I be a fiddler , not a fight man , . " " Pooh , you have no spirit , sir , " roar the general . " I will be my own second , if no one will stand by and see I injure . and I will take my case of pistol and shoot 'um in the coffee - room of the . " " and so poor Arthur have no money ? " sigh out , rather plaintively . " poor lad , he be a good lad too : wild and talk nonsense , with he verse and pothry and that , but a brave , generous boy , and indeed I like he -- and he like I too , " she add , rather softly , and rub away at the shoe . " why do not you marry he if you like he so ? " say , rather savagely . " he be not more than ten year younger than you be . he mother may relent , and you might go and live and have enough at . why not go and be a lady ? I could go on with the fiddle , and the general live on he half - pay . why do not you marry he ? you know he like you . " " there be other that like I as well , Bows , that have no money and that be old enough , " say sententiously . " yes , --- it , " say , with a bitter curse --" that be old enough and poor enough and fools enough for anything . " " there be old fools , and young fools too . you have often say so you silly man , " the imperious beauty say , with a conscious glance at the old gentleman . " if have not enough money to live upon , it be folly to talk about marry
marry he : and that be the long and short of it . " " and the boy ? " say . " by ! you throw a man away like a old glove , . " " I do not know what you mean , , " say , placidly , rub the second shoe . " if he have have half of the two thousand a year that give he , or the half of that , I would marry he . but what be the good of take on with a beggar ? we be poor enough already . there be no use in my go to live with a old lady that be testy and cross , maybe , and would grudge I every morsel of meat . " ( sure , it be near dinner time , and not lay the cloth yet . ) " and then , " add quite simply , " suppose there be a family ?-- why , , we should not be as well off as we be now . " " ' deed , then , you would not , Milly dear , " answer the father . " and there be a end to all the fine talk about of -- the member of parliament 's lady , " say , with a laugh . " pretty carriage and horse we should have to ride !-- that you be always talk about , ! but it be always the same . if a man look at I , you fancie he be go to marry I ; and if he have a good coat , you fancie he be as rich as Crazes . " " -- as , " say . " well , call 'um what ye like . but it be a fact now that have marry I these eight year a score of time . be not I to be my of ? then there be the at , and the old surgeon at , and the Methodist preacher here last year , and who know how many more ? well , I bet a penny , with all you scheming , I shall die at last . so poor little yoArthu have no money ? stop and take dinner , Bows ; we have a beautiful beef - steak pudding . " " I wonder whether she be on with , " think , whose eye and thought be always watch she . " the dodge of woman beat all comprehension ; and I be sure she would not let the lad off so easily , if she have not some other scheme on hand . " it will have be perceive that , though silent in general , and by no means brilliant as a conversationist , where poetry , literature , or the fine art be concerned , could talk freely , and with good sense , too , in she own family circle . she can not justly be call a romantic person : nor be she literary acquirement great : she never open a Shakspeare from the day she leave the stage , nor , indeed , understand it during all the time she adorn the board : but about a pudding , a piece of needle - work , or she own domestic affair , she be as good a judge as could be find ; and not be misl by a strong imagination or a passionate temper , be better enable to keep she judgment cool . when , over they dinner , try to convince himself and the company , that the major 's statement regard Pen' finances be unworthy of credit , and a mere ruse upon the old hypocrite 's part so as to induce they , on they side , to break off the match , would not , for a moment , admit the possibility of deceit on the side of the adversary : and point out clearly that it be she father who have deceive himself , and not poor little Pen who have try to take they in . as for that poor lad , she say she pitie he with all she heart . and she eat a exceedingly good dinner ; to the admiration of , who have a remarkable regard and contempt for this woman , during and after which repast , the party devise upon the best means of bring this love - matter to a close . as for , he idea of tweak the major 's nose vanish with he supply of after - dinner whisky - and - water ; and he be submissive to he daughter , and ready for any plan on which she might decide , in order to meet the crisis which she see be at hand . the , who , as long as he have a notion that he be wronged , be eager to face and demolish both and he uncle , perhaps shrank from the idea of meet the former , and ask " what the juice they be to say to the lad if he remain steady to he engagement , and they break from theirs ? " " what ? do not you know how to throw a man over ? " say ; " ask a woman to tell you ? " and show how this feat be to be do simply enough -- nothing be more easy . " write to to know what settlement he propose to make in event of a marriage ; and ask what he mean are . yoArthu write back and say what he be get , and you will find it be as the major say , I will go bail . then papa write , and say it be not enough , and the match have best be at a end . " "
" and , of course , you enclose a parting line , in which you say you will always regard he as a brother , " say , eye she in he scornful way . " of course , and so I shall , " answer . " he be a most worthy young man , I be sure . I will thank ye hand I the salt . they filbert be beautiful . " " and there will be no nos pull , , my boy ? I be sorry you be baulk , " say . " dad , I suppose not , " say , rub he own .-- " what will ye do about they letter , and verse , and pome , Milly , darling ?-- ye must send th'ey back . " " would give a hundred pound for 'em , " Bows say , with a sneer . " ' deed , then , he would , " say , who be easily lead . " ! " say Milly .--" ye would not be for not send the poor boy he letter back ? they letter and pome be mine . they be very long , and full of all sort of nonsense , and , and thing I could not understand the half of ; indeed I have not read them all ; but we will send th'ey back to he when the proper time come . " and go to a drawer , take out from it a number of the and , in which have write a copy of flaming verse celebrat she appearance in the character of , and put by the leaf upon which the poem appear ( for , like lady of she profession , she keep the favourable print notice of she performance ) , she wrap up Pen's letter , poem , passion , and fancie , and tie they with a piece of string neatly , as she would a parcel of sugar . be she in the least moved while perform this act . what hour the boy have pass over those papers ! what love and long : what generous faith and manly devotion -- what watchful night and lonly fevers might they tell of ! she tie they up like so much grocery , and sate down and make tea afterwards with a perfectly placid and content heart : while be year after she ten mile off : and hug she image to he soul . chapter XIII a crisis meanwhile they be wonder at Fairoak that the major have not return . and he lady , on they way home to , stop at 's lodge - gate , with a brief note for she from major , in which he say he should remain at another day , be anxious to have some talk with Messrs . , the lawyer , whom he would meet that afternoon ; but no mention be make of the transaction in which the writer have be engage during the morning . indeed the note be write at the pause after the first part of the engagement , and when the major have decidedly have the worst of the battle . do not care somehow to go into the town whilst he uncle be there . he do not like to have to fancy that he guardian might be spy at he from that abominable 's grass - plat , whilst he be make love in 's drawing - room ; and the pleasure of a walk ( a delight which he be very rarely permit to enjoy ) would have be spoil if he have meet the man of the polish boot on that occasion . he modest love could not show in public by any outward sign , except the eyes ( with which the poor fellow ogle and gaze violently to be sure ) , but it be dumb in the presence of third party ; and so much the better , for of all the talk which take place in this world , that of love -maker be surely , to the uninitiated , the most silly . it be the vocabulary without the key ; it be the lamp without the flame . let the respecte reader look or think over some old love - letter that he ( or she ) have have and forgote , and try they over again . how blank and meaningless they seem ! what glamour of infatuation be it which make that nonsense beautiful ? one wonder that such puling and trash could ever have make one happy . and yet there be dates when you kiss those silly letter with rapture -- live upon six absurd line for a week , and until the reactionary period come , when you be restless and miserable until you get a fresh supply of folly . that be why we decline to publish any of the letter and verse which write at this period of he life , out of mere regard for the young fellow 's character . they be too spooney and wild . young lady ought not to be call upon to read they in cold blood . Bide you time , young woman ; perhaps you will get and write they on you own account soon . meanwhile we will respect Pen's first outpouring , and keep they tie up in the newspaper with 's string , and seal with 's great silver seal . the major come away from he interview with in a state of such concentrated fury as render he terrible to approach ! " the impudent bog - trot scamp , " he think , " dare to threat I ! dare to talk of permitting he damne Costigans to marry with the Pendennise ! send I a challenge ! if the fellow can get anything
anything in the shape of a gentleman to carry it , I have the greatest mind in life not to baulk he . -- ! what would people say if I be to go out with a tipsy mountebank , about a row with a actress in a barn ! " so when the major saw , who ask anxiously regard the issue of he battle with the dragon , do not care to inform the divine of the general 's insolent behaviour , but state that the affair be a very ugly and disagreeable one , and that it be by no means over yet . he enjoin and to say nothing about the business at Fairoak ; whither he contente himself with despatch the note we have before mention . and then he return to he hotel , where he vent he wrath upon he valet , " dammin and cussin upstairs and downstairs , " as that observe to 's man , in whose company he partake of dinner in the servants 's room of the . the servant carry the news to he master ; and have finish he breakfast about this time , it be two o'clock in the afternoon , remember that he be anxious to know the result of the interview between he two friend , and have inquire the number of the major 's sitting - room , go over in he brocade dressing - gown , and knock for admission . major Pendennis have some business , as he have state , respecte a lease of the widow 's , about which he be desirous of consult old , the lawyer , who have be he brother 's man of business , and who have a branch - office at , where he and he son attend market and other day three or four in the week . this gentleman and he client be now in consultation when show he grand dressing - gown and embroider skull - cap at 's door . see the engage with papers and red -tape , and a old man with a white head , the modest youth be for draw back -- and say , " o , you be busy -- call again another time . " but want to see he , and beg he , with a smile , to enter : whereupon take off the embroidered tarboosh or fez ( it have be work by the fondest of mother ) and advanced , bow to the gentleman and smile on they graciously . have never see so splendo a apparition before as this brocad , who seat himself in a arm -chair , spread out he crimson skirt , and look with exceeding kindness and frankness on the other two tenant of the room . " you seem to like my dressing - gown , sir , " he say to . " a pretty thing , be not it ? neat , but not in the least gaudy . and how do you do , major Pendennis , sir , and how do the world treat you ? " there be that in 's manner and appearance which would have put a Inquisitor into good humour , and it smoothe the wrinkle under 's head of hair . " I have have a interview with that ( you may speak before my friend , here , who know all the affair of the family ) , and it have not , I own , be very satisfactory . he will not believe that my nephew be poor : he say we be both liar : he do I the honour to hind that I be a coward , as I take leave . and I think when you knock at the door , that you might be the gentleman whom I expect with a challenge from -- that be how the world treat I , . " " you do not mean that , the actress 's father ? " cry , who be a dissenter himself , and do not patronise the drama . " that , the actress 's father -- the very man . have not you hear what a fool my nephew have make of himself about the girl ? " -- , who never enter the wall of a theatre , have hear nothing : and major Pendennis have to recound the story of he nephew 's love to the lawyer , come in with appropriate comment in he usual familiar language . be lose in wonder at the narrative . why have not marry a serious man , he think -- be a widower -- and keep this unfortunate boy from perdition ? as for 's daughter , he would say nothing : she profession be sufficient to characterise she . here interpose to say he have know some uncommon good people in the boot , as he call the Temple of the . well , it might be so , hope so -- but the father , kknow personally -- a man of the worst character , a wine - bibber and a idler in tavern and billiard - room , and a notorious insolvent . " I can understand the reason , major , " he say , " why the fellow would not come to my office to ascertain the truth of the statement which you make he .-- we have a writ out against he and another disreputable fellow , one of the play - actor , for a bill give to of this city , a most respectable Grocer and wine and , and a member of the of . this come cry to , -- cry in the shop , sir , -- and we have not proceed against he or the other , as neither be worth powder and shot . " it be whilst be engage
engage in tell this story that a third knock come to the door , and there enter a athletic gentleman in a shabby braide frock , bear in he hand a letter with a large blotched red seal . " can I have the honour of speak with major Pendennis in private ? " he begin -- " I have a few word for you ear , sir . I be the bearer of a mission from my friend , " -- but here the man with the bass voice pause , falter , and turn pale -- he catch sight of the red and well - remember face of . " Hullo , , speak up ! " cry , delight . " why , bless my soul , it be the other party to the bill ! " say . " I say , sy ; stop I say . " but Garbetts , with a face as blank as 's when 's ghost appear upon he , gas some inarticulate word , and fle out of the room . the major 's gravity be also entirely upset , and he burst out laugh . so do , who say , " by , it be a good 'un . " so do the attorney , although by profession a serious man . " I do not think there will be any fight , major , " young say ; and begin mimick the tragedian . " if there be , the old gentleman -- you name ?-- very happy to make you acquaintance , -- may send the bailiff to separate the man ; " and Tathbe promise to do so . the major be by no means sorry at the ludicrous issue of the quarrel . " it seem to I , sir , " he say to , " that you always arrive to put I into good - humour . " be this the only occasion on which Foker this day be destin to be of service to the family . we have say that he have the entree of 's lodging , and in the course of the afternoon he think he would pay the general a visit , and hear from he own lip what have occur in the conversation , in the morning , with . be not at home . he have receive permission , nay , encouragement from he daughter , to go to the convivial club at the , where no doubt he be brag at that moment of he desire to murder a certain ruffian ; for he be not only brave , but he know it too , and like to take out he courage , and , as it be , give it a airing in company . then be absent , but be at home wash the tea-cup whilst sate opposite to she . " just do breakfast I see -- how do ? " say , pop in he little funny head . " get out , you funny little man , " cry . " you mean come in , answer the other . -- here we be ! " and enter the room he fold he arm and begin twirl he head round and round with immense rapidity , like in the Pantomime when he first issue from he cocoon or envelope . laugh with all she heart : a wink of 's would set she off laughing , when the bitterest joke Bows ever make could not get a smile from she , or the finest of poor Pen' speech would only puzzle she . at the end of the harlequinade he sank down on one knee and kiss she hand . " you be the drollest little man , " she say , and give he a great good - humoured slap . use to tremble as he kiss she hand . Pen would have die of a slap . these preliminary over , the three begin to talk ; amuse he companion by recount to they the scene which he have just witness of the discomfiture of , by which they learn , for the first time , how far the general have carry he wrath against major Pendennis . speak strongly in favour of the major 's character for veracity and honour , and describe he as a tip - top swell , move in the upper - circle of society , who would never submit to any deceit --much more to deceive such a charming young woman as . he touch delicately upon the delicate marriage question , though he could not help show that he hold rather cheap . in fact , he have a perhaps just contempt for Pen's high - fly sentimentality ; he own weakness , as he think , not lie that way . " I know it would not do , , " say he , nodd he little head . " could not do . do not like to put my hand into the bag , but kknow it could not do . he be too young for you : too green : a deal too green : and he turn out to be poor as . can not have he at no price , can she , ? " " indeed he be a nice poor boy , " say the rather sadly . " poor little beggar , " say , with he hand in he pocket , and steal up a queer look at . perhaps he think and wonder at the way in which woman play with man , and coax they and win they and drop they . but have not the least objection to acknowledge that he think be perfectly right in give up , and that in he idea the match be always a absurd one : and own that she think so
so herself , only she could not send away two thousand a year . " it all come of believe 's silly story , " she say ; " faith I will choose for meself another time " -- and very likely the large image of enter into she mind at that instant . after praise , whom declare to be a proper gentleman entirely , smell of lavender , and as neat as a pin , -- and who be pronounce by to be the right sort of fellow , though rather too much of a old buck , suddenly bethotch he to ask the pair to come and meet the major that very even at dinner at he apartment at the . " he agree to dine with I , and I think after the -- after the little shindy this morning , in which I must say the general be wrong , it would look kind , you know .-- I know the major fell in love with you , : he say so . " " so she may be still , " say with a sneer -- " no , thank you , have dine . " " sure , that be at three o'clock , " say , who have a honest appetite , " and I can not go without you . " " we will have lobster - salad and champagne , " say the little monster , who could not construe a line of , or do a sum beyond the rule of . now , for lobster - salad and champagne in a honourable manner , would have go anywhere -- and major Pendennis actually find himself at seven o'clock seat at a dinner - table in company with , a professional fiddler , and , whose father have want to blow he brain out a few hour before . to make the happy meeting complete , , who know 's haunt , despatch to the club at the , where the general be in the act of singe a pathetic song , and bring he off to supper . to find he daughter and Bows seat at the board be a surprise indeed -- major Pendennis laugh , and cordially hold out he hand , which the grasp avec effusion as the french say . in fact he be considerably inebriate , and have already be cry over he own song before he join the little party at the . he burst into tear more than once , during the entertainment , and call the major he dearest friend . and walk home with he : the major gallantly give he arm to . he be receive with great friendliness when he call the next day , when many civility pass between the gentleman . on take leave he express he anxious desire to serve on any occasion in which he could be useful to she , and he shook hand with most cordially and gratefully , and say that have do he the very greatest service . " all right , " say : and they part with mutual esteem . on he return to Fairoak the next day , major Pendennis do not say what have happene to he on the previous night , or allude to the company in which he have pass it . but he engage to stop to dinner ; and any person accustom to watch he manner might have remark that there be something constrain in he hilarity and talkativeness , and that he be unusually gracious and watchful in he communication with he nephew . he give a emphatic - bless - you when the lad go to bed ; and as they be about to part for the night , he seem as if he be go to say something to , but he bethotch he that if he speak he might spoil she night 's rest , and allow she to sleep in peace . the next morning he be down in the breakfast - room earlier than be he custom , and salute everybody there with great cordiality . the post use to arrive commonly about the end of this meal . when , the old servant , enter , and discharge the bag of its letter and papers , the major look hard at as the lad get he -- yoArthu blush , and put he letter down . he know the hand , it be that of old , and he do not care to read it in public . major Pendennis know the letter , too . he have put it into the post himself in the day before . he tell little to go away , which the child do , have a thorough dislike to he ; and as the door close on she , he take 's hand , and give she a look full of meaning , point to the letter under the newspaper which be pretend to read . " will you come into the drawing - room ? " he say . " I want to speak to you . " and she follow he , wonder , into the hall . " what be it ? " she say nervously . " the affair be at a end , " major Pendennis say . " he have a letter there give he he dismissal . I dictat it myself yesterday . there be a few line from the lady , too , bid he farewell . it be all over . " run back to the dining - room , she brother follow . have jump at he letter the instant they be go . he be read it with a stupefied face . it state what the major have say , that be most gratify for the kindness with which yoArthu have treat he daughter , but that
that he be only now make aware of 's peecupiary circumstance . they be such that marriage be at present out of the question , and consider the great disparity in the age of the two , a future union be impossible . under these circumstance , and with the deepest regret and esteem for he , farewell , and suggest that he should cease visit , for some time at least , at he house . a few line from be enclose . she acquiesce in the decision of she Papa . she point out that she be many year older than , and that a engagement be not to be think of . she would always be grateful for he kindness to she , and hope to keep he friendship . but at present , and until the pain of the separation should be over , she entreate they should not meet . read 's letter and its enclosure mechanically , hardly know what be before he eye . he look up wildly , and see he mother and uncle regard he with sad face . 's , indeed , be full of tender maternal anxiety . " what -- what be this ? " say . " it be some joke . this be not she write . this be some servant 's writing . who be play these trick upon I ? " " it come under she father 's envelope , " the major say . " those letter you have before be not in she hand : that be hers . " " how do you know ? " say very fiercely . " I see she write it , " the uncle answer , as the boy start up ; and he mother , come forward , take he hand . he put she away . " how come you to see she ? how come you between I and she ? what have I ever do to you that you should -- oh , it be not true ! it be not true ! " -- break out with a wild execration . " she can not have do it of she own accord . she can not mean it . she be pledge to I . who have tell she lie to break she from I ? " " lie be not tell in the family , , " major Pendennis reply . " I tell she the truth , which be , that you have no money to maintain she , for she foolish father have represent you to be rich . and when she know how poor you be , she withdraw at once , and without any persuasion of mine . she be quite right . she be ten year older than you be . she be perfectly unfitted to be you wife , and know it . look at that handwriting , and ask yourself , be such a woman fit to be the companion of you mother ? " " I will know from herself if it be true , " yoArthu say , crumple up the paper . " will not you take my word of honour ? she letter be write by a confident of hers , who write better than she can -- look here . here be one from the lady to you friend , . you have see she with , as whose amanuensis she act " -- the major say , with ever so little of a sneer , and lay down a certain billet which have give to he . " it be not that , " say , burn with shame and rage . " I suppose what you say be true , sir , but I will hear it from herself . " " ! " appeal he mother . " I will see she , " say . " I will ask she to marry I , once more . I will . no one shall prevent I . " " what , a woman who spell affection with one f ? Nonsense , sir . be a man , and remember that you mother be a lady . she be never make to associate with that tipsy old swindler or he daughter . be a man and forget she , as she do you . " " be a man and comfort you mother , my , " say , go and embrace he : and see that the pair be greatly move , go out of the room and shut the door upon they , wisely judge that they be best alone . he have win a complete victory . he actually have bring away Pen' letter in he portmanteau from : have compliment , when he return they , by give he the little promissory note which have disquiet himself and ; and for which the major settle with . rush wildly off to that day , but in vain attempt to see , for whom he leave a letter , enclose to she father . the enclosure be return by , who beg that all correspondence might end ; and after one or two further attempt of the lad 's , the indignant General desire that they acquaintance might cease . he cut in the street . as and be pace the walk , one day , they come upon on she father 's arm . she pass without any nod of recognition . feel poor trembl on he arm . he uncle want he to travel , to quit the country for a while , and he mother urge he too : for he be grow very ill , and suffer severely . but he refuse , and say point - blank he would not go . he would not obey in this instance : and he mother be too fond ,
, and he uncle too wise to force he . whenever act , he ride over to the and see she . one night there be so few people in the house that the manager return the money . come home and go to be at eight o'clock , and have a fever . if this continue , he mother will be go over and fetch the girl , the major thought , in despair . as for , he think he should die . we be not go to describe he feeling , or give a dreary journal of he despair and passion . have not other gentleman be baulk in love besides ? yes , indeed : but few die of the malady . in which make a new engagement within a short period of the event above narrate , be perform he famous character of ' , ' in ' , ' to a house so exceedingly thin , that it would appear as if the part of be by no means such a favourite with the people of as it be with the accomplished actor himself . Scarce anybody be in the theatre . poor Pen have the box almost all to himself , and sate there lonely , with bloodshot eye , lean over the ledge , and gaze haggardly towards the scene , when come in . when she be not on the stage he see nothing . Spaniard and Peruvians , procession and battle , priest and virgin of the sun , go in and out , and have they talk , but take no note of any of they ; and only see whom he soul longe after . he say afterwards that he wonder he have not take a pistol to shoot she , so mad be he with love , and rage , and despair ; and have it not be for he mother at home , to whom he do not speak about he luckless condition , but whose silent sympathy and watchfulness greatly comfort the simple half heart - break fellow , who know but he might have do something desperate , and have end he day prematurly in front of ? there he sate then , miserable , and gaze at she . and she take no more notice of he than he do of the rest of the house . the be uncommonly handsome , in a white raiment and leopard skin , with a sun upon she breast , and fine tawdry bracelet on she beautiful glancing arm . she spout to admiration the few word of she part , and look it still better . the eyes , which have overthrown Pen' soul , roll and gleam as lustrous as ever ; but it be not to he that they be direct that night . he do not know to whom , or remark a couple of gentleman , in the box next to he , upon whom 's glance be perpetually shine . have notice the extraordinary change which have take place on the stage a short time after the entry of these two gentleman into the theatre . there be so few people in the house , that the first act of the play languish entirely , and there have be some question of return the money , as upon that other unfortunate night when poor Pen have be drive away . the actor be perfectly careless about they part , and yawn through the dialogue , and talk loud to each other in the interval . even be listless , and in speak under she breath . how come it that all of a sudden . begin to raise she voice and bellow like a bull of ? Whence be it that , flinge off he apathy , dart about the stage and yell like ? why do and and try , each of they , the force of they charms or graces , and act and swagger and scowl and spout they very loudest at the two gentleman in box no . 3 ? one be a quiet little man in black , with a grey head and a jolly shrewd face -- the other be in all respects a splendid and remarkable individual . he be a tall and portly gentleman with a hook nose and a profusion of curling brown hair and whisker ; he coat be cover with the richest frog - braiding and velvet . he have under - waistcoat , many splendid ring , jewell pin and neck - chain . when he take out he yellow pocket - handkerchief with he hand that be case in white kid , a delightful odour of musk and bergamot be shake through the house . he be evidently a personage of rank , and it be at he that the little company be ac . he be , in a word , no other than , the great manager from , accompany by he faithful friend and secretary : without whom he never travel . he have not be ten minute in the theatre before he august presence there be perceive by and the rest : and they all begin to act they best and try to engage he attention . even 's dull heart , which be disturb at nothing , feel perhaps a flutter , when she come in presence of the famous . she have not much to do in she part , but to look handsome , and stand in picturesque attitude encircle she child and she do this work to admiration . in vain the various actor try to win the favour of the great stage . never get a hand from he . Bingley yell , and . bellow , and the manager only take snuff out of he great gold box . it be only in the last scene , when
when come in staggering with the infant ( be not so strong as he be and he fourth son master be a monstrous large child for he age ) -- when come stagger with the child to , who rush forward with a shriek , and say -- " of , there be blood upon he ! " -- that the manager clap he hand , and break out with a enthusiastic bravo . then have conclude he applause , give he secretary a slap on the shoulder , and say , " by , , she will do ! " " who teach she that ? " say old , who be a sardonic old gentleman . " I remember she at the , and hang I if she could say Bo to a goose . " it be little in the orchestra who have teach she the ' ' in question . all the company hear the applause , and , as the curtain go down , come round she and congratulate and hat . now 's appearance in the remote little Chatteris theatre may be account for in this manner . in spite of all he exertion , and the perpetual blaze of triumph , coruscation of talent , victory of good old comedy , which he play - bills advertise , he theatre ( which , if you please , and to injure no present susceptibility and ves interest , we shall call the ) by no means prosper , and the famous find himself on the verge of ruin . the great have act legitimate drama for twenty night , and fail to remunerate anybody but himself : the celebrate and have come out in 's tragedy , and in they favourite round of piece , and have not attract the public . 's lion and tiger have draw for a little time , until one of the animal have bite a piece out of the 's shoulder ; when the interfere , and put a stop to this species of performance : and the grand , though bring out with unexampled splendour and success , with as first tenor , and a enormous orchestra , have almost crush poor Dolphing in its triumphant progress : so that great as he genius and resource be , they seem to be at a end . he be drag on he season wretchedly with half salary , small opera , feeble old comedy , and he ballet company ; and everybody be look out for the day when he should appear in the Gazette . one of the illustrious patron of the , and occupant of the great proscenium - box , be a gentleman whose name have be mention in a previous history ; that refin patron of the art , and enlighten lover of music and the drama , the most the of . he lordship 's avocation as a statesman prevent he from attend the playhouse very often , or come very early . but he occasionally appear at the theatre in time for the ballet , and be always receive with the greatest respect by the manager , from whom he sometimes condescende to receive a visit in he box . it communicate with the stage , and when anything occur there which particularly please he , when a new face make its appearance among the coryphee , or a fair dancer execute a pa with especial grace or agility , , , or some other aide - de - camp of the noble , would be commission to go behind the scene , and express the great man 's approbation , or make the inquiry which be prompt by he lordship 's curiosity , or he interest in the dramatic art . he could not be see by the audience , for sate modestly behind a curtain , and look only towards the stage -- but you could know he be in the house , by the glance which all the corps - de - ballet , and all the principal dancer , cast towards he box . I have see many score of pair of eye ( as in the in the ballet of at , where no less than a hundred - and - twenty lovely female savage in palm leave and feather apron , be make to dance round as ) ogl that box as they perform before it , and have often wonder to remark the presence of mind of , or ( know as ) , who , when actually up in the air quiver like so many shuttlecock , always keep they lovely eye wink at that box in which the great Steyne sate . now and then you would hear a harsh voice from behind the curtain cry , " , , " or a pair of white glove wave from it , and begin to applaud . , or , when they come down to , curtsy and smile , especially to those hand , before they walk up the stage again , pante and happy . one night this great surround by a few choice friend be in he box at the , and they be make such a noise and laughter that the pit be scandalise , and many indignant voice be bawl out silence so loudly , that wonder the police do not interfere to take the rascal out . be amuse the party in the box with extracts from a private letter which he have receive from , whose absence in the country at the full season have be remark , and of course deplor by he friend . " the secret be out , " say , " there be a woman in the case . " " why , --- it , , he be you age , " say the gentleman behind the curtain . " pwe le
le ames bien nees , l'amour ne compte pa le nombre de annee , " say , with a gallant air . " for my part , I hope to be a victim till I die , and to break my heart every year of my life . " the meaning of which sentence be , " my lord , you need not talk ; I be three year younger than you , and twice as well conserve . " " Wenham , you affect I , " say the great man , with one of he usual oath . " by --- you do . I like to see a fellow preserve all the illusion of youth up to we time of life -- and keep he heart warm as yours be . hang it , sir , it be a comfort to meet with such a generous , cando creature .-- who be that gal in the second row , with blue ribbon , third from the stage -- fine gal . yes , you and I be sentimentalist . Wagg I do not think so much care -- it be the stomach rather more than the heart with you , eh , , my boy ? " " I like everything that be good , " say , generously . " and , and . I do not say that 's turtle be to be despise , because they do not cook they at the : but -- but tell we about old , , " he abruptly conclude -- for he joke flag just then , as he see that he patron be not listen . in fact , 's glassis be up , and he be examine some object on the stage . " yes , I have hear that joke about 's turtle and the before -- you begin to fail , my poor Wagg . if you do not mind I shall be oblige to have a new , " say , lay down he glass . " go on , Wenham , about old Pendennis . " " dear , " -- he begin , read , -- " as you have have my character in you hand for the last three week , and no doubt have tear I to shred , accord to you custom , I think you can afford to be good - humoure by way of variety , and to do I a service . it be a delicate matter , entre nous , une affaire de coeur . there be a young friend of mine who be go wild about a certain , a actress at the theatre here , and I must own to you , as handsome a woman , and , as it appear to I , as good a actress as ever put on rouge . she do , , -- that sort of thing . upon my word , she be as splendid as in she best day , and as far as I know , utterly superior to anything we have on we scene . I want a engagement for she . can not you get you friend to come and see she -- to engage she -- to take she out of this place ? a word from a noble friend of ours ( you understand ) would be invaluable , and if you could get the interest for I -- I will promise anything I can in return for you service -- which I shall consider one of the greatest that can be do to I . do , do this now as a good fellow , which I always say you be : and in return , command yours truly , . . " " it be a clear case , " say , have read this letter ; " old be in love . " " and want to get the woman up to --evidently , " continue . " I should like to see Pendennis on he knee , with the rheumatism , " say . " or accommodate the beloved object with a lock of he hair , " say . " stuff . " say the great man . " he have relation in the country , have not he ? he say something about a nephew , whose interest could return a member . it be the nephew 's affair , depend on it . the young one be in a scrape . I be myself -- when I be in the fifth form at -- a market - gardener 's daughter -- and swore I would marry she . I be mad about she -- poor ! " -- here he make a pause , and perhaps the past rise up to , and be a boy again not altogether lose .--" but I say , she must be a fine woman from 's account . have in , and let we hear if he know anything of she . " at this spring out of the box , pass the servitor who wait at the door communicate with the stage , and who salute with profound respect ; and the latter emissary , push on and familiar with the place , have no difficulty in find out the manager , who be employ , as he not unfrequently be , in swear and curse the lady of the corps - de - ballet for not do they duty . the oath die away on 's lip , as soon as he see ; and he draw off the hand which be clench in the face of one of the offending coryphee , to grasp that of the new- comer . " how do , ? how be he lordship to - night ? look uncommonly well , " say the manager smile , as if he have never be out of
of temper in he life ; and he be only too delighted to follow 's ambassador , and pay he personal respects to that great man . the visit to be the result of they conversation : and write to he lordship from that place , and do himself the honour to inform the Marquess of , that he have see the lady about whom he lordship have speak , that he be as much struck by she talents as he be by she personal appearance , and that he have make a engagement with , who would soon have the honour of appearing before a audience , and he noble and enlighten patron the of . read the announcement of 's engagement in the paper , where he have so often praise she charms . the editor make very handsome mention of she talent and beauty , and prophesy she success in the metropolis . , the manager , begin to advertise " the last night of 's engagement . " poor and Oak be very constant at the play : in the stage - box , throw bouquet and get glance .-- Pen in the almost desert box , haggard , wretch and lonely . nobody care whether be go or stay except those two -- and perhaps one more , which be of the orchestra . he come out of he place one night , and go into the house to the box where be ; and he hold out he hand to he , and ask he to come and walk . they walk down the street together ; and go and sate upon bridge in the moonlight , and talk about she . " we may sit on the same bridge , " say he ; " we have be in the same boat for a long time . you be not the only man who have make a fool of himself about that woman . and I have less excuse than you , because I be older and know she better . she have no more heart than the stone you be lean on ; and it or you or I might fall into the water , and never come up again , and she would not care . yes -- she would care for I , because she want I to teach she : and she will not be able to get on without I , and will be force to send for I from . but she would not if she do not want I . she have no heart and no head , and no sense , and no feeling , and no grief or car , whatever . I be go to say no pleasure -- but the fact be , she do like she dinner , and she be pleased when people admire she . " " and you do ? " say , interest out of himself , and wonder at the crabbed homely little old man . " it be a habit , like take snuff , or drink dram , " say the other . " I have be take she these five year , and can not do without she . it be I make she . if she do not send for I , I shall follow she : but I know she will send for I . she want I . some day she will marry , and fl I over , as I do the end of this cigar . " the little flaming spark drop into the water below , and disappear ; and , as he ride home that night , actually think about somebody but himself . the happy until the enemy have retire altogether from before the place , be resolve to keep he garrison in Fairoaks . he do not appear to watch Pen's behaviour or to put any restraint on he nephew 's action , but he manage nevertheless to keep the lad constantly under he eye or those of he agent , and young 's comings and goings be quite well know to he vigilant guardian . I suppose there be scarcely any man who read this or any other novel but have be baulk in love some time or the other , by fate and circumstance , by falsehood of woman , or he own fault . let that worthy friend recall he own sensation under the circumstance , and apply they as illustrative of 's anguish . ah ! what weary night and sicken fevers ! ah ! what mad desire dash up against some rock of obstruction or indifference , and fling back again from the unimpressionable granite ! if a list could be make this very night in of the groan , thought , imprecation of tossing lover , what a catalogue it would be ! I wonder what a percentage of the male population of the metropolis will be lie awake at two or three o'clock to - morrow morning , count the hour as they go by knelling drearily , and roll from left to right , restless , yearning and heart-sick ? what a pang it be ! I never know a man die of love certainly , but I have know a twelve - stone man go down to nine - stone five under a disappointed passion , so that pretty nearly quarter of he may be say to have perish : and that be no small portion . he have come back to he old size subsequently ; perhaps be bigger than ever : very likely some new affection have close round he heart and rib and make they comfortable , and young be a man who will conseal himself like the rest of we . we say this lest the lady should be dispose to deplore he prematurely , or be seriously uneasy with regard to
to he complaint . he mother be , but what will not a maternal fondness fear or invent ? " Depend on it , my dear creature , " major Pendennis would say gallantly to she , " the boy will recover . as soon as we get she out of the country we will take he somewhere , and show he a little life . meantime make yourself easy about he . half a fellow 's pang at lose a woman result from vanity more than affection . to be leave by a woman be the deuce and all , to be sure ; but look how easily we leave th'ey . " do not know . this sort of knowledge have by no means come within the simple lady 's scope . indeed she do not like the subject or to talk of it : she heart have have its own little private misadventure and she have borne up against it and cure it : and perhaps she have not much patience with other folk 's passion , except , of course , 's , whose suffering she make she own , feel indeed very likely in many of the boy 's illness and pain a great deal more than himself endure . and she watch he through this present grief with a jealous silent sympathy ; although , as we have say , he do not talk to she of he unfortunate condition . the major must be allow to have have not a little merit and forbearance , and to have exhibit a highly creditable degree of family affection . the life at be uncommonly dull to a man who have the entree of half the house in , and be in the habit of make he bow in three or four draw - room of a night . a dinner with or a neighbour now and then ; a dreary rubber at backgammon with the widow , who do she utmost to amuse he ; these be the chief of he pleasure . he use to long for the arrival of the bag with the letter , and he read every word of the evening paper . he doctore himself too , assiduously , -- a course of quiet living would suit he well , he think , after the banquet . he dress himself laboriously every morning and afternoon : he take regular exercise up and down the terrace walk . thus with he cane , he toilet , he medicine - chest , he backgammon - box , and he newspaper , this worthy and worldly philosopher fence himself against ennui ; and if he do not improve each shine hour , like the be by the widow 's garden wall , major Pendennis make one hour after another pass as he could , and render he captivity just tolerable . after this period it be remark that he be fond of bring round the conversation to the american war , the massacre of and the brilliant action of , the fact be that he have a couple of volume of the ' annual register ' in he bedroom , which he sedulously study . it be thus a well - regulate man will accommodate himself to circumstance , and show himself calmly superior to fortune . sometimes take the box at backgammon of a night , or would listen to he mother 's simple music of summer evening -- but he be very restless and wretch in spite of all : and have be know to be up before the early daylight even ; and down at a carp - pond in , a dreary pool with innumerable whispering rush and green alder , where a milkmaid drown herself in the 's grandfather 's time , and she ghost be say to walk still . but do not dry himself , as perhaps he mother fancie might be he intention . he like to go and fish there , and think and think at leisure , as the float quiver in the little eddy of the pond , and the fish flap about he . if he get a bite he be excited enough : and in this way occasionally bring home carps , tench , and eel , which the major cook in the continental fashion . by this pond , and under a tree , which be he favourite resort , compose a number of poem suitable to he circumstance over which verse he blush in after day , wonder how he could ever have invent such rubbish . and as for the tree , why it be in a hollow of this very tree , where he use to put he tin - box of ground - bait , and other fishing commodity , that he afterwards -- but we be advance matter . Suffice it to say , he write poem and relieve himself very much . when a man 's grief or passion be at this point , it may be loud , but it be not very severe . when a gentleman be cudgell he brain to find any rhyme for sorrow , besides borrow and to - morrow , he woe be nearer at a end than he think for . so be . he have he hot and cold fit , he day of sullenness and peevishness , and of blank resignation and despondency , and occasional mad paroxysm of rage and long , in which fit would be saddle and gallop fiercely about the country , or into , she rider gesticulat wildly on she back , and astonish carter and turnpikeman as he pass , cry out the name of the false one . become a very frequent and welcome visitor at Fairoaks during this period , where he good spirit and oddity always amuse the major and Pendennis , while they astonished
astonished the widow and little not a little . he tandem make a great sensation in Clavering market - place ; where he upset a market stall , and cut 's poodle over the shaven quarter , and drank a glass of raspberry bitter at the Clavering Arms . all the society in the little place hear who he be , and look out he name in they Peerage . he be so young , and they book so old , that he name do not appear in many of they volume ; and he mamma , now quite a antiquate lady , figure amongst the progeny of the of , as still . but he name , wealth , and honourable lineage be speedily know about , where you may be sure that poor Pen's little transaction with the actress be also pretty freely discuss . look at the little old town of from the road as it run by the lodge at Fairoaks , and see the rapid and shine win down from the town and skirt the wood of , and the ancient church tower and peak roof of the house rise up amongst tree and old wall , behind which swell a fair background of sunshiny hill that stretch from Clavering westwards towards the sea -- the place look so cheery and comfortable that many a traveller 's heart must have year towards it from the coach - top , and he must have think that it be in such a calm friendly nook he would like to shelter at the end of life 's struggle . , who use to drive the Alacrity coach , would often point to a tree near the river , from which a fine view of the church and town be command , and inform he companion on the box that " Artise come and take hoff the from that there tree -- it be a Habby once , sir :" -- and indeed a pretty view it be , which I recommend to or , for they next tour . like see from the ; like not view in she box from the opposite side of the house ; like many a object which we pursue in life , and admire before we have attaine it ; be rather prettier at a distance than it be on a closer acquaintance . the town so cheerful of aspect a few furlong off , look very blank and dreary . except on market day there be nobody in the street . the clack of a pair of patten echo through half the place , and you may hear the creaking of the rusty old ensign at the Clavering Arm , without be disturb by any other noise . there have not be a ball in the since the volunteers give one to they Colonel , the old ; and the stable which once hold a great part of that brilliant , but defunct regiment , be now cheerless and empty , except on , when the farmer put up there , and they tilt cart and gig make a feeble show of liveliness in the place , or on Petty sessions , when the magistrate attend in what use to be the old card - room . on the south side of the market rise up the church , with it be great grey towers , of which the sun illuminate the delicate carve ; deepen the shadow of the huge buttress , and gild the glittering window and flam vane . the image of the Patroness of the be wrench out of the porch centurie ago : such of the statue of saint as be within reach of stone and hammer at that period of pious demolition , be maimed and headless , and of those who be out of fire , only know the name and history , for he curate , , be not much of a antiquarian , and ( husband of the ) , incumbent and architect of the of in the lower town , think they the abomination of desolation . the Rectory be a stout broad - shoulder brick house , of the reign of . it communicate with the church and market by different gate , and stand at the opening of Yew - tree lane , where the ( ---- ) be ; Yew - tree Cottage ( miss Flather ) ; the butchers 's slaughtering - house , a old barn or brew - house of the time , and the 's establishment for young lady . the two school have they pew in the loft on each side of the organ , until the get rather empty , through the falling - off of the congregation , who be inveigle to the Heresy - shop in the lower town , the Doctor induce the to bring they pretty little flock downstairs ; and the young lady ' bonnet make a tolerable show in the rather vacant aisle . nobody be in the great pew of the family , except the statue of defunct baronet and they lady : there be , and , knee in a square beard opposite he wife in a ruff : a very fat lady , the , in altoo -relievo , be borne up to by two little blue - vein angels , who seem to have a severe task -- and so forth . how well in after life remembe those effigy , and how often in youth he scan they as the be grumbl the sermon from the pulpit , and 's mild head and forehead curl pee over the great prayer - book in the desk ! the Fairoak folk be constant at the old church ; they servant have a pew , so have the Doctor 's , so have 's , and those of 's establishment , three maid and a
a very nice - look young man in a livery . the family be numerous and faithful . Glanders and he child regularly come to church : so do one of the apothecary . go , turn and turn about , to the town church , and to the : the and they family of course come ; 's boy make a good cheerful noise , scuffl with they foot as they march into church and up the organ - loft stair , and blow they nos a good deal during the service . to be brief , the congregation look as decent as might be in these bad time . the be furnish with a magnificent screen , and many hatchment and heraldic tombstone . the spend a great part of he income in beautifying he darl place ; he have endow it with a superb painted window , buy in the , and a organ grand enough for a cathedral . but in spite of organ and window , in consequence of the latter very likely , which have come out of a Papistical place of worship and be blazon all over with idolatry , Claver prosper scandalously in the tooth of ; and many of the 's congregation desert to and the honourable woman he wife . they effort have thin the very Ebenezer hard by they , which build before 's advent use to be so full , that you could see the back of the congregation squeeze out of the arch window thereof . 's tract flutter into the door of all the Doctor 's cottage , and be take as greedily as honest 's soup , with the quality of which the graceless people find fault . with the folk at the situate by the weir on the side , and round which the have grow , could make no way at all . be put out of court by impetuous and she female aide - de- camp . ah , it be a hard burthan for the 's lady to bear , to behold she husband 's congregation dwindl away ; to give the precedence on the few occasion when they meet to a notorious low- churchman 's wife who be the daughter of a irish peer ; to know that there be a party in , they own town of , on which she Doctor spend a great deal more than he professional income , who hold he up to odium because he play a rubber at whist ; and pronounce he to be a because he go to the play . in she grief she besotch he to give up the play and the rubber , -- indeed they could scarcely get a table now , so dreadful be the outcry against the sport , -- but the declare that he would do what he think right , and what the great and good the do ( whose he have be ) : and as for give up whist because those silly folk cry out against it , he would play dummy to the end of he day with he wife and , rather than yield to they despicable persecution . of the two family , owner of the factory ( which have spoilead the as a trout - stream and bring all the mischief into the town ) , the senior partner , , go to ; the junior , , to the . in a word , people quarrell in this little place a great deal more than neighbours do in ; and in the , which the prudent and conciliat Pendennis have set up , and which ought to have be a neutral territory , they bicker so much that nobody scarcely be ever see in the reading - room , except , who , though he keep up a faint amity with the faction , have still a taste for magazine and light worldly literature ; and old Glanders , whose white head and grizzly moustache might be see at the window ; and of course , little , who look at everybody 's letter as the bring they ( for the reading - room , as every one know , use to be hold at 's , , formerly ) , and read every advertisement in the paper . it may be imagine how great a sensation be create in this amiable little community when the news reach it of Pen's love - passage at . it be carry from house to house , and form the subject of talk at high - church , low - church , and no -church table ; it be canvass by the and they teacher , and very likely debat by the young lady in the dormitory for what we know ; 's big boy have they version of the story , and eye curiously as he sate in he pew at church , or raise the finger of scorn at he as he pass through . they always hate he and call he , because he do not wear corduroy as they do , and ride a horse , and give himself the air of a buck . and if the truth must be tell , it be herself who be the chief narrator of the story of Pen's love . whatever tales this cando woman hear , she be sure to impart they to she neighbour ; and after she have be put into possession of Pen's secret by the little scandal at , poor know that it would next day be about the parish of which he be the rector . and so indeed it be ; the whole society there have the legend -- at the news - room , at the milliner 's , at the shoe - shop , and the general warehouse at the corner of the market ; at 's , at
at the 's , at the . 's soiree , at the factory ; nay , through the mill itself the tale be current in a few hour , and young 's madness be in every mouth . all 's acquaintance bark out upon he when he walk the street the next day . the poor divine know that he Betsy be the author of the rumour , and groan in spirit . well , well , -- it must have come in a day or two , and it be as well that the town should have the real story . what the folk thought of for spoile she son , and of that precocious young rascal of a Arthur for daring to propose to a play -actress , need not be tell here . if pride exist amongst any folk in we country , and assuredly we have enough of it , there be no pride more deep - seat than that of twopenny old gentlewoman in small town . " gracious goodness , " the cry be , " how infatuate the mother be about that pert and headstrong boy who give himself the air of a lord on he blood - horse , and for whom we society be not good enough , and who would marry a odious painted actress off a booth , where very likely he want to rant himself . if dear good have be alive this scandal would never have happen . " no more it would , very likely , nor should we have be occupy in narrating Pen' history . it be true that he give himself air to the Clavering folk . naturally haughty and frank , they cackle and small talk and small dignity bo he , and he show a contempt which he could not conceal . the Doctor and the curate be the only people care for in the place -- even share in the general distrust of he , and of he mother , the widow , who keep herself aloon from the village society , and be sneer at accordingly , because she try , forsooth , to keep she head up with the great County family . she , indeed ! at the have four time the butcher 's meat that go up to Fairoaks , with all they fine air . etc. etc. etc. : let the reader fill up these detail accord to he liking and experience of village scandal . they will suffice to show how it be that a good woman occupy solly in do she duty to she neighbour and she child , and a honest , brave lad , impetuous , and full of good , and wish well to every mortal alive find enemy and detractor amongst people to whom they be superior , and to whom they have never do anything like harm . the Claver curs be yelpe all round the house of Fairoaks , and delighte to pull down . and be both cautious of inform the widow of the constant outbreak of calumny which be pursue poor , through Glanders , who be a friend of the house , keep he au courant . it may be imagine what he indignation be : be there any man in the village whom be could call to account ? presently some wag begin to chalk up ' Fotheringay for ever ! ' and other sarcastic allusion to late transaction , at Fairoaks 's gate . another bring a large playbill from , and wafer it there one night . on one occasion , ride through the , fancie he hear the factory boy jeer he ; and finally go through the 's gate into the churchyard , where some of 's boy be lounge , the biggest of they , a young gentleman about twenty year of age , son of a neighbour small , who live in the doubtful capacity of parlour - boarder with , fling himself into a theatrical attitude near a newly - make grave , and begin repeat 's verse over , with a hideous leer at . the young fellow be so enrage that he rush at with a shriek very much resembl a oath , cut he furiously across the face with the riding - whip which he carry , fling it away , call upon the cowardly villain to defend himself , and in another minute knock the bewildered young ruffian into the grave which be just wait for a different lodger . then with he fist clench , and he face quiver with passion and indignation , he roar out to 's gaping companion , to know if any of the blackguard would come on ? but they hold back with a growl , and retreat as come up to he wicket , and , with he nose and lip bleed piteously , emerge from the grave . , look death and defiance at the lad , who retreat towards ' they side of the churchyard , walk back again through the Doctor 's wicket , and be interrogate by that gentleman . the young fellow be so agitate he could scarcely speak . he voice break into a sob as he answer . " the ---- coward insult I , sir , " he say ; and the pass over the oath , and respecte the emotion of the honest suffer young heart . the elder , who like a real man of the world have a proper and constant dread of the opinion of he neighbour , be prodigiously annoyed by the absurd little tempest which be blow in , and toss about master Pen's reputation . and have to support the charge of the whole society against the young reprobate , who be look upon as a monster of crime . do not say anything about the churchyard scuffle at home ;
; but go over to , and take counsel with he friend , , who drive over he drag presently to the Clavering Arms , whence he send with a note to , , at the 's , and a civil message to ask when he should wait upon that gentleman . Stoopid bring back word that the note have be open by , and read to half a dozen of the big boy , on whom it seem to make a great impression ; and that after consult together , and laugh , say he would send a answer " arter arternoon school , which the bell be a - ringing : and he come out in he master 's gownd . " be learn in academical costume , have attend at . go out to see the curiosity of Clavering meanwhile ; but not have a taste for architecture , 's fine church do not engage he attention much and he pronounce the tower to be as mouldy as a old cheese . he walk down the street and look at the few shop there ; he see at the window of the reading - room , and have take a good stare at that gentleman , he wag he head at he in token of satisfaction ; he inquire the price of meat at the butcher 's with a air of the greatest interest , and ask " when be next kill day ? " he flatten he little nose against 's window to see if haply there be a pretty workwoman in she premise ; but there be no face more comely than the doll 's or be wear the french cap in the window , only that of herself , dimly visible in the parlour , read a novel . that object be not of sufficient interest to keep very long in contemplation , and so have exhaust the town and the inn stable , in which there be no cattle , save the single old pair of poster that earn a scanty livelihood by transport the gentry round about to the county dinner , be give himself up to ennui entirely , when a messenger from be at length announce . it be no other than himself , who come with a air of great indignation , and hold Pen' missive in he hand , ask " how da he bring such a unchristian message as a challenge to a boy of he school ? " in fact have write a note to he adversary of the day before , tell he that if after the chastisement which he insolence richly deserve , he feel inclin to ask the reparation which be usually give amongst gentleman , 's friend , , be empower to make any arrangement for the satisfaction of . " and so he send you with the answer -- do he , sir ? " say , survey the Schoolmaster in he black coat and clerical costume . " if he have accept this wicked challenge , I should have flog he , " say , and give Foker a glance which seem to say , " and I should like very much to flog you too . " " uncommon kind of you , sir , I be sure , " say emissary . " I tell my principal that I do not think the other man would fight , " he continue with a great air of dignity . " he prefer be flog to fight , sir , I dare say . may I offer you any refreshment , mr.? I have not the advantage of you name . " " my name be Wapshot , sir , and I be master of the of this town , sir , " cry the other : " and I want no refreshment , sir , I thank you , and have no desire to make you acquaintance , sir . " " I do not seek yours , sir , I be sure , " reply . " in affair of this sort , you see , I think it be a pity that the clergy should be call in , but there be no accounting for taste , sir . " " I think it be a pity that boy should talk about commit murder , sir , as lightly as you do , " roar the Schoolmaster ; " and if I have you in my school ---- " " I dare say you would teach I better , sir , " say , with a bow . " thank you , sir . I have finish my education , sir , and be not a - go back to school , sir -- when I do , I will remember you kind offer , sir . , show this gentleman downstair -- and , of course , as likes be thrash , we can have no objection , sir , and we shall be very happy to accommodate he , whenever he come we way . " and with this , the young fellow bow the elder gentleman out of the room , and sate down and write a note off to , in which he inform the latter that be not dispose to fight , and propose to put up with the caning which have administer to he . in the conduct in this business of course be soon make public , and anger he friend not a little : while it only amuse major Pendennis . as for the good , she be almost distract when she hear of the squabble , and of Pen's unchristian behaviour . all sort of wretchedness , discomfort , crime , annoyance , seem to come out of this transaction in which the luckless boy have engage ; and she longe more than ever to see he out of
of for a while , -- anywhere remove from the woman who have bring he into so much trouble . when remonstrate with by this fond parent , and angrily rebuk by the Doctor for he violence and ferocious intention , take the matter au grand serieux , with the happy conceit and gravity of youth : say that he himself be very sorry for the affair , that the insult have come upon he without the slightest provocation on he part ; that he would permit no man to insult he upon this head without vindicat he own honour , and appeal with great dignity to he uncle , ask whether he could have ac otherwise as a gentleman , than as he do in resent the outrage offer to he , and in offer satisfaction to the person chastise ? " Vous allez trop vite , my good sir , " say the uncle , rather puzzl , for he have be indoctrinat he nephew with some of he own notion upon the point of honour -- old - world notion savour of the camp and pistol a great deal more than we soberer opinion of the present day -- " between man of the world I do not say ; but between two schoolboy , this sort of thing be ridiculous , my dear boy -- perfectly ridiculous . " " it be extremely wicked , and unlike my son , " say , with tear in she eye , and bewilder with the obstinacy of the boy . kiss she , and say with great pomposity , " women , dear mother , do not understand these matters -- I put myself into 's hand -- I have no other course to pursue . " major Pendennis grin and shrug he shoulders . the young one be certainly make great progress , he think . declare that that be a wicked horrid little wretch , and be sure that he would lead she dear boy into mischief , if go to the same College with he . " I have a great mind not to let he go at all , " she say : and only that she remember that the lad 's father have always destin he for the College in which he have have he own brief education , very likely the fond mother would have put a veto upon he go to the . that he be to go , and at the next term , have be arrange between all the authority who preside over the lad 's welfare . have promise to introduce he to the right set ; and major Pendennis laid great store upon Pen's introduction into College life and society by this admirable young gentleman . " know the very best young man now at the , " the major say , " and will form acquaintance there who will be of the greatest advantage through life to he . the young of be there , eldest son of the of 's - - be there , 's son , and a first cousin of ( , my dear , be , you of course remember ) ; Lady Agnes will certainly invite he to Logwand ; and far from be alarme at he intimacy with she son , who be a singular and humorous , but most prudent and amiable young man , to whom , I be sure , we be under every obligation for he admirable conduct in the affair of the marriage , I look upon it as one of the very luckiest thing which could have happen to , that he should have form a intimacy with this most amusing young gentleman . " sigh , she suppose the major know best . have be very kind in the wretched business with , certainly , and she be grateful to he . but she could not feel otherwise than a dim presentiment of evil ; and all these quarrel , and riot , and worldliness , scare she about the fate of she boy . be decidedly of opinion that should go to . he hope the lad would read , and have a moderate indulgence of the best society too . he be of opinion that would distinguish himself : speak very highly of he proficiency : the Doctor himself have hear he construe , and think he acquit himself remarkably well . that he should go out of be a great point at any rate ; and , who be distract from he private grief by the various row and trouble which have risen round about he , gloomily say he would obey . there be assize , races , and the entertainment and the flux of company consequent upon they , at , during a part of the month of and , and still continue to act , and take farewell of the audience at the during that time . nobody seem to be particularly affect by she presence , or she announce departure , except those persons whom we have name ; nor could the polite county folk , who have house in , and very likely admire the prodigiously in the capital , when they have be teach to do so by the fashion which set in in she favour , find anything remarkable in the actress perform on the little board . many genius and many a quack , for that matter , have meet with a similar fate before and since 's time . this honest woman meanwhile bear up against the public neglect , and any other crossis or vexation which she might have in life , with she usual equanimity ; and ate , drank , act , sleep , with that regularity and comfort which belong to people of she temperament . what a deal of grief , care , and other harmful
harmful excitement do a healthy dulness and cheerful insensibility avoid ! nor do I mean to say that be not Virtue because it be never temp to go astray ; only that dulness be a much finer gift than we give it credit for be ; and that some people be very lucky whom have endow with a good store of that great anodyne . use to go drearily in and out from the play at during this season , and pretty much accord to he fancy . he proceedings torture he mother not a little , and she anxiety would have lead she often to interfere , have not the major constantly check , and at the same time encourage she ; for the wily man of the world fancie he see that a favourable turn have occur in malady . it be the violent efflux of versification , among other symptom , which give 's guardian and physician satisfaction . he might be hear spouting verse in the shrubbery walk , or mutter they between he tooth as he sit with the home party of evening . one day prowl about the house in Pen's absence , the major find a great book full of verse in the lad 's study . they be in , and in latin ; quotation from the classic author be give in the scholastic manner in the foot -note . he can not be very bad , wisely think the - : and he make Pen's mother remark ( not , perhaps , without a secret feeling of disappointment , for she love romance like other soft woman ) , that the young gentleman during the last fortnight come home quite hungry to dinner at night , and also show a very decent appetite at the breakfast - table in the morning . " , I wish I could , " say the major , think ruefully of he dinner pill . " the boy begin to sleep well , depend upon that . " it be cruel , but it be true . have no other soul to confide in -- for he could not speak to he mother of he love and disappointment -- he uncle treat they in a scornful and worldly tone , which , though carefully guard and polite , yet jar greatly on the feeling of -- and be much too coarse to appreciate those refin sentimental secret -- the lad 's friendship for the curate redouble , or rather , he be never tired of have for a listener on that one subject . what be a lovee without a confident ? employ , as do the elm - tree , to cut out he mistress 's name upon . he make he echo with the name of the beautiful Amaryllis . when man have leave off play the tune , they do not care much for the pipe : but think he have a great friendship for , because he could sigh out he love and grief into he tutor 's ears ; and have he own reason for always be ready at the lad 's call . 's affection gush out in a multitude of sonnet to the friend of he heart , as he style the curate , which the other receive with great sympathy . he ply with and . the love -song multiply under he fluent pen ; and declare and believe that they be beautiful . on the other hand , express a boundless gratitude to think that should have send he such a friend at such a moment . he present he tutor with he best - bound book , and he gold guard - chain , and want he to take he double - barrel gun . he go into and get a gold pencil - case on credit ( for he have no money , and indeed be still in debt to Smirke for some of the Fotheringay present ) , which he present to , with a inscription indicative of he unalterable and eternal regard for the curate ; who of course be pleased with every mark of the boy 's attachment . the poor curate be naturally very much dismay at the contemplate departure of he pupil . when yoArthu should go , 's occupation and delight would go too . what pretext could he find for a daily visit to Fairoaks and that kind word or glance from the lady there , which be as necessary to the curate as the frugal dinner which serve he ? yoArthu go , he would only be allow to make visit like any other acquaintance : little could not accommodate he by learn the more than once a week : he have curl himself like ivy round Fairoak : he pine at the thought that he must lose he hold of the place . should he speak he mind and go down on he knee to the widow ? he think over any indication in she behaviour which flatter he hope . she have praise he sermon three week before : she have thanke he exceedingly for he present of a melon , for a small dinner - party which give : she say she should always be grateful to he for he kindness to , and when he declare that there be no bounds to he love and affection for that dear boy , she have certainly reply in a romantic manner , indicate she own strong gratitude and regard to all she son 's friend . should he speak out ?-- or should he delay ? if be speak and she refuse he , it be awful to think that the gate of Fairoak might be shut upon he for ever -- and within that door lay all the world for . thus , oh friendly reader , we see how every man in the
the world have he own private grief and business , by which he be more cast down or occupy than by the affair or sorrow of any other person . while be disquiet herself about lose she son , and that anxious hold she have have of he , as long as he have remain in the mother 's nest , whence he be about to take flight into the great world beyond -- while the major 's great soul chafe and fret , inwardly vex as he think what great party be go on in , and that he might be sunn himself in the glance of Dukes and Duchess , but for those curse affair which keep he in a wretched little country hole -- while be toss between he passion and a more agreeable sensation , unacknowledge yet , but sway he considerably , namely , he longe to see the world -- have a private care watch at he bedside , and sit behind he on he pony ; and be no more satisfied than the rest of we . how lonely we be in the world ; how selfish and secret , everybody ! you and you wife have press the same pillow for forty year and fancy . , do she cry out when you have the gout , or do you lie awake when she have the toothache ? you artless daughter , seemingly all innocence and devote to she mamma and she piano - lesson , be think of neither , but of the young with whom she dance at the last ball -- the honest frank boy just return from school be secretly speculat upon the money you will give he , and the debt he owe the tart-man . the old grandmother croon in the corner and bound to another world within a few month , have some business or car which be quite private and she own -- very likely she be think of fifty year back , and that night when she make such a impression , and dance a cotillon with the captain before you father propose for she : or , what a silly little overrated creature you wife be , and how absurdly you be infatuate about she -- and , as for you wife -- of philosophic reader , answer and say ,-- do you tell she all ? ah , sir -- a distinct universe walk about under you hat and under mine -- all thing in nature be different to each -- the woman we look at have not the same feature , the dish we eat from have not the same taste to the one and the other -- you and I be but a pair of infinite isolation , with some fellow - island a little more or less near to we . let we return , however , to the solitary Smirke . have one confidante for he passion -- that most injudicious woman , . how she become , nobody know : she have leave to go to a milliner 's in as -- she pretend that she have get the rank in during she residence in that city . but how could the french king , be he ever so much dispose , give she any such title ? we shall not inquire into this mystery , however . Suffice to say , she go away from home a bouncing young lass ; she return a rather elderly character , with a na front and a melancholy countenance -- buy the late 's business for a song -- take she elderly mother to live with she ; be very good to the poor , be constant at church , and have the best of character . but there be no one in all Clavering , not herself , who read so many novel as . she have plenty of time for this amusement , for , in truth , very few people besides the folk at the Rectory and Fairoaks employ she ; and by a perpetual perusal of such work ( which be by no means so moral or edify in the day of which we write , as they be at present ) she have get to be so absurdly sentimental , that in she eye life be nothing but a immense love - match ; and she never could see two people together , but she fancie they be die for one another . on the day after 's visit to the curate , which we have record many page back , settle in she mind that must be in love with the widow , and do everything in she power to encourage this passion on both side . she very seldom see , indeed , except in public , and in she pew at church . that lady have very little need of millinery , or make most of she own dress and cap ; but on the rare occasion when receive visit from or pay she respects at Fairoaks , she never fail to entertain the widow with praise of the curate , point out what a angelical man he be , how gentle , how studious , how lonely ; and she would wonder that no lady would take pity upon he . laugh at these sentimental remark , and wonder that herself do not compassionate she lodger , and conseal he . shook she to frond , " cure a boco souffare , " she say , lay she hand on the part she designate as she cure . " it est more en , , " she say with a sigh . she be proud of she intimacy with the french language , and speak it with more volubility than correctness . do not care to penetrate the secret of this wounded heart : except to she few intimate she
she be a reserved and it may be a very proud woman ; she look upon she son 's tutor merely as a attendant on that young , to be treat with respect as a clergyman certainly , but with proper dignity as a dependent on the house of . be 's constant allusion to the curate particularly agreeable to she . it require a very ingenious sentimental turn indeed to find out that the widow have a secret regard for , to which pernicious error however persist in holding . she lodger be very much more willing to talk on this subject with he soft - hear landlady . every time after that she praise the curate to , she come away from the latter with the notion that the widow herself have be praise he . " Etre soul au monde est bien ouneeyoung , " she would say , glance up at a print of a french carbineer in a green coat and brass cuirass which decorate she apartment -- " Depend upon it when go to College , he ma will find herself very lonely . she be quite young yet .-- you would not suppose she to be five - and - twenty . yoMonsieu le Cury , song cure est touchy - - 'ang sui sure -- conny cela biang -- . " he softly blush ; he sigh ; he hope ; he fear ; he doubt ; he sometimes yield to the delightful idea -- he pleasure be to sit in 's apartment , and talk upon the subject , where , as the greater part of the conversation be carry on in by the Milliner , and she old mother be deaf , that retire old individual ( who have once be a housekeeper , wife and widow of a butler in the Clavering family ) could understand scarce one syllable of they talk . thus it be , that when major Pendennis announce to he nephew 's tutor that the young fellow would go to in , and that 's valuable service would no longer be needful to he pupil , for which service the major , who speak as grandly as a lord , profess himself exceedingly grateful , and besotch to command he interests in any way -- thus it be , that the curate feel that the critical moment be come for he , and be rack and torture by those severe pang which the occasion warrant . have , of course , take the strongest interest in the progress of Pen's love affair with . she have be over to , and have see that actress perform , have pronounce that she be old and overrate : and have talk over master Pen's passion in she shop many and many a time to the half - dozen old maid , and old woman in male clothes , who be to be find in little country town , and who form the genteel population of . , , have pronounce that be go to be a devil of a fellow , and have begin early : have tell he to check he horrid observation , and to respect he own wife , if he please . she say it would be a lesson to Hel for she pride and absurd infatuation about that boy . say many people be proud of very small thing , and for she part , she do not know why a apothecary 's wife should give herself such air . call she daughter away from that side of the street , one day when , on , be stop at the saddler 's , to get a new lash to he whip -- one and all of these people have make visit of curiosity to Fairoaks , and have try to condeal with the widow , or bring the subject of the affair on the tapis , and have be severally check by the haughty reserve of , support by the frigid politeness of the major she brother . these rebuff , however , do not put a end to the gossip , and slander go on increase about the unlucky Fairoak ' family . Glanders ( ) , a retired cavalry officer , whose half - pay and large family compelle he to fuddle himself with brandy - and - water instead of claret after he quit the Dragoon , have the occasional entree at Fairoaks , and keep he friend the major there inform of all the story which be current at Clavering . have take a inside place by the coach to , and go to the on purpose to get the particular . 's man , have treat 's servant to drink at for a similar purpose . it be say that have hang himself for despair in the orchard , and that he uncle have cut he down ; that , on the contrary , it be who be jilt , and not young Arthur ; and that the affair have only be hush up by the payment of a large sum of money , the exact amount of which there be several people in Clavering could testify -- the sum of course varie accord to the calculation of the individual narrator of the story . shook he mane and rage like a furious lion when these scandal , affect 's honour and he own , come to he ear . why be not Pybus a man ( she have whisker enough ) , that he might call she out and shoot she ? see pass by , glar at he so from he saddle on , and clutch he whip in a manner so menace , that that clergyman go home and write a sermon , or think over a sermon ( for he deliver oral testimony at great length ) , in which he speak of
of , theatrical entertainment ( a double cut this - - for , the rector of the old church , be know to frequent such ) , and of youth go to perdition , in a manner which make it clear to every capacity that be the individual mean , and on the road allude to . what story more be there not against young Pendennis , whilst he sate sulking , Achilles - like in he tent , for the loss of he ravish ? after the affair with , be pronounce to be a murderer as well as a profligate , and he name become a name of terror and a byword in . but this be not all ; he be not the only one of the family about whom the village begin to chatter , and he unlucky mother be the next to become a victim to they gossip . " it be all settled , " say Pybus to , " the boy be to go to , and then the widow be to conseal herself . " " he be be there every day , in the most open manner , my dear , " continue . " enough to make poor turn in he grave , " say . " she never like he , that we know , " say no . 1 . " marry he for he money . everybody know that : be a penniless hanger - on of 's , " say no . 2 . " it be rather too open , though , to encourage a lover under pretence of have a tutor for you son , " cry no . 3 . " Hush ! here come , " some one say , as the good rector 's wife enter 's shop , to inspect she monthly book of fashions just arrive from . and the fact be that have be able to hold out no longer ; and one day , after she and she lodger have be talk of approach departure , and the curate have go off to give one of he last lesson to that gentleman , have communicate to , who happen to step in with , she strong suspicion , she certainty almost , that there be a attachment between a certain clerical gentleman and a certain lady , whose naughty son be grow quite unmanageable , and that a certain marriage would take place pretty soon . see it all , of course , when the matter be mention . what a sly fox that be ! he be low - church , and she never like he . and to think of take a fancy to he after she have be marry to such a man as ! she could hardly stay five minute at 's , so eager be she to run to the Rectory and give the news . when hear this piece of intelligence , he be in such a rage with he curate , that he first movement be to break with , and to beg he to transfer he service to some other parish . " that milksop of a creature pretend to be worthy of such a woman as , " break out the Doctor : " where will impudence stop next ! " " she be much too old for , " remark : " why , poor dear might be he mother almost . " " you always choose the most charitable reason , , " cry the rector . " a matron with a son grow up -- she would never think of marry again . " " you only think man should marry again , , answer he lady , bridl up . " you stupid old woman , " say the Doctor , " when I be go , you shall marry whomsoever you like . I will leave order in my will , my dear , to that effect : and I will bequeath a ring to my successor , and my Ghost shall come and dance at you wedding . " " it be cruel for a clergyman to talk so , " the lady answer , with a ready whimper : but these little breeze use to pass very rapidly over the surface of the Doctor 's domestic bliss ; and be follow by a great calm and sunshine . the adopt a plan for soothing 's ruffle countenance , which have a great effect when it be try between a worthy couple who be sincerely fond of one another ; and which , I think , become ' ' at three - score , just as much as it use to do when he be a black - hair young of five - and - twenty . " have not you better speak to , ? " ask . " when go to College , cadit quaestio , " reply the rector , " 's visit at Fairoak will cease of themselves , and there will be no need to bother the widow . she have trouble enough on she hand , with the affair of that silly young scapegrace , without be pester by the tittle - tattle of this place . it be all a invention of that fool , . " " against whom I always warn you , -- you know I do , my dear , " interpose . " that you do ; you very often do , my love , " the answer with a laugh . " it be not for want of warning on you part , I be sure , that I have form my opinion of most woman with whom we be acquaint . be a fool , and fond of gossip , and so be some other folk . but she be good to the poor : she take care of
of she mother , and she come to church twice every . and as for , my dear ---- " here the doctor 's face assume for one moment a comical expression , which do not perceive ( for she be look out of the drawing - room window , and wonder what Mr . Pybus could want cheapen fowl again in the market , when she have bad poultry from 's two day before ) -- " and as for , my dear , will you promise I that you will never breathe to any mortal what I be go to tell you as a profound secret ? " " what be it , my dear !-- of course I will not , " answer the rector 's lady . " well , then -- I can not say it be a fact , mind -- but if you find that be at this moment -- ay , and have be for year -- engage to a young lady , a miss -- a , if you will have the name , who live on -- yes , on , not far from 's house , what become of you story then about and ? " " why do you not tell I this before ? " ask the 's wife .--" how long have you know it ?-- how we all of we have be deceive in that man ! " " why should I meddle in other folk ' business , my dear ? " the Doctor answer . " I know how to keep a secret -- and perhaps this be only a invention like that other absurd story ; at least , , I should never have tell you this but for the other , which I beg you to contradict whenever you hear it . " and so say the go away to he study , and see that the day be a remarkably fine one , think she would take advantage of the weather and pay a few visit . the Doctor look out of he study window see the wife of he bosom presently issue forth , attire in she best . she cross the market - place , salut the market - woman right and leave , and give a glance at the grocery and general emporium at the corner : then enter ( formerly ) , she stop for a minute at 's window , and look at the fashions which hang up there , -- seem hesitat whether she should enter ; but she pass on and never stop again until she come to 's little green gate and garden , through which she go to that lady 's cottage . there , of course , she husband lose sight of . " oh , what a long bow I have pull , " he say inwardly -- " forgive I ! and shoot my own flesh and blood . there must be no more tattling and scandal about that house . I must stop it , and speak to . I will ask he to dinner this very day . " have a sermon to compose , the Doctor sit down to that work , and be so engage in the composition , that he have not conclude it until near five o'clock in the afternoon : when he step over to 's lodging , to put he hospitable intention , regard that gentleman , into effect . he reach 's door , just as the curate issue from it . be magnificently dress , and as he turn out he toe , he show a pair of elegant open - work silk stocking and glossy pumps . he white cravat be arrange in a splendid stiff tie , and he gold shirt stud shone on he spotless linen . he hair be curl round he fair temple . have he borrow 's iron to give that curly grace ? he white cambric pocket - handkerchief be scent with the most delicious eau -de - . " of tgracilis puer , " -- cry the Doctor .--" Whither be you bound ? I want you to come home to dinner . " " I be engage to dine at -- at Fairoaks , " say , blush faintly and whisk the scent pocket - handkerchief , and he pony be in waiting , he mount and ride away simper down the street . no accident befell he that day , and he arrive with he tie in the very best order at 's house . conclude the first part of this History the curate have go on he daily errand to Fairoaks , and be upstairs in study pretend to read with he pupil , in the early part of that very afternoon when , after transact business with , have find the weather so exceedingly fine that she pursue she walk as far as , in order to pay a visit to she dear friend there . in the course of they conversation , the rector 's lady tell Pendennis and the major a very great secret about the curate , , which be no less than that he have a attachment , a very old attachment , which he have long kept quite private . " and on whom be it that have bestow he heart ? " ask , with a superb air but rather a inward alarm . " why , my dear , " the other lady answer , " when he first come and use to dine at the Rectory , people say we want he for , and we be force to give up ask he . then they use to say he be smite in another quarter ; but I always contradict it for my part , and say that you -- -- " " that I , " cry ;
; " people be very impertinent , I be sure . come here as 's tutor , and I be surprised that anybody should dare to speak so ---- " " ' pon my soul , it be a little too much , " the major say , lay down the newspaper and the double eye - glass . " I have no patience with that , " continue indignantly . " I tell she there be no truth in it , " say . " I always say so , my dear : and now it come out that my demure gentleman have be engage to a young lady -- , of , ever so long : and I be delighte for my part , and on 's account , too , for a unmarried curate be always objectionable about one 's house : and of course it be strictly private , but I think I would tell you , as it might remove unpleasantness . but mind : not one word , if you please , about the story . " say , with perfect sincerity , that she be exceedingly glad to hear the news : and hope , who be a very kind and amiable man , would have a deserving wife : and when she visitor go away , and she brother talk of the matter with great satisfaction , the kind lady rebuk herself for she haughty behaviour to , whom she have avoid of late , instead of be grateful to he for he constant attention to . " Gratitude to this kind of people , " the major say , " be very well ; but familiarity be out of the question . this gentleman give he lesson and receive he money like any other master . you be too humble , my good soul . there must be distinction in rank , and that sort of thing . I tell you before , you be too kind to . " but do not think so : and now that be go away , and she bethotch she how very polite have be ; how he have go on message for she ; how he have bring book and copy music ; how he have teach so many thing , and give she so many kind present , she heart smote she on account of she ingratitude towards the curate ;-- so much so , that when he come down from study with , and be hanker about the hall previous to he departure , she go out and shook hand with he with rather a blushing face , and beg he to come into she drawing - room , where she say they now never see he . and as there be to be rather a good dinner that day , she invite to partake of it ; and we may be sure that he be too happy to accept such a delightful summon . Ease , by the above report , of all she former doubt and misgiving regard the curate , be exceedingly kind and gracious to during dinner , redoubl she attention , perhaps , because be very high and reserve with he nephew 's tutor . when ask to drink wine , he address he as if he be a Sovereign speak to a petty retainer , in a manner so condescending , that even laugh at it , although quite ready , for he part , to be as conceited as most young man be . but do not care for the impertinence of the major so long as he have he hostess 's kind behaviour ; and he pass a delightful time by she side at table , exert all he power of conversation to please she , talk in a manner both clerical and worldly , about the , and the Great meeting , about the last new novel , and the Bishop 's excellent sermon about the fashionable party in , a account of which he read in the newspaper -- in fine , he neglect no art , by which a College divine who have both sprightly and serious talents , a taste for the genteel , a irreproachable conduct , and a susceptible heart , will try and make himself agreeable to the person on whom he have fix he affections . major Pendennis come yawn out of the dining - room very soon after he sister and little have leave the apartment . " what a unsufferable bear that man be , and how he do talk ! " the major say . " he have be very good to , who be very fond of he , " say ,--" I wonder who the be whom he be go to marry ? " " I always think the fellow be look in another direction , " say the major . " and in what ? " ask quite innocently , -- " towards ? " " , if you must know , " answer she brother - in - law . " towards I ! impossible ! " say , who know perfectly well that such have be the case . " he marriage will be a very happy thing . I hope yoArthu will not take too much wine . " now , flush with a good deal of pride at the privilege of have the key of the cellar , and remember that a very few more dinner would probably take place which he and he dear friend Smirke could share , have bring up a liberal supply of claret for the company 's drinking , and when the elder with little leave he , he and the curate begin to pass the wine very freely . one bottle speedily yield up the ghost , another shed more than half its blood , before the two toper have
have be much more than half a hour together -- , with a hollow laugh and voice , have off one bumper to the falsehood of woman , and have say sardonically , that wine at any rate be a mistress who never deceive , and be sure to give a man a welcome . gently say that he know for he part some woman who be all truth and tenderness ; and cast up he eye towards the ceiling , and heaive a sigh as if evok some be dear and unmentionable , he take up he glass and drain it , and the rosy liquor begin to suffuse he face . troll over some verse he have be make that morning , in which he inform himself that the woman who have slighte he passion could not be worthy to win it : that he be awak from love 's mad fever , and , of course , under these circumstance , proceed to leave she , and to quit a heartless deceiver : that a name which have one day be famous in the land , might again be hear in it : and , that though he never should be the happy and careless boy he be but a few month since , or he heart be what it have be ere passion have fill it and grief have well - nigh kill it ; that though to he personally death be as welcome as life , and that he would not hesitate to part with the latter , but for the love of one kind be whose happiness depend on he own , -- yet he hope to show he be a man worthy of he race , and that one day the false one should be bring to know how great be the treasure and noble the heart which she have fling away . , we say , who be a very excitable person , roll out these verse in he rich sweet voice , which tremble with emotion whilst we young poet spoke . he have a trick of blushing when in this excited state , and he large and honest grey eye also exhibit proof of a sensibility so genuine , hearty , and manly , that , if she have a heart , must need have soften towards he ; and very likely she be , as he say , altogether unworthy of the affection which he lavish upon she . the sentimental Smirke be catch by the emotion which agitate he young friend . he grasp Pen's hand over the dessert dish and wine - glass . he say the verse be beautiful : that be a poet , a great poet , and likely by 's permission to run a great career in the world . " go on and prosper , dear Arthur , " he cry ; " the wound under which at present you suffer be only temporary , and the very grief you endure will cleanse and strengthen you heart . I have always prophesy the greatest and brightest thing of you , as soon as you have correcte some failings and weakness of character , which at present belong to you . but you will get over these , my boy ; you will get over these ; and when you be famous and celebrated , as I know you will be , will you remember you old tutor and the happy early day of you youth ? " Pen swore he would : with another shake of the hand across the glassis and apricot . " I shall never forget how kind you have be to I , , " he say . " I do not know what I should have do without you . you be my best friend . " " be I , really , ? " say , look through he spectacle ; and he heart begin to beat so that he think must almost hear it throbb . " my best friend , my friend for ever , " say . " bless you , old boy , " and he drank up the last glass of the second bottle of the famious wine which he father have laid in , which he uncle have buy , which have import , and which now , like a slave indifferent , be ministere pleasure to its present owner , and give it be young master delectation . " we will have another bottle , old boy , " say , " by we will . Hurray !-- claret go for nothing . my uncle be tell I that he see drink five bottle at 's , besides a bottle of . this be some of the finest wine in , he say . so it be , by . there be nothing like it . Nunc vino pellite cura --cra ingen iterabimus aeq , -- fill you glass , , a hogshead of it will not do you any harm . " and begin to s the drinking song out of . the dining - room window be open , and he mother be softly pace on the lawn outside , while little be look at the sunset . the sweet fresh note of the boy 's voice come to the widow . it cheer she kind heart to hear he s . " you -- you be take too much wine , , " say softly --" you be excite yourself . " " no , " say , " women give headach , but this do not . fill you glass , old fellow , and let 's drink -- I say , Smirke , my boy -- let 's drink to she -- you she , I mean , not mine , for whom I swear I will care no more -- no , not a
a penny -- no , not a fig -- no , not a glass of wine . tell we about the lady , Smirke ; I have often see you sigh about she . " " oh ! " say -- and he beautiful cambric shirt front and glisten stud heav with the emotion which agitate he gentle and suffer bosom . " oh -- what a sigh ! " cry , grow very hilarious ; " fill , my boy , and drink the toast , you can not refuse a toast , no gentleman refuse a toast . here be she health , and good luck to you , and may she soon be . " " do you say so ? " say , all of a tremble . " do you really say so , ? " " say so ; of course , I say so . down with it . here be 's good health : Hip , hip , hurray ! " convulsively gulp down he glass of wine , and wave he over he head , cheer so as to make he mother and wonder on the lawn , and he uncle , who be do over the paper in the drawing - room , start , and say to himself , " that boy 's drinking too much . " Smirke put down the glass . " I accept the oman , " gas out the blushing curate . " oh my dear Arthur , you -- you know she ---- " " what -- ? I wish you joy ; she be get a dev'lish large waist ; but I wish you joy , old fellow . " " oh , ! " groane the curate again , and nod he head , speechless . " beg you pardon -- sorry I offend you -- but she have get a large waist , you know -- devilish large waist , " continue -- the third bottle evidently begin to act upon the young gentleman . " it be not , " the other say , in a voice of agony . " be it anybody at or at ? somebody here ? no -- it be not old ? it can not be at the factory -- she be only fourtee . " " it be somebody rather older than I be , , " the curate cry , look up at he friend , and then guiltily cast he eye down into he plate . burst out laugh . " it be ; by , it be . . by the immortal gods ! " the curate could contain no more . " of , " he cry , " how can you suppose that any of those -- of those more than ordinary being you have name could have a influence upon this heart , when I have be daily in the habit of contemplating perfection ! I may be insane , I may be madly ambitious , I may be presumptuous -- but for two year my heart have be fill by one image , and have know no other idol . have not I love you as a son , ?--say , have not love you as a son ? " " yes , old boy , you have be very good to I , " say , whose like , however , for he tutor be not by any means of the filial kind . " my mean , " rush on , " be at present limit , I own , and my mother be not so liberal as might be desire ; but what she have will be mine at she death . be she to hear of my marry a lady of rank and good fortune , my mother would be liberal , I be sure she would be liberal . whatever I have or subsequently inherit -- and it be five hundred a year at the very least -- would be settle upon she and -- and -- and you at my death -- that be " " what the deuce do you mean ?-- and what have I to do with you money ? " cry out , in a puzzle . " , ! " exclaim the other wildly ; " you say I be you dearest friend -- let I be more . oh , can not you see that the angelic be I love -- the purest , the best of woman -- be no other than you dear , dear angel of a -- mother . " " my mother ! " cry out , jump up and sober in a minute . " Pooh ! damn it , Smirke , you must be mad -- she be seven or eight year older than you be . " " do you find that any objection ? " cry piteously , and allud , of course , to the elderly subject of Pen's own passion . the lad feel the hint , and blush quite red . " the case be not similar , , " he say , " and the allusion might have be spare . a man may forget he own rank and elevate any woman to it : but allow I to say we position be very different . " " how do you mean , dear ? " the curate interpose sadly , cower as he feel that he sentence be about to be read . " ? " say . " I mean what I say . my tutor , I say my tutor , have no right to ask a lady of my mother 's rank of life to marry he . it be a breach of confidence . I say it be a liberty you take , Smirke -- it be a liberty . mean , indeed ! " "
" of ! " the curate begin to cry with clasped hand , and a scared face , but give another stamp with he foot and begin to pull at the bell . " do not let 's have any more of this . we will have some coffee , if you please , " he say with a majestic air ; and the old butler enter at the summon , yoArthu bade he to serve that refreshment . say he have just carry coffee into the drawing - room , where he uncle be ask for , and the old man give a glance of wonder at the three empty claret - bottle . say he think he ' -- he would rather not go into the drawing - room , on which haughtily say , " as you please , " and call for 's horse to be bring round . the poor fellow say he know the way to the stable and would get he pony himself , and he go into the hall and sadly put on he coat and hat . follow he out uncovered . be still walk up and down the soft lawn as the sun be set , and the curate take off he hat and bow by way of farewell , and pass on to the door lead to the stable court , by which the pair disappear . know the way to the stable , as he say , well enough . he fumble at the girth of the saddle , which fasten for he , and put on the bridle and lead the pony into the yard . the boy be touch by the grief which appear in the other 's face as he mount . hold out he hand , and wring it silently , " I say , , " he say in a agitate voice , " forgive I if I have say anything harsh -- for you have always be very , very kind to I . but it can not be , old fellow , it can not be . be a man . bless you . " nod he head silently , and ride out of the lodge - gate : and look after he for a couple of minute , until he disappear down the road , and the clatter of the pony 's hoof die away . be still linger on the lawn wait until the boy come back -- she put he hair off he forehead and kiss it fondly . she be afraid he have be drink too much wine . why have go away without any tea ? he look at she with a kind humwe beam in he eye " Smirke be unwell , " he say with a laugh . for a long while Hele have not see the boy look so cheerful . he put he arm round she waist , and walk she up and down the walk in front of the house . begin to drub on the drawing - room window and nod and laugh from it . " come along , you two people , " cry on major Pendennis , " you coffee be get quite cold . " when be go to bed , , who be big with he secret , burst out with it , and describe the dismal but ludicrous scene which have occur . heard of it with many blush , which become she pale face very well , and a perplexity which roguishly enjoy . " Confound the fellow 's impudence , " major Pendennis say as he take he candle , " where will the assurance of these people stop ? " and he mother have a long talk that night , full of love , confidence , and laughter , and the boy somehow sleep more soundly and wake up more easily than he have do for many month before . before the great quit , he not only make a advantageous engagement with , but he liberally leave with she a sum of money to pay off any debt which the little family might have contract during they stay in the place , and which , mainly through the lady 's own economy and management , be not considerable . the small account with the spirit merchant , which major Pendennis have settle , be the chief of 's debt , and though the at one time talk about repay every farthing of the money , it never appear that he execute he menace , nor do the law of honour in the least call upon he to accomplish that threat . when have see all the outstanding bill pay to the uttermost shilling , she hand over the balance to she father , who break out into hospitality to all he friend , give the little Creeds more apple and gingerbread than he have ever bestow upon they , so that the widow Cree ever after hold the memory of she lodger in veneration , and the young one weep bitterly when he go away ; and in a word manage the money so cleverly that it be entirely expend before many day , and that he be compelle to draw upon for a sum to pay for travel expense when the time of they departure arrive . there be hold at a inn in that county town a weekly meeting of a festive , almost a riotous character , of a society of gentleman who call themselves the Buccaneer . some of the choice spirit of belong to this cheerful club . , the apothecary ( than whom a better fellow never put a pipe in he mouth and smoke it ) , , the talented and humorous portrait - painter of , , a excellent auctioneer , and the uncompromising , the able for twenty - three year of
of the and , be amongst the crew of the , whom also , the manager , like to join of a evening , whenever he receive permission from he lady . have be also a occasional Buccaneer . but a want of punctuality of payment have of late somewhat exclude he from the , where he be subject to disagreeable remark from the landlord , who say that a Buccaneer who do not pay he shot be utterly unworthy to be a . but when it become known to the ' ear , as the call themselves familiarly , that have make a splendid engagement , a great revolution of feeling take place in the club regard . Solly , mine host of the Grapes ( and I need not say , as worthy a fellow as ever stand behind a bar ) , tell the gent in the ' room one night how noble the have behave ; have be round and pay off all he tick in , include he score of three pound fourteen here -- and pronounce that be a good feller , a gentleman at bottom , and he , Solly , have always say so , and finally work upon the feeling of the Buccaneers to give the a dinner . the banquet take place on the last night of 's stay at , and be serve in 's accustom manner . as good a plain dinner of old fare as ever smoke on a table be prepare by ; and about eighteen gentleman sate down to the festive board . ( the eminent draper of ) be in the chair , have the distinguished guest of the on he right . the able and consistent Hicks officiat as croupier on the occasion ; most of the gentleman of the be present , and , , and , , friend of , be also participator in the entertainment . the cloth have be draw , the Chairman say , " , there be wine , if you like , " but the captain prefer punch , that liquor be vote by acclamation : and ' ' have be sung in admirable style by Messrs . , , and ( of the choir , than whom a more jovial spirit " ne 'er toss off a bumper or empty a bowl " ) , the Chairman give the health of the ' ! ' which be drink with the loyalty of man , and then without further circumlocution propose they friend ' . ' after the enthusiastic cheering which ring through old have subsid , rise in reply , and make a speech of twenty minute , in which he be repeatedly overcome by he emotion . the say he must be pardon for incoherence , if he heart be too full to speak . he be quit a city celebrate for its antiquitee , its hospitalitee , the beautee of its woman , the manly fidelitee , generositee , and jovialitee of its man . ( cheer . ) he be go from that ancient and venerable city , of which while hold she sayt , he should never think without the fondest emotion , to a methrawpolis where the talents of he daughther be about to have full play , and where he would watch over she like a guardian angel . he should never forget that it be at she have acquire the skill which she be about to exercise in another sphere , and in she name and he own Jack Costigan thank and bless they . the gallant officer 's speech be receive with tremendous cheer . , , in a brilliant and energetic manner , propose 's health . return thanks in a speech full of feeling and eloquence . propose the and the , and be about to rise but be prevent by , who , as long connect with the and on behalf of he daughter , thanke the company . he inform they that he have be in garrison , at , and at , and have be at the taking of . the of be a patron of the ; he have the honour of dining with he and the of many time ; and the former have justly be name the friend of the soldier . ( cheer . ) the be then propose , and return thanks . in the course of the night he sang he well - know song , ' the ,' ' the ,' ' the pig under the , ' and ' the of . ' the evening be a great triumph for he -- it end . all triumph and all evening end . and the next day , have take leave of all she friend , have be reconcile to , to whom she leave a necklace and a white satin gow -- the next day , he and have place in the Competitor coach rol by the gate of -- and never see they . , the coachman , point out Fairoaks to , who sate on the box smell of rum -and - water -- and the say it be a poor place -- and add , " ye should see , , I boy , " -- which say he should like very much to see . they be gone and have never see they ! he only know of they departure by its announcement in the county paper the next day : and straight gallop over to to hear the truth of this news . they be go indeed . a card of ' Lodgings to let ' be place in the dear little familiar window . he rush up into the room and view it over . he sate ever so long in the old window - seat look into the 's garden : whence he and Emily have so often
often look out together . he walk , with a sort of terror , into she little empty bedroom . it be sweep out and prepare for new - comer . the glass which have reflecte she fair face be shine ready for she successor . the curtain lay square fold on the little bed : he fling himself down and bury he head on the vacant pillow . have nett a purse into which he mother have put some sovereign , and have find it on he dressing - table that very morning . he give one to the little servant who have be use to wait upon the , and another to the child , because they say they be very fond of she . it be but a few month back , yet what year ago it seem since he have first enter that room ! he feel that it be all done . the very missing she at the coach have something fatal in it . , weary , utterly wretch and lonely the poor lad felt . he mother see she be go by he look when he come home . he be eager to fly too now , as be other folk round about . poor Smirke want to go away from the sight of the syren widow . begin to think he have have enough of , and that a few supper - party at would not be unpleasant . and major Pendennis longe to be off , and have a little pheasant - shoot at , and get rid of all annoyance and tracassery of the village . the widow and nervously set about the preparation for Pen's kit , and fill trunk with he book and linen . write card with the name of , , which be duly nail on the box ; and at which both she and look with tearful wistful eye . it be not until long , long after he be go , that remember how constant and tender the affection of these woman have be , and how selfish he own conduct be . a night soon come , when the mail , with echo horn and blaze lamps , stop at the lodge - gate of Fairoaks , and Pen's trunk and he uncle be place on the roof of the carriage , into which the pair presently afterwards enter . and be stand by the evergreens of the shrubbery , they figure light up by the coach lamps ; the guard cry all right : in another instant the carriage whirl onward ; the light disappear , and 's heart and prayer go with they . she saint benediction follow the depart boy . he have leave the home - nest in which he have be chaf , and whither , after he very first flight , he return bleed and wound ; he be eager to go forth again , and try he restless wing . how lonely the house look without he ! the corded trunk and book - box be there in he empty study . ask leave to come and sleep in 's room : and when she have cry herself to sleep there , the mother go softly into vacant chamber , and kneel down by the bed on which the moon be shine , and there pray for she boy , as mother only know how to plead . he know that she pure blessing be follow he , as he be carry mile away . every man , however brief or inglorious may have be he academical career , must remember with kindness and tenderness the old university comrade and day . the young man 's life be just begin : the boy 's leading - string be cut , and he have all the novel delight and dignity of freedom . he have no idea of car yet , or of bad health , or of roguery , or poverty , or to - morrow 's disappointment . the play have not be act so often as to make he tired . though the after drink , as we mechanically go on repeat it , be stale and bitter , how pure and brilliant be that first sparkling dratch of pleasure !-- how the boy rush at the cup , and with what a wild eagerness he drain it ! but old epicure who be cut off from the delight of the table , and be restrict to a poach egg and a glass of water , like to see people with good appetite ; and , as the next best thing to be amuse at a pantomime one 's - self be to see one 's child enjoy it , I hope there may be no degree of age or experience to which mortal may attain , when he shall become such a glum philosopher as not to be pleas by the sight of happy youth . come back a few week since from a brief visit to the old of , where my friend pass some period of he life , I make the journey in the railroad by the side of a young fellow at present a student of . he have get a exeat somehow , and be bend on a day 's lark in : he never stop rattling and talk from the commencement of the journey until its close ( which be a great deal too soon for I , for I never be tired of listen to the honest young fellow 's joke and cheery laughter ) ; and when we arrive at the terminus nothing would satisfy he but a hansom cab , so that he might get into town the quicker , and plunge into the pleasure await he there . away the young lad go whir , with joy lighting up he honest face ; and
and as for the reader 's humble servant , have but a small carpet - bag , I get up on the outside of the omnibus , and sate there very contentedly between a Jew-pedlar smoking bad cigar , and a gentleman 's servant take care of a poodle - dog , until we get we fated complement of passengers and box , when the coachman drive leisurely away . we be not in a hurry to get to town . neither one of we be particularly eager about rush into that near smoke , or think of dining at the club that night , or dance at the Casino . yet a few year more , and my young friend of the railroad will be not a whit more eager . there be no railroad make when go to the famous of ; but he drive thither in a well - appoint coach , fill inside and out with don , gownsman , young freshmen about to enter , and they guardian , who be conduct they to the university . a fat old gentleman , in grey stocking , from the , who sate by major Pendennis inside the coach , have he pale - face son opposite , be frightene beyond measure when he hear that the coach have be drive for a couple of stage by young , of , who be the friend of all man , include coachman , and could drive as well as himself . Pen sate on the roof , examine coach , passengers , and country with great delight and curiosity . he heart jump with pleasure as the famious university come in view , and the magnificent prospect of venerable towers and pinnacle , tall elm and shining river , spread before he . have pass a few day with he uncle at the major 's lodging , in , before they set out for . major Pendennis think that the lad 's wardrobe want renewal ; and be by no means averse to any plan which be to bring he new coat and waistcoat . there be no end to the sacrifice which the self - deny uncle make in the youth 's behalf . be awfully lonely . the pavement be desert ; the very red jacket have go out of town . there be scarce a face to be see in the bow- window of the club . the major conduct he nephew into one or two of those desert mansion , and write down the lad 's name on the candidate - list of one of they ; and 's pleasure at this compliment on he guardian 's part be excessive . he read in the parchment volume he name and title , as ' , , of , ---- shire and , ; propose by major Pendennis , and seconde by , ' with a thrill of intense gratification . " you will come in for ballot in about three year , by which time you will have take you degree , " the guardian say . longe for the three year to be over , and survey the stucco - hall , and vast library , and draw -room as already he own property . the major laugh slyly to see the pompous air of the simple young fellow as he strut out of the building . he and drive down in the latter 's cab one day to the , and renew acquaintance with some of they old comrade there . the boy come crowd up to the cab as it stand by the gate , where they be enter , and admire the chestnut horse , and the tight and livery and gravity of , the tiger . the bell for afternoon - school ring as they be swagger about the play - ground talk to they old crony . the awful doctor pass into school with he grammar in he hand . slink away uneasily at he presence , but go up blushing , and shake the dignitary by the hand . he laugh as he think that well - remember have box he ear many a time . he be generous , good - natured , and , in a word , perfectly conceit and satisfi with himself . then they drive to the parental brew - house . 's be compose in a enormous pile of building , not far from the , and the name of that well - know firm be gild upon innumerable public - house sign , tenant by its vassal in the neighbourhood ; and the venerable junior partner and manager do honou to the young lord of the vat and he friend , and serve they with silver flagon of brown - stout , so strong , that you would have think , not only the young man , but the very horse drive , be affect by the potency of the drink , for he rush home to the west - end of the town at a rapid pace , which endanger the pie - stall and the woman on the crossing , and bring the cab - step into collision with the post at the street corner , and cause to sw fearfully on he board behind . the major be quite pleased when be with he young acquaintance ; listen to 's artless story with the greatest interest ; give the two boy a fine dinner at a - house , whence they proceed to the play ; but be above all happy when and , who happen to be in , request the pleasure of major Pendennis and 's company at dinner in . " have obtain the entree into 's house , " he say to Pen with a affectionate solemnity which befit the importance of the occasion , " it behove you , my dear boy ,
, to keep it . you must mind and never neglect to call in when you come to . I recommend you to read up carefully , in , the alliances and genealogy of the Earls of , and if you can , to make some trifl allusion to the family , something historical , neat , and complimentary , and that sort of thing , which you , who have a poetic fancy , can do pretty well . himself be a worthy man , though not of high extraction or indeed much education . he always make a point of have some of the family porter serve round after dinner , which you will on no account refuse , and which I shall drink myself , though all beer disagree with I confoundedly . " and the heroic martyr do actually sacrifice himself , as he say he would , on the day when the dinner take place , and old , at the head of he table , make he usual joke about 's . we should all of we , I be sure , have like to see the major 's grin , when the worthy old gentleman make he time - honoured joke . lady Agnes , who , wrap up in , be the fondest of mother , and one of the most good - natured though not the wisest of woman , receive she son 's friend with great cordiality : and astonished Pen by account of the severe course of study which she darl boy be pursue , and which she fear might injure he dear health . Foker the elder burst into a horse - laugh at some of these speech , and the heir of the house wink he eye very knowingly at he friend . and then go through she son 's history from the earliest time , and recount he miraculous suffering in the measle and hooping - cough , he escape from drowning , the shocking tyranny practise upon he at that horrid school , whither would send he because he have be bring up there himself , and she never would forgive that disagreeable Doctor , no never -- , we say , have prattle away for a hour incessantly about she son , vote the two most agreeable man ; and when pheasant come with the second course , which the major praise as the very finest bird he ever see , she ladyship say they come from ( as the major knew perfectly well ) , and hope that they would both pay she a visit there -- at , or when dear be at home for the vacation . " bless you , my dear boy , " say to , as they be light they candle in afterwards to go to bed . " you make that little allusion to , where one of the Rosherville distinguished himself , very neatly and well , although do not quite understand it : but it be exceedingly well for a beginner -- though you ought not to blush so , by the way -- and I beseech you , my dear Arthur , to remember through life , that with a entree -- with a good entree , mind -- it be just as easy for you to have good society as bad , and that it cost a man , when properly introduce , no more trouble or soin to keep a good footing in the best house in than to dine with a lawyer in . mind this when you be at pursue you study , and for 's sake be very particular in the acquaintance which you make . the premier pa in life be the most important of all -- do you write to you mother to - day ?-- no ?--well , do , before you go , and call and ask for a frank -- they like it -- good night . bless you . " write a droll account of he doings in , and the play , and the visit to the old Friars , and the brewery , and the party at 's , to he dearest mother , who be say she prayer at home in the lonely house at Fairoaks , she heart full of love and tenderness unutterable for the boy : and she and read that letter and those which follow , many , many time , and brood over they as woman do . it be the first step in life that be make -- ah ! what a dangerous journey it be , and how the bravest may stumble and the strongest fail . brother wayfarer ! may you have a kind arm to support yours on the path , and a friendly hand to succour those who fall beside you . truth guide , mercy forgive at the end , and love accompany always . without that lamp how blind the traveller would be , and how black and cheerless the journey ! so the coach drive up to that ancient and comfortable inn the , which stand in , , and Pen with delight and eagerness remark , for the first time , gownsman go about , chapel bell clinking ( bell in be ring from morning - tide till even - song ) --tower and pinnacle rise calm and stately over the gable and antique house - roof of the homely busy city . previous communications have take place between on part , and , of , on whose side be enter ; and as soon as major Pendennis have arrange he personal appearance , so that it should make a satisfactory impression upon Pen's tutor , the pair walk down , and pass the great gate and belfry - tower of 's , and so come , as they be direct , to : where again
again Pen' heart begin to beat as they enter at the wicket of the venerable ivy -mantled gate of the College . it be surmount with a ancient dome almost cover with creeper , and adorn with the effigy of the from whom the take its name , and many coat - of - arm of its royal and noble benefactor . the porter point out a queer old tower at the corner of the quadrangle , by which 's room be approach , and the two gentleman walk acrosse the square , the main feature of which be at once and for ever stamp in mind -- the pretty fountain play in the centre of the fair grass plat ; the tall chapel window and buttress rise to the right ; the hall with its tapering lantern and oriel window ; the lodge , from the door of which the master issue with rust silk ; the line of the surround room pleasantly break by carve chimney , grey turret , and quaint gable -- all these Pen's eye drank in with a eagerness which belong to first impressions ; and major Pendennis survey with that calmness which belong to a gentleman who do not care for the picturesque , and whose eye have be somewhat dim by the constant glare of the pavement of . 's be the great college of the of , with its four vast quadrangles , and its beautiful hall and garden , and the , as the man be call wear gown of a peculiar cut , and give themselves no small air of superiority over all other young man . be but a petty hermitage in comparison of the huge consecrate pile alongside of which it lie . but consider it be size it have always keep a excellent name in the university . it be ton be very good : the best family of certain county have time out of mind send up they young man to : the college living be remarkably good : the fellowship easy ; the Boniface man have have more than they fair share of university honour ; they boat be third upon the river ; they chapel - choir be not inferior to 's itself ; and the Boniface ale the best in . in the comfortable old wainscote College - Hall , and round about 's statue of ( who stand in a attitude of seraphic benediction over the uncommonly good cheer of the fellows 's table ) there be portrait of many most eminent . there be the learn , who suffer in . 's time , and who roast he -- there be Hicks -- the of . 's , , of the and of this College -- Sprott the poet , of whose fame the college be justly proud -- , the late master , and friend of , who visit he at -- and other lawyer , scholar , and divine , whose portraiture look from the wall , or whose coat - of - arm shine in emerald and ruby , gold and azure , in the tall window of the refectory . the venerable cook of the college be one of the best artist in ( he son take the highest honour in the other of ) , and the wine in the fellows 's room have long be fam for its excellence and abundance . into this certainly not the least snugly shelter arbour amongst the grove of , now find he way , lean on he uncle 's arm , and they speedily reach 's room , and be conduct into the apartment of that courteous gentleman . he have receive previous information from regard , with respect to whose family , fortune , and personal merit the honest have speak with no small enthusiasm . indeed have describ to the tutor as " a young gentleman of some fortune and land estate , of one of the most ancient family in the kingdom , and possesse such a character and genius as be sure , under the proper guidance , to make he a credit to the college and the university . " under such recommendation the tutor be , of course , most cordial to the young freshman and he guardian , invite the latter to dine in hall , where he would have the satisfaction of see he nephew wear he gown and eat he dinner for the first time , and request the pair to take wine at he room after hall , and in consequence of the highly favourable report he have receive of , say , he should be happy to give he the best set of room to be have in college -- a gentleman - pensioner 's set , indeed , which be just luckily vacant . so they parte until dinner - time , which be very near at hand , and major pronounce to be uncommonly civil indeed . indeed when a College take the trouble to be polite , there be no man more splendidly courteous . Immerse in they book and exclude from the world by the gravity of they occupations , these reverend man assume a solemn magnificence of compliment in which they rustle and swell as in they grand rob of state . those silks and brocade be not put on for all comer or every day . when the two gentleman have take leave of the tutor in he study , and have return to 's ante - room , or lecture - room , a very handsome apartment , turkey - carpet , and hang with excellent print and richly fram picture , they find the tutor 's servant already in wait there , accompany by a man with a bag full of cap and a number of gowns , from which might select a cap and gow for himself ,
, and the servant , no doubt , would get a commission proportionable to the service do by he . be all in a tremor of pleasure as the bustling tailor try on a gown and pronounce that it be a excellent fit ; and then he put the pretty college cap on , in rather a dandified manner and somewhat on one side , as he have see , the youngest master at , wear it . and he inspect the entire costume with a great deal of satisfaction in one of the great gilt mirror which ornament 's lecture - room : for some of these college divine be no more above look -- glass than a lady be , and look to the set of they gown and cap quite as anxiously as folk due of the lovelier sex . the major smile as he see the boy dandify himself in the glass : the old gentleman be not displease with the appearance of the comely lad . then , the skip or attendant , lead the way , key in hand , across the quadrangle , the major and follow he , the latter blushing , and pleas with he new academical habiliment , across the quadrangle to the room which be destin for the freshman ; and which be vacate by the retreat of the gentleman - pensioner , . the room be very comfortable , with large cross beam , high wainscot , and small window in deep embrasure . 's furniture be there , and to be sell at a valuation , and major Pendennis agree on he nephew 's behalf to take the available part of it , laughingly however declining ( as , indeed , do for he own part ) six sporting prints , and four group of opera-dancer with gauze drapery , which form the late occupant 's pictorial collection . then they go to hall , where sate down and eat he common with he brother freshmen , and the major take he place at the high - table along with the college dignitary and other fathers or guardian of youth , who have come up with they son to ; and after hall they go to 's to take wine ; and after wine to chapel , where the major sate with great gravity in the upper place , have a fine view of the master in he carve throne or stall under the organ - loft , where that gentleman , the learn , sate magnificent , with he great prayer - book before he , a image of statuesque piety and rigid devotion . all the young freshman behave with gravity and decorum , but be shocked to see that atrocious little Foker , who come in very late , and half a dozen of he comrade in the gentleman - pensioner ' seat , giggle and talk as if they have be in so many stall at the . but these circumstance , it must be remembe , take place some year back , when the be king . young man be much better behave now , and besides , be rather a fast college . could hardly sleep at night in he bedroom at the Trencher : so anxious be he to begin he college life , and to get into he own apartment . what do he think about , as he lay tossing and awake ? be it about he mother at home ; the pious soul whose life be bound up in he ? yes , let we hope he think of she a little . be it about , and he eternal passion , which have keep he awake so many night , and create such wretchedness and such long ? he have a trick of blushing , and if you have be in the room , and the candle have not be out , you might have see the youth 's countenance redden more than once , as be break out into passionate incoherent exclamation regard that luckless event of he life . he uncle 's lesson have not be throw away upon he ; the mist of passion have pass from he eye now , and he see she as she be . to think that he , , have be enslave by such a woman , and then jilt by she ! that he should have stoop so low , to be trample on the mire ! that there be a time in he life , and that but a few month back , when he be willing to take for he father - in - law ! " poor old ! " presently laugh out -- " well , I will write and try and conseal the poor old boy . he will not die of he passion , ha , ha ! " the major , have he be awake , might have hear a score of such ejaculation utter by Pen as he lay awake and restless through the first night of he residence at . it would , perhaps , have be better for a youth , the battle of whose life be go to begin on the morrow , to have pass the eve in a fferent sort of vigil : but the world have get hold of in the shape of he selfish old Mentor : and those who have any interest in he character must have perceive ere now , that this lad be very weak as well as very impetuous , very vain as well as very frank , and if of a generous disposition , not a little selfish in the midst of he profuseness , and also rather fickle , as all eager pursuer of self - gratification be . the six month 's passion have a he very considerably . there be a immense gulf between
between the victim of love , and Pen the innocent boy of eighteen , sigh after it : and so have all the experience and superiority , besides that command which afterwards conceit and imperiousness of disposition give he over the young man with whom he now begin to live . he and he uncle pass the morning with great satisfaction in make purchase for the better comfort of the apartment which the lad be about to occupy . 's china and glass be in a dreadfully dismantled condition , he lamp smashed , and he bookcase by no means so spacious as those shelf which would be requisite to receive the contents of the box which be lie in the hall at Fairoaks , and which be address to Arthur in the hand of poor Helen . the box arrive in a few day , that he mother have pack with so much care . be touche as he read the superscription in the dear well - know hand , and he arrange in they proper place all the book , he old friend , and all the linen and table - clot which have select from the family stock , and all the jam - pots which little have bound in straw , and the hundred simple gift of home . have another now . but it be not all child who take to she kindly . of we friend be not sorry when he Mentor take leave of the young gentleman on the second day after the arrival of the pair in , and we may be sure that the major on he part be very glad to have discharge he duty , and to have the duty over . more than three month of precious time have that martyr of a major give up to he nephew -- be ever selfish man call upon to make a greater sacrifice ? do you know many man or Majors who would do as much ? a man will lay down he head , or peril he life for he honour , but let we be shy how we ask he to give up he ease or he heart 's desire . very few of we can bear that trial . , worthy reader , if thou hast peradventure a beard , wouldst thou do as much ? I will not say that a woman will not . they be use to it : we take care to accustom they to sacrifice but , my good sir , the amount of self - denial which you have probably exert through life , when put down to you account elsewhere , will not probably swell the balance on the credit side much . well , well , there be no use in speak of such ugly matter , and you be too polite to use a vulgar to quoque . but I wish to state once for all that I greatly admire the major for he conduct during the past quarter , and think that he have quite a right to be pleased at get a holiday . and see he off in the coach , and the former young gentleman give particular order to the coachman to take care of that gentleman inside . it please the elder Pendennis to have he nephew in the company of a young fellow who would introduce he to the best set of the university . the major rush off to and thence to , from which water - place he descende upon some neighbour great house , whereor the family be not go abroad , and where good shooting and company be to be have . a quarter of the space which custom have award to work style the , have be assign to the account of one passage in Pen's career , and it be manifest that the whole of he adventur can not be treat at a similar length , unless some descendant of the chronicler of Pen' history should take up the pen at he decease , and continue the narrative for the successor of the present generation of reader . we be not about to go through the young fellow 's academical career with , by any means , a similar minuteness . Alas , the life of such boy do not bear tell altogether . I wish it do . I ask you , do yours ? as long as what we call we honour be clear , I suppose you mind be pretty easy . woman be pure , but not man . woman be unselfish , but not man . and I would not wish to say of poor Arthur Pendennis that he be worse than he neighbour , only that he neighbour be bad for the most part . let we have the candour to own as much at least . can you point out ten spotless man of you acquaintance ? mine be pretty large , but I can not find ten saint in the list . during the first term of Pen's academical life , he attend classical and mathematical lecture with tolerable assiduity ; but discover before very long time that he have little taste or genius for the pursuing of the exact sciences , and be perhaps rather annoyed that one or two very vulgar young man , who do not even use strap to they trousers so as to cover the abominably thick and coarse shoe and stocking which they wear , beat he completely in the lecture - room , he give up he attendance at that course , and announce to he fond parent that he propose to devote himself exclusively to the cultivation of and . be , for she part , quite satisfie that she darl boy should pursue that branch of learning for which he have the greatest inclination ; and only besotch he not
not to ruin he health by too much study , for she have hear the most melancholy story of young student who , by over -fatigue , have bring on brain - fever and perish untimely in the midst of they university career . and Pen's health , which be always delicate , be to be regard , as she justly say , beyond all consideration or vain honour . , although not aware of any lurking disease which be likely to end he life , yet kindly promise he mamma not to sit up read too late of night , and stick to he word in this respect with a great deal more tenacity of resolution than he exhibit upon some other occasion , when perhaps he be a little remiss . presently he begin too to find that he learn little good in the classical lecture . he fellow - student there be too dull , as in mathematics they be too learn for he . , the tutor , be no better a scholar than many a fifth - form boy at ; might have some stupid humdrum notion about the metre and grammatical construction of a passage of or , but have no more notion of the poetry than , he bed - maker ; and grow weary of hear the dull student and tutor blunder through a few line of a play , which he could read in a tenth part of the time which they give to it . after all , private reading , as he begin to perceive , be the only study which be really profitable to a man ; and he announce to he mamma that he should read by himself a great deal more , and in public a great deal less . that excellent woman know no more about than she do about , but she be quite contented with arrangement regard he course of study , and feel perfectly confident that she dear boy would get the place which he merit . do not come home until after , a little to the fond mother 's disappointment , and 's , who be long for he to make a fine snow fortification , such as he have make three winter before . but he be invite to , 's , where there be private theatrical , and a gay party of very fine folk , some of they whom major Pendennis would on no account have he nephew neglect . however , he stay at home for the last three week of the vacation , and have the opportunity of remark what a quantity of fine new clothes he bring with he , and he mother admire he improved appearance and manly and decide tone . he do not come home at ; but when he arrive for the long vacation , he bring more smart clothes ; appear in the morning in wonderful shooting jacket , with remarkable buttons ; and in the evening in gorgeous velvet waistcoat , with richly - embroider cravat , and curiious linen . and as she pry about he room , she see , oh , such a beautiful dressing - case , with silver mountings , and a quantity of lovely ring and jewellery . and he have a new french watch and gold chain , in place of the big old chronometer , with its bunch of jingling seal , which have hang from the fob of , and by the second - hand of which the defunct doctor have feel many a patient 's pulse in he time . it be but a few month back have longe for this watch , which he think the most splendid and august timepiece in the world ; and just before he go to college , have take it out of she trinket - box ( where it have remain unwound since the death of she husband ) and give it to Pen with a solemn and appropriate little speech respect he father 's virtue and the proper use of time . this portly and valuable chronometer now pronounce to be out of date , and , indeed , make some comparison between it and a warming - pan , which think disrespectful , and he leave the watch in a drawer , in the company of soiled primrose glove , cravat which have go out of favour , and of that other school watch which have once before be mention in this history . we old friend , , pronounce to be no long up to he weight , and swap she away for another and more powerful horse , for which he have to pay rather a heavy figure . give the boy the money for the new horse ; and cry when be fetch away . also bring a large box of cigar brand , , , , or by some such strange title , and begin to consume these not only about the stable and green - house , where they be very good for 's plant , but in he own study , of which practice he mother do not at first approve . but he be at work upon a prize - poem , he say , and could not compose without he cigar , and quote the late lament it 's line in favour of the custom of smoking . as he be smoke to such good purpose , he mother could not of course refuse permission : in fact , the good soul come into the room one day in the midst of Pen's labour ( he be consult a novel which have recently appear , for the cultivation of the light literature of he own country as well as of foreign nation become every student ) -- , we say , come into the room and find Pen on the sofa at
at this work , rather than disturb he go for a light - box and he cigar - case to he bedroom which be adjacent , and actually put the cigar into he mouth and light the match at which he kindle it . laugh , and kiss he mother 's hand as it hang fondly over the back of the sofa . " dear old mother , " he say , " if I be to tell you to burn the house down , I think you would do it . " and it be very likely that be right , and that the foolish woman would have do almost as much for he as he say . besides the work of English " light literature " which this diligent student devoure , he bring down boxe of the light literature of the neighbour country of : into the leaf of which when dip , she read such thing as cause she to open she eye with wonder . but show she that it be not he who make the book , though it be absolutely necessary that he should keep up he french by a acquaintance with the most celebrated writer of the day , and that it be as clearly he duty to read the eminent , as to study or . and yield with a sigh of perplexity . but be warn off the book , both by he anxious mother , and that rigid moralist himself , who , however he might be call upon to study every branch of literature in order to form he mind and to perfect he style , would by no means prescribe such a course of read to a young lady whose business in life be very different . in the course of this long vacation drank up the bin of claret which he father have laid in , and of which we have hear the son remark that there be not a headache in a hogshead ; and this wine be exhaust , he write for a further supply to " he wine merchant , " . and of , : from whom , indeed , old have recommend to get a supply of port and sherry on go to college . " you will have , no doubt , to entertain you young friend at Boniface with wine - party , " the honest rector have remark to the lad . " they use to be customary at college in my time , and I would advise you to employ a honest and respectable house in for you small stock of wine , rather than to have recourse to the tradesman , whose liquor , if I remember rightly , be both deleterious in quality and exorbitant in price . " and the obedient young gentleman take the Doctor 's advice , and patronise Messrs . and at the rector 's suggestion . so when he write order for a stock of wine to be send down to the cellar at Fairoaks , he hint that . and might send in he university account for wine at the same time with the Fairoak bill . the poor widow be frightene at the amount . but laugh at she old - fashioned view , say that the bill be moderate , that everybody drank claret and champagne now , and , finally , the widow pay , feel dimly that the expense of she household be increase considerably , and that she narrow income would scarce suffice to meet they . but they be only occasional . merely come home for a few week at the vacation . and she might pinch when he be gone . in the brief time he be with they , ought they not to make he happy ? yoArthu be own allowances be liberal all this time ; indeed , much more so than those of the son of far more wealthy man . year before , the thrifty and affectionate , whose darling project it have ever be to give he son a university education , and those advantage of which he own father 's extravagance have deprive he , have begin lay by a store of money which he call 's . year after year in he book he executor find entry of sum ves as . , and during the period subsequent to she husband 's decease , and before Pen's entry at college , the widow have add sundry sum to this fund , so that when go up to it reach no inconsiderable amount . let he be liberally allowanc , be major 's maxim . let he make he first entree into the world as a gentleman , and take he place with man of good rank and station : after give it to he , it will be he own duty to hold it . there be no such bad policy as stint a boy -- or put he on a lower allowance than he fellows . yoArthu will have to face the world and fight for himself presently . meanwhile we shall have procure for he good friend , gentlemanly habit , and have he well back and well train against the time when the real struggle come . and these liberal opinion the major probably advanc both because they be just , and because he be not deal with he own money . thus young , the only son of a estate country gentleman , with a good allowance , and a gentlemanlike bearing and person , look to be a lad of much more consequence than he be really ; and be hold by the authority , tradesman , and undergraduates , as quite a young buck and member of the aristocracy . he manner be frank , brave , and perhaps a little impertinent , as become a high - spirited youth
youth . he be perfectly generous and free - hand with he money , which seem pretty plentiful . he love joviality , and have a good voice for a song . Boat - racing have not risen in Pen's time to the fureur which , as we be give to understand , it have since attaine in the university ; and riding and tandem -driving be the fashions of the ingenuous youth . ride well to hound , appear in pink , as become a young buck , and , not particularly extravagant in equestrian or any other amusement , yet manage to run up a fine bill at 's , the livery - stable keeper , and in a number of other quarter . in fact , this lucky young gentleman have almost every taste to a considerable degree . he be very fond of book of all sort : have teach he to like rare edition , and he own taste lead he to like beautiful bindings . it be marvellous what tall copy , and gild , and marbl , and blind - tooling , the bookseller and binder put upon Pen's bookshelf . he have a very fair taste in matter of art , and a keen relish for print of a high school -- none of you , or tawdry racing Print , such as have delighte the simple eye of , he predecessor -- but you Strange , and Rembrandt etching , and Wilkies before the letter , with which he apartment be furnish presently in the most perfect good taste , as be allow in the university , where this young fellow get no small reputation . we have mention that he exhibit a certain partiality for ring , jewellery , and fine raiment of all sort ; and it must be own that , during he time at the university , be rather a dressy man , and love to array himself in splendour . he and he polite friend would dress themselves out with as much care in order to go and dine at each other 's room , as other folk would who be go to enslave a mistress . they say he use to wear ring over he kid glove , which he always deny ; but what folly will not youth perpetrate with its own admirable gravity and simplicity ? that he take perfume bath be a truth ; and he use to say that he take they after meet certain man of a very low set in hall . in Pen's second year , when make she chief hit in , and score of print be publish of she , have one of these hung in he bedroom , and confide to the man of he set how awfully , how wildly , how madly , how passionately , he have love that woman . he show they in confidence the verse that he have write to she , and he brow would darke , he eye roll , he chest heave with emotion as he recal that fatal period of he life , and describe the woe and agony which he have suffer . the verse be copy out , hand about , sneer at , admire , pass from coterie to coterie . there be few thing which elevate a lad in the estimation of he brother boy , more than to have a character for a great and romantic passion . perhaps there be something noble in it at all time -- among very young man it be consider heroic -- be pronounce a tremendous fellow . they say he have almost committed suicide : that he have fight a duel with a baronet about she . point he out to each other . as at the promenade time at two o'clock he swagger out of college , surround by he crony , he be famous to behold . he be elaborately attired . he would ogle the lady who come to lionise the university , and pass before he on the arm of happy gownsman , and give he opinion upon they personal charms , or they toilette , with the gravity of a critic whose experience entitle he to speak with authority . use to say that they have be walk with , and be as pleased to be see in he company as some of we would be if we walk with a duke down . he and the Proctor cap each other as they meet , as if they be rival power , and the man hardly know which be the greater . in fact , in the course of he second year , have become one of the man of fashion in the university . it be curious to watch that facile admiration , and simple fidelity of youth . they hang round a leader ; and wonder at he , and love he , and imitate he . no generous boy ever live , I suppose , that have not have some wonderment of admiration for another boy ; and at have he school , he faithful band of friend and he rival . when the young man hear at the haberdasher 's shop that , of , have just order a crimson satin - cravat , you would see a couple of dozen crimson satin cravat in in the course of the week -- and , the , be know to sell no less than two gross of Pendennis pins , from a pattern which the young gentleman have select in he shop . now if any person with a arithmetical turn of mind will take the trouble to calculate what a sum of money it would cost a young man to indulge freely in all the above propensity which we have say possess , it will be see that a young fellow , with such liberal
liberal taste and amusement , must need in the course of two or three year spend or owe a very handsome sum of money . we have say we friend have not a calculating turn . no one propensity of he be outrageously extravagant ; and it be certain that 's tailor 's account ; 's cook 's bill for dinner ; 's bill with , the print seller , for - and proof , and 's dealings with , the great bookseller , for edition , black - letter folio , and richly illuminate Missal of the . ; and 's or 's score with the horsedealer , be , each and all of they , incomparably greater than any little bills which might run up with the above -mentioned tradesman . but of have the advantage over all these young gentleman , he friend and associate , of a universality of taste : and whereas young do not care twopence for the most beautiful print , or to look into any gilt frame that have not a mirror within it ; and do not mind in the least how he be dress , and have a aversion for horse exercise , nay a terror of it ; and never read any print work but the ' ' or ' 's , ' or care for any manuscript except he greasy little scrawl of a bett - book :--ou - minded young friend occupy himself in every one of the branch of science or pleasure above - mention , and distinguished himself tolerably in each . hence young get a prodigious reputation in the university , and be haile as a sort of ; and as for the english verse prize , in competition for which we have see he busily engage at , of carry it that year certainly , but the undergraduates think a much finer poem , and he have he verse print at he own expense , and distribute in gilt morocco cover amongst he acquaintance . I find a copy of it lately in a dusty corner of Pen's bookcase , and have it before I this minute , bound up in a collection of old Oxbridge tracts , university statute , prize - poem by successful and unsuccessful candidate , declamation recit in the college chapel , speech deliver at the , and inscribe by with he name and college , -- ; or present to he by he affectionate friend or , the author . how strange the epigraph look in those half - boyish hand , and what a thrill the sight of the document give one after the lapse of a few lustre ! how fate , since that time , have remove some , estrange other , deal awfully with all ! many a hand be cold that write those kindly memorial , and that we press in the confident and generous grasp of youthful friendship . what passion we friendship be in those old day , how artless and void of doubt ! how the arm you be never tired of have link in yours under the fair college avenue or by the river side , where it wash , or , or wind by Trinity and 's , be withdrawn of necessity , when you enter presently the world , and each part to push and struggle for himself through the great mob on the way through life ! be we the same man now that write those inscription -- that read those poem ? that deliver or hear those essay and speech so simple , so pompous , so ludicrously solemn ; parody so artlessly from book , and speak with smug chubby face , and such a admirable aping of wisdom and gravity ? here be the book before I : it be scarcely fifteen year old . here be moan with despair and Byronic misanthropy , whose career at the university be one of unmixed milk - punch . here be 's daring in defence of suicide and of republicanism in general , apropo of the death of and the -- 's , who wear the starchest tie in all the diocese , and would go to rather than eat a beefsteak on a in . here be of the ---- , who have make a fortune in , and whose dinner be so good -- bellow out with and , " on to the breach , ye soldier of the cross , the red wall and swim the choking foss . ye dauntless archer , twang you cross - bow well ; on , bill and battle - axe and mangonel ! Ply batter -ram and hurtle catapult , be ours -- id Deus vult . " after which come a mellifluous description of the garden of and the maid of , and a prophecy that rose shall deck the entire country of , and a speedy reign of peace be establish -- all in undeniably decasyllabic line , and the queerest aping of sense and sentiment and poetry . and there be and along with these grave parody , and boyish exercise ( which be at once so frank and false and mirthful , yet , somehow , so mournful ) by youthful hand , that shall never write more . have interpose darkly , and the young voice be silent , and the eager brain have cease to work . this one have genius and a great descent , and seem to be destin for honour which now be of little worth to he : that have virtue , learn , genius -- every faculty and endowment which might secure love , admiration , and worldly fame : a obscure and solitary churchyard contain the grave of many fond hope , and the pathetic stone which bid they farewell -- I see the sun shining on it in the fall of last
last year , and hear the sweet village choir raising anthem round about . what boot whether it be or a little country spire which cover you ash , or if , a few day sooner or later , the world forget you ? Amidst these friend , then , and a host more , pass more than two brilliant and happy year of he life . he have he fill of pleasure and popularity . no dinner - or supper - party be complete without he ; and jovial wit , and Pen's songs , and dash courage and frank and manly bear , charme all the undergraduates , and even disarm the tutor who cry out at he idleness , and murmure about he extravagant way of life . though he become the favourite and leader of young man who be much he superior in wealth and station , he be much too generous to endeaavor to propitiate they by any meanness or cringe on he own part , and would not neglect the humblest man of he acquaintance in order to curry favour with the richest young grandee in the university . he name be still remembe at the , as one of the brilliant orator of he day . by the way , from have be a ardent Tory in he freshman 's year , he principles take a sudden turn afterwards , and he become a liberal of the most violent order . he avow himself a Dantonist , and assert that the be serve right . and as for the , he vow that he would chop off that monarch 's head with he own right hand be he then in the room at the , and have no other executioner for the traitor . he and , the of 's son , before - mention , be the most truculent republicans of they day . there be reputation of this sort make , quite independent of the collegiate hierarchy , in the republic of gownsman . a man may be famous in the Honour - list and entirely unknown to the undergraduate : who elect king and chieftain of they own , whom they admire and obey , as negro - gang have private black sovereign in they own body , to whom they pay a occult obedience , besides that which they publicly profess for they owner and driver . among the young one become famous and popular : not that he do much , but there be a general determination that he could do a great deal if he choose . " ah , if Pendennis of Boniface would but try , " the man say , " he might do anything . " he be back for the win by of Trinity ; everybody be sure he would have the hexameter prize which of 's , however , carry off , and in this way one university honour after another be lose by he , until , after two or three failure , cease to compete . but he get a declamation prize in he own college , and bring home to he mother and at a set of prize - book begild with the college arm , and so big , well - bound , and magnificent , that these lady think there have be no such prize ever give in a college before as this of Pen's , and that he have win the very largest honour which be capable of awarding . as vacation after vacation and term after term pass away without the desired news that have sate for any scholarship or win any honour , grow mightily gloomy in he behaviour towards , and adopt a sulky grandeur of deportment towards he , which the lad return by a similar haughtiness . one vacation he do not call upon the Doctor at all , much to he mother 's annoyance , who think that it be a privilege to enter the Rectory - house at , and listen to 's antique joke and story , though ever so often repeat , with unfailing veneration . " I can not stand the Doctor 's patronising air " , say . " he be too kind to I , a great deal fatherly . I have see in the world better man than he , and be not go to bear myself by listen to he dull old story and drink he stupid old port wine . " the tacit feud between and the Doctor make the widow nervous , so that she too avoid , and be afraid to go to the Rectory when be at home . one in the last long vacation , the wretched boy push he rebellious spirit so far as not to go to church , and he be see at the gate of the Clavering Arms smoke a cigar , in the face of the congregation as it issue from 's . there be a awful sensation in the village society , prophesy ruin after that , and groan in spirit over the rebellious young prodigal . so do Hel tremble in she heart , and little -- have grow to be a fine young stripling by this time , graceful and fair , cling round and worship she , with a passionate affection . both of these woman feel that they boy be change . he be no longer the artless Pen of old day , so brave , so artless , so impetuous , and tender . he face look careworn and haggard , he voice have a deeper sound , and tone more sarcastic . care seem to be pursue he ; but he only laugh when he mother question he , and parry she anxious query with some scornful jest . do he spend much of he vacation at home ; he go on visit to one
one great friend or another , and scare the quiet pair at Fairoaks by story of great house whither he have be invite ; and by talk of lord without they title . , who have be the means of introduce to that set of young man at the university , from whose society and connexion 's uncle expect that the lad would get so much benefit ; who have call for 's first song at he first supper - party ; and who have present he at the , where none but the very best man of be admit ( it consiste in time of six nobleman , eight gentlemen- pensioner , and twelve of the most select commoner of the university ) , soon find himself leave far behind by the young freshman in the fashionable world of , and be a generous and worthy fellow , without a spark of envy in he composition , be exceedingly pleased at the success of he young protege , and admire quite as much as any of the other youth do . I be he who follow now , and quote he saying ; learn he song , and retail they at minor supper - party , and be never weary of hear they from the gif young poet own mouth -- for a good deal of the time which might have employ much more advantageously in the pursuit of the regular scholastic study , be give up to the composition of secular ballad , which he sang about at party accord to university wont . it have be as well for if the honest have remain for some time at college , for , with all he vivacity , he be a prudent young man , and often curb Pen's propensity to extravagance : but 's collegiate career do not last very long after 's entrance at . repeat difference with the university authority cause to quit in a untimely manner . he would persist in attend races on the neighbour , in spite of the injunction of he academic superior . he never could be get to frequent the chapel of the college with that regularity of piety which demand from she child ; tandem , which be abomination in the eyes of the head and tutor , be 's greatest delight , and so reckless be he drive and frequent the accident and upset out of he drag , that call take a drive with he take the " Diversion of ; " finally , have a dinner - party at he room to entertain some friend from , nothing would satisfy but paint 's door vermilion , in which freak he be catch by the proctor ; and although young , the celebrated negro fighter , who be one of 's distinguished guest , and be hold the can of paint while the young artist operate on the door , knock down two of the proctor 's attendant and perform prodigy of valour , yet these feat rather injured than serve Foker , whom the proctor know very well and who be take with the brush in he hand , and who be summarily conven and send down from the university . the tutor write a very kind and feeling letter to on the subject , state that everybody be fond of the youth ; that he never mean harm to any mortal creature ; that he for he own part would have be delighted to pardon the harmless little boyish frolic , have not it be unhappy publicity render it impossible to look the freak over , and breathe the most fervent wish for the young fellow 's welfare -- wish no doubt sincere , for , as we know , come of a noble family on he mother 's side , and on the other be here to a great number of thousand pound a year . " it do not matter , " say , talk over the matter with ,-- " a little sooner or a little later , what be the odd ? I should have be pluck for my little - go again , I know I should -- that I can not screw into my head , and my mamma 's anguish would have break out next term . the will blow like a old grampus , I know he will , -- well , we must stop till he get he wind again . I shall probably go abroad and improve my mind with foreign travel . yes , parly - voo be the ticket . it 'ly , and that sort of thing . I will go to and learn to dance and complete my education . but it be not I I be anxious about , . as long as people drink beer I do not care , -- it be about you I be doubtful , my boy . you be go too fast , and can not keep up the pace , I tell you . it be not the fifty you owe I , -- pay it or not when you like , -- but it be the every - day pace , and I tell you it will kill you . you be livin ' as if there be no end to the money in the stockin ' at home . you ought not to give dinner , you ought to eat th'ey . fellows be glad to have you . you ought not to owe horse bill , you ought to ride other chap ' nag . you know no more about bett than I do about : the chap will win you money as sure as you sport it . hang I if you be not try everything . I see you sit down to ecarte last week at 's , and take you turn with the bone after 's supper
supper . they will beat you at it , , my boy , even if they play on the square , which . I do not say they do not , nor which I do not say they do , mind . but I will not play with th'ey . you be no match for 'em . you be not up to they weight . it be like little black Strap stand up to , -- the 's a pretty fighter but , law bless you , he arm be not long enough to touch ,-- and I tell you , you be go it with feller beyond you weight . look here -- if you will promise I never to bet nor touch a box nor a card , I will let you off the two pony . " but , laughingly , say , " that though it be not convenient to he to pay the two pony at that moment , he by no means wish to be let off any just debt he owed ; " and he and part , not without many dark foreboding on the latter 's part with regard to he friend , who think be travel speedily on the road to ruin . " one must do at as do , " Pen say , in a dandified manner , jingl some sovereign in he waistcoat - pocket . " a little quiet play at ecarte can not hurt a man who play pretty well -- I come away fourteen sovereign richer from 's supper , and , gad ! I want the money . " -- and he walk off , after have take leave of poor Foker , who go away without any beat of drum , or offer to drive the coach out of , to superintend a little dinner which he be go to give at he own room in , about which dinner , the cook of the college , who have a great respect for , always take especial pain for he young favourite . 's some short time before 's departure from , there have come up to Boniface a gentleman who have once , as it turn out , belong to the other of , which he have quit on account of some difference with the tutor and authority there . this gentleman , whose name be , be of the ancient Suffolk family of - , of - , - , as the young wag use to call it ; and no doubt it be on account of he descent , and because , the master of , be a Suffolk man , and relate perhaps to the family , that be take in at , after 's and one or two other college have refuse to receive he . there be a live in the family , which it be important for to hold ; and , be in a dragoon regiment at the time when he third brother , for whom the living be originally intend , sicken and die , determine upon quit crimson pantaloon and sable shako , for the black coat and white neckcloth of the english divine . the misfortune which occur at , occasion some slight disturbance to 's plan ; but although defeat upon one occasion , the resolute ex-dragoon be not dismay , and set to work to win a victory elsewhere . in Pen's second year pay a brief visit to he nephew , and be introduce to several of university friend -- the gentle and polite , the gallant and open - hear , the sly and witty ; the intrepid , who be call in the , from he opinion and the bravery of he blunder ; , style from the republican nature of he opinion ( he be of a dissent family from and a perfect Boanerge of debate ) ; - finally , who have at once take he place among the select of the university . major Pendennis , though he do not understand 's quotation , or quite appreciate 's thick shoe and dingy hand , be nevertheless delighted with the company assemble round he nephew , and highly approve of all the young man with the exception of that one who give himself the greatest air in the society , and affect most to have the manners of a man of the world . as he and sate at breakfast on the morning after the party in the room of the latter , the major give he opinion regard the young man , with whom he be in the greatest good - humour . he have regal they with some of he story , which , though not quite so fresh in ( where people have a diseased appetite for novelty in the way of anecdote ) , be entirely new at , and the lad hear they with that honest sympathy , that eager pleasure , that boisterous laughter , or that profound respect , so rare in the metropolis , and which must be so delightful to the professed raconteur . only once or twice during the telling of the anecdote 's face wear a look of scorn , or betraye by its expression that he be acquaint with the tale narrate . once he have the audacity to question the accuracy of one of the particular of a tale as give by major Pendennis , and give he own version of the anecdote , about which he know he be right , for he hear it openly talk of at the club by so - and - so and T'other who be present at the business . the youngster present look up with wonder at they associate , who da to interrupt the major -- few of they could appreciate that melancholy grace and politeness with which major Pendennis at once acced to
to 's version of the story , and thanke he for correcte he own error . they star on the next occasion of meeting , when speak in contemptuous term of old ; say everybody know old , regular old trencherman at , notorious old bore , regular old fogy . major Pendennis on he side like not a whit . these sympathy be pretty sure to be mutual amongst man and woman , and if , for my part , some kind friend tell I that such and such a man have be abuse I , I be almost sure , on my own side , that I have a misliking to such and such a man . we like or dislike each other , as folk like or dislike the odour of certain flowers , or the taste of certain dish or wine , or certain book . we can not tell why -- but as a general rule , all the reason in the world will not make we love , and as sure as we dislike he , we may be sure that he dislike we . so the major say , " , my boy , you dinner go off a merveille ; you do the honour very nicly -- you carve well -- I be glad you learn to carve -- it be do on the sideboard now in most good house , but be still a important point , and may aid you in middle - life -- young be a very amiable young man , quite the image of he dear mother ( whom I know as ) ; and 's republicanism will wear off -- it sit prettily enough on a young patrician in early life , though nothing be so loathsome among person of we rank -- Broadbent seem to have much eloquence and considerable read you friend be always delightful : but you acquaintance , , strike I as in all respects a most ineligible young man . " " bless my soul , sir , - ! " cry , laugh ; " why , sir , he be the most popular man of the university . we elect he of the the first week he come up -- have a special meeting on purpose -- he be of a excellent family -- , descende from 's , bear a harp in chief -- and motto of . " " a man may have a very good coat - of - arm , and be a tiger , my boy , " the major say , chipp he egg ; " that man be a tiger , mark my word -- a low man . I will lay a wager that he leave he regiment , which be a good one ( for a more respectable man than my friend never sate in a saddle ) , in bad odour . there be the unmistakable look of slang and bad habits about this . he frequent low gambling - house and billiard - hells , sir -- he haunt third - rate club -- I know he do . I know by he style . I never be mistaken in my man yet . do you remark the quantity of ring and jewellery he wear ? that person have write on he countenance , if any man ever have . Mark my word and avoid he . let we turn the conversation . the dinner be a leetle too fine , but I do not object to you make a few extra frais when you receive friend . of course , you do not do it often , and only those whom it be you interest to feter . the cutlet be excellent , and the souffle uncommonly light and good . the third bottle of champagne be not necessary ; but you have a good income , and as long as you keep within it , I shall not quarrel with you , my dear boy . " poor Pen ! the worthy uncle little know how often those dinner take place , while the reckless young delighte to show he hospitality and skill in gourmandise . there be no art than that ( so long to learn , so difficult to acquire , so impossible and beyond the means of many unhappy people ! ) about which boy be more anxious to have a air of knowingness . a taste and knowledge of wine and cookery appear to they to be the sign of a accomplished roue and manly gentleman . I like to see they wink at a glass of claret , as if they have a intimate acquaintance with it , and discuss a salmi -- poor boy -- it be only when they grow old that they know they know nothing of the science , when perhaps they conscience whisper they that the science be in itself little worth , and that a leg of mutton and content be as good as the dinner of pontiff . but little , in he character of , think it necessary to be a great judge and practitioner of dinner ; we have just say how the college cake respecte he , and shall soon have to deplore that that worthy man so blindly trust we Pen . in the third year of the lad 's residence at , he staircase be by no means encumber with dish - cover and dessert , and waiter carry in dish , and skips open ice champagne ; crowd of different sort of attendant , with face sulky or piteous , hung about the outer oak , and assail the unfortunate lad as he issue out of he den . do he guardian 's advice take any effect , or induce to avoid the society of the disreputable . what young man like in they companion be , what have
have get a great part of he own repute and popularity , a real or suppose knowledge of life . a man who have see the world , or can speak of it with a know air -- a roue , or , who have he adventur to relate , be sure of a admiring audience among boy . it be hard to confess , but so it be . we respect that sort of prowess . from we school - day we have be teach to admire it . be there five in the hundred , out of the hundred and hundred of English school - boy , bring up at we great school and college , that must not own at one time of they life to have read and like ? awful propagation of evil !-- the idea of it should make the man tremble who hold the pen , lest untruth , or impurity , or unjust anger , or unjust praise escape it . one such disease creature as this be enough to infect a whole colony , and the tutor of begin to find the moral tone of they college lower and they young man grow unruly , and almost ungentleman - like , soon after 's arrival at . the young magnate of the neighbour great College of 's , who regard , and in whose society he liv , be not take in by 's flashy graces , and rakish air of fashion . call he , and say he would live to be hang . , during he brief stay at the university with , with characteristic caution decline to say anything in the 's disfavour , but hint to that he have better have he for a partner at whist than play against he , and better back he at ecarte than bet on the other side . " you see , he play better than you do , , " be the astute young gentleman 's remark : " he play uncommon well , the captain do ; -- and , I would not take the odd too freely from he , if I be you . I do not think he be too flush of money , the be not . " but beyond these dark suggestion and generality , the cautious Foker could not be get to speak . not that he advice would have have more weight with a headstrong young man , than advice commonly have with a lad who be determined on pursue he own way . 's appetite for pleasure be insatiable , and he rush at it wherever it present itself , with a eagerness which bespeak he fiery constitution and youthful health . he call take pleasure " see life , " and quote well - know maxim from , from , from , to show that one should do all that might become a man . he bay fair to be utterly use up and a roue , in a few year , if he be to continue at the pace at which he be go . one night after a supper - party in college , at which and have be present , and at which a little quiet vingt - et - un have be play ( a amusement much pleasanter to man in they second and third year than the boisterous custom of singing song , which bring the proctor about the room , and which have grow quite stale by this time , every man have expend he budget ) -- as the man have take they cap and be go away , after no great loss or winnings on any side , playfully take up a green wine - glass from the supper - table , which have be destin to contain iced cup , but into which he insert something still more pernicious , namely a pair of dice , which the gentleman take out of he waistcoat - pocket , and put into the glass . then give the glass a graceful wave which show that he hand be quite experienced in the throwing of dice , he call sevend the main , and whisk the ivory cube gently on the table , sweep they up lightly again from the cloth , and repeat this process two or three time . the other man look on , , of course , among the number , who have never use the dice as yet , except to play a humdrum game of backgammon at home . , who have a good voice , begin to troll out the chorus from the , a then in great vogue , in which chorus many of the man join , especially , who be in very high spirit , have win a good number of shilling and half - crown at the vingt - et - un -- and presently , instead of go home , most of the party be seat round the table play at dice , the green glass go round from hand to hand until finally shiver it , after throw six mains . from that night plunge into the delight of the game of hazard , as eagerly as it be he custom to pursue any new pleasure . Dice can be play of morning as well as after dinner or supper . would come into Pen's room after breakfast , and it be astonish how quick the time pass as the bone be ratt . they have little quiet party with closed door , and devise a box line with felt , so that the dice should make no noise , and they tell - tale rattle not bring the sharp - eare tutor up to the room . , , and be once very nearly catch by , who , pass in the Quadrangle , think he hear the word "
" two to one on the caster , " through Pen's open window ; but when the tutor get into 's room he find the lad with three Homer before they , and say he be try to coach the two other man , and ask with great gravity what be the present condition of the , and whether it be navigable or no ? do not win much money in these transaction with , or indeed gain good of any kind except a knowledge of the odd at hazard , which he might have learn out of book . have other accomplishment which he exercise for Pen's benefit . the 's story have a great and unfortunate charm for , who be never tired of hear 's histories of garrison conquest , and of he feat in country -quarter .-- he have be at , and have plenty of legend about the , and the salon , and 's . he have go to the salon one night , after a dinner at the , " when we be all devilishly cut , by ; and on waking in the morning in my own room , I find myself with twelve thousand franc under my pillow , and a hundred and forty - nine Napoleon in one of my boot . be not that a coup , hay ? " the say . 's eye glisten with excitement as he hear this story . he respecte the man who could win such a sum of money . he sigh , and say it would set he all right . Macheath laugh , and tell he to drink another drop of . " I could tell you story much more wonderful than that , " he add ; and so indeed the could have do , without any further trouble than that of invention , with which portion of the poetic faculty nature have copiously endow he . he laugh to scorn Pen's love for , when he come to hear of that amour from , as he pretty soon do , for , we have say , be not averse to tell the story now to he confidential friend , and he and they be rather proud of the transaction . but take away all conceit on this head , not by demonstrate the folly of the lad 's passion for a uneducated woman much he senior in year , but by expose he absurd desire of gratify he passion in a legitimate way . " marry she , " say he , " you might as well marry ----, " and he name one of the most notorious actress on the stage . " she have not a shred of a character . " he know twenty man who be openly admirer of she , and name they , and the sum each have spend upon she . I know no kind of calumny more frightful or frequent than this which take away the character of woman , no man more reckless and mischievous than those who lightly use it , and no kind of coward more despicable than the people who invent these slander . be it , or not , a misfortune that a man , himself of a candid disposition , and dispose , like we friend , to blurt out the truth on all occasion , begin life by believe all that be say to he ? would it be better for a lad to be less trustful , and so less honest ? it require no small experience of the world to know that a man , who have no especial reason theretoo , be tell you lie . I be not sure whether it be not best to go on be du for a certain time . at all event , we honest have a natural credulity , which enable he to accept all statement which be make to he , and he take every one of 's figment as if they have be the most unquestioned fact of history . so 's account about pain and mortify exceedingly . if he have be asham of he passion before , -- what be he feeling regard it now , when the object of so much pure flame and adoration turn out to be only a worthless impostor , a impostor detect by all but he ? it never occur to to doubt the fact , or to question whether the story of a man who , like he new friend , never speak well of any woman , be likely to be true . one vacation , when have announce to he mother and uncle he intention not to go down , but stay at and read , be nevertheless induced to take a brief visit to in company with he friend . they put up at a hotel in , where have a tick , as he call it , and take the pleasure of the town very freely after the wont of young university man . still belong to a military club , whither he take to dine once or twice ( the young man would drive thither in a cab , trembl lest they should meet Major Pendennis on he beat in ) , and here be introduce to a number of gallant young fellow with spur and mustachio , with whom he drank pale - ale of morning and beat the town of a night . here he see a deal of life , indeed : nor in he career about the theatre and singing - house which these roaring young blades frequent , be he very likely to meet he guardian . one night , nevertheless , they be very near to each other : a plank only separate , who be in the box of the , from the major , who be in 's box ,
, along with that venerate nobleman . the be in the pride of she glory . Shave make a hit : that be , she have draw very good house for nearly a year , have star the province with great eclat , have come back to shine in with somewhat diminish lustre , and now be act with " ever increase attraction ; etc. , " " triumph of the good old british drama , " as the play - bill avow , to house in which there be plenty of room for anybody who want to see she . it be not the first time have see she , since that memorable day when the two have part in . in the previous year , when the town be make much of she , and the press laud she beauty , have find a pretext for come to in term - time , and have rush off to the theatre to see he old flame . he recollect it rather than renew it . he remember how ardently he use to be on the look - out at , when the speech before 's or 's entrance on the stage be make by the proper actor . now , as the actor speak , he have a sort of feeble thrill : as the house begin to thunder with applause , and enter with she old bow and sweep curtsey , feel a slight shock and blush very much as he look at she , and could not help think that all the house be regard he . he hardly hear she for the first part of the play : and he think with such rage of the humiliation to which she have subject he , that he begin to fancy he be jealous and in love with she still . but that illusion do not last very long . he run round to the stage - door of the theatre to see she if possible , but he do not succeed . she pass indeed under he nose with a female companion , but he do not know she , -- nor do she recognise he . the next night he come in late , and stay very quietly for the afterpiece , and on the third and last night of he stay in -- why , be go to dance at the ,-- ! and there be to be , which he admire of all thing in the world : so go to and . this time the illusion about she be quite gone . she be not less handsome , but she be not the same , somehow . the light be go out of she eye which use to flash there , or no longer be dazzl by it . the rich voice speak as of old , yet it do not make Pen's bosom thrill as formerly . he think he could recognise the brogue underneath : the accent seem to he coarse and false . it annoye he to hear the same emphasis on the same word , only utter a little louder : worse than this , it annoye he to think that he should ever have mistaken that loud imitation for , or melt at those mechanical sob and sigh . he feel that it be in another life almost , that it be another man who have so madly love she . he be asham and bitterly humiliate , and very lonely . ah , poor ! the delusion be better than the truth sometimes , and fine dream than dismal waking . they go and have a uproarious supper that night , and have a fine headache the next morning , with which he go back to , have spend all he ready money . as all this narrative be take from Pen's own confession , so that the reader may be assure of the truth of every word of it , and as Pen himself never have any accurate notion of the manner in which he spend he money , and plunge himself in much deeper pecuniary difficulty , during he luckless residence at , it be , of course , impossible for I to give any accurate account of he involvement , beyond that general notion of he way of life , which have be sketch a few page back . he do not speak too hardly of the roguery of the university tradesman , or of those in whom he honoure with he patronage at the outset of he career . even , the money - lender , to whom introduce he , and with whom he have various transaction , in which the young rascal 's signature appear upon stamped paper , treat he , accord to Pen's own account , with forbearance , and never mulct he of more than a hundred per cent . the old college - cake , he fervent admirer , make he a private bill , offer to send he in dinner up to the very last , and never would have press he account to he die day . there be that kindness and frankness about , which win most people who come in contact with he , and which , if it render he a easy prey to rogue , get he , perhaps , more goodwill than he merit from many honest man . it be impossible to resist he good - nature , or , in he worst moment , not to hope for he rescue from utter ruin . at the time of he full career of university pleasure , he would leave the gayest party to go and sit with a sick friend . he never know the difference between small and great in the treatment of he acquaintance , however much the unlucky lad 's taste , which be of the sumptuous
sumptuous order , lead he to prefer good society ; he be only too ready to share he guinea with a poor friend , and when he get money have a irresistible propensity for paying , which he never could conquer through life . in he third year at college , the dun begin to gather awfully round about he , and there be a levee at he oak which scandalise the tutor , and would have scared many a stouter heart . with some of these he use to battle , some he would bully ( under 's direction , who be a master in this art , though he take a degree in no other ) , and some deprecate . and it be report of he that little , the daughter of a certain poor gilder and frame - maker , whom have think fit to employ , and who have make a number of beautiful frame for he fine print , come to with a piteous tale that she father be ill with ague , and that there be a execution in they house , Pen in a anguish of remorse rush away , pawn he grand watch and every single article of jewellery except two old gold sleeve - button , which have belong to he father , and rush with the proceed to 's shop , where , with tear in he eye , and the deepest repentance and humility , he ask the poor tradesman 's pardon . this , young gentleman , be not tell as a instance of virtue , but rather of he weakness . it would have be much more virtuous to have have no print at all . he still stand for the bauble which he sell in order to pay 's bill , and he mother have cruelly to pinch herself in order to discharge the jeweller 's account , so that she be in the end the sufferer by the lad 's impertinent fancie and folly . we be not present Pen to you as a hero or a model , only as a lad , who , in the midst of a thousand vanity and weakness , have as yet some generous impulse , and be not altogether dishonest . we have say it be to the scandal of the tutor that Pen's extravagance became know : from the manner in which he enter college , the associate he keep , and the introduction of and the major , for a long time think that he pupil be a man of large property , and wonder rather that he only wear a plain gown . once on go up to to the levee with a address from he 's of , have see Major Pendennis at 's in conversation with two knights of the garter , in the carriage of one of whom the dazzle tutor see the major whisk away after the levee . he ask to wine the instant he come back , let he off from chapel and lecture more than ever , and feel perfectly sure that he be a young gentleman of large estate . thus , he be thunderstrike when he hear the truth , and receive a dismal confession from . he university debt be large , and the tutor have nothing to do , and of course do not acquaint he , with he debt . what man ever do tell all when presse by he friend about he liability ? the tutor learn enough to know that be poor , that he have spend a handsome , almost a magnificent allowance , and have raise around he such a fine crop of debt , as it would be very hard work for any man to mow down ; for there be no plant that grow so rapidly when once it have take root . perhaps it be because she be so tender and good that be terrify lest he mother should know of he sins . " I can not bear to break it to she , " he say to the tutor in a agony of grief . " o ! sir , I have be a villain to she " -- and he repent , and he wish he have the time to come over again , and he ask himself , " why , why do he uncle insist upon the necessity of live with great people , and in how much do all he grand acquaintance profit he ? " they be not shy , but think they be , and slink from they during he last term at college . he be as gloomy as a death 's - head at party , which he avoid of he own part , or to which he young friend soon cease to invite he . everybody know that be " hard up . " that man , who could pay nobody , and who be obliged to go down after three term , be he ruin , the man say . he melancholy figure might be see shirking about the lonely quadrangles in he batter old cap and tear gown , and he who have be the pride of the university but a year before , the man whom all the young one love to look at , be now the object of conversation at freshmen 's wine - party , and they speak of he with wonder and awe . at last come the . many a young man of he year whose hob - nail shoe have deride , and whose face or coat he have caricature -- many a man whom he have treat with scorn in the lecture - room or crush with he eloquence in the debating - club -- many of he own set who have not half he brain , but a little regularity and constancy of
of occupation , take high place in the honour or pass with decent credit . and where in the list be the superb , Pen the wit and dandy , Pen the poet and orator ? ah , where be the widow 's darling and sole pride ? let we hide we head , and shut up the page . the list come out ; and a dreadful rumour rush through the university , that Pendennis of be pluck . after everybody who have the least knowledge of Heraldry and the Peerage must be aware that the noble family of which , as we know , be a member , bear for a crest , a nest full of little pelican peck at the ensanguined bosom of a big maternal bird , which plentifully supply the little wretch with the nutriment on which , accord to the heraldic legend , they be suppose to be bring up . very likely female pelican like so to bleed under the selfish little beak of they young one : it be certain that woman do . there must be some sort of pleasure , which we men do not understand , which accompany the pain of be scarify , and indeed I believe some woman would rather actually so suffer than not . they like sacrifice themselves in behalf of the object which they instinct teach they to love . be it for a reckless husband , a dissipated son , a darling scapegrace of a brother , how ready they heart be to pour out they best treasure for the benefit of the cherish person ; and what a deal of this sort of enjoyment be we , on one side , ready to give the soft creature ! there be scarce a man that read this , but have administer pleasure in this fashion to he womankind , and have treat they to the luxury of forgive he . they do not mind how they live themselves ; but when the prodigal come home they make a rejoicing , and kill the fatted calf for he : and at the very first hint that the sinner be return , the kind angels prepare they festival , and and forgiveness go smile out to welcome he . I hope it may be so always for all : if we have only to look to , help we ! during the latter part of Pen's residence at the of , he uncle 's partiality have greatly increase for the lad . the major be proud of , who have high spirits , frank manners , a good person , and high gentleman - like bearing . it please the old bachelor to see walk with the young patrician of he university , and he ( who be never kny to entertain he friend , and whose stinginess have pass into a sort of byword among some wag at the , who envy he many engagement , and do not choose to consider he poverty ) be charme to give he nephew and the young lord snug little dinner at he lodging , and to regale they with good claret , and he very best bon mot and story : some of which would be injure by the repetition , for the major 's manner of tell they be incomparably neat and careful ; and other , whereor the repetition would do good to nobody . he pay he court to they parent through the young man , and to himself as it be by they company . he make more than one visit to , where the young fellow be amuse by entertaine the old gentleman , and give party and breakfast and fete , partly to joke he and partly to do he honour . he ply they with he story . he make himself juvenile and hilarious in the company of the young lord . he go to hear at a grand debate at the union , crow and cheer , and rap he stick in chorus with the cheer of the man , and be astounde at the boy 's eloquence and fire . he think he have get a young for a nephew . he have a almost paternal fondness for . he write to the lad letter with playful advice and the news of the town . he brag about at he club , and introduce he with pleasure into he conversation ; say , that , , the young fellow be put the old one to the wall ; that the lad who be come up , young , a friend of my boy , young , a chum of my scapegrace , etc. , would make a greater figure in the world than even they fathers have do before they . he ask permission to bring to a grand fete at ; see he with ineffable satisfaction dancing with the sister of the young nobleman before mention ; and give himself as much trouble to procure card of invitation for the lad to some good house , as if he have be a mamma with a daughter to marry , and not a old half - pay officer in a wig . and he boast everywhere of the boy 's great talents , and remarkable oratorical power ; and of the brilliant degree he be go to take . would take he on he embassy , or the would bring he in for one of he borough , he write over and over again to ; who , for she part , be too ready to believe anything that anybody choose to say in favour of she son . and all this pride and affection of uncle and mother have be trample down by Pen's wicked extravagance and idleness ! I do not envy 's feeling ( as the phrase be ) , as he think of
of what he have do . he have sleep , and the tortoise have win the race . he have mar at its outset what might have be a brilliant career . he have dip ungenerously into a generous mother 's purse ; basely and recklessly spild she little cruse . o ! it be a coward hand that could strike and rob a creature so tender . and if feel the wrong which he have do to other , be we to suppose that a young gentleman of he vanity do not feel still more keenly the shame he have bring upon himself ? let we be assure that there be no more cruel remorse than that ; and no groan more piteous than those of wounded self - love . like 's friend , the senior , who bow to the audience from he box at the play , because he and the king happen to enter the theatre at the same time , only with a fatuity by no means so agreeable to himself , poor feel perfectly convinced that all would remark the absence of he name from the examination - list , and talk about he misfortune . he wounded tutor , he many dun , the skip and bed - maker who wait upon he , the undergraduates of he own time and the year below he , whom he have patronise or scorn -- how could he bear to look any of they in the face now ? he rush to he room , into which he shut himself , and there he penn a letter to he tutor , full of thanks , regards , remorse , and despair , request that he name might be take off the college book , and intimat a wish and expectation that death would speedily end the woe of the disgrac . then he slink out , scarcely know whither he go , but mechanically take the unfrequented little lane by the back of the college , until he clear the university precinct , and get down to the bank of the river , now desert , but so often alive with the boat -race , and the crowd of cheering gownsman , he wander on and on , until he find himself at some mile ' distance from , or rather be find by some acquaintance leave that city . as go up a hill , a drizzl rain beat in he face , and he rag gown fly behind he -- for he have not divest himself of he academical garment since the morning -- a postchaise come ratt up the road , on the box of which a servant be seat , whilst within , or rather half out of the carriage window , sate a young gentleman smoke a cigar , and loudly encourage the postboy . it be we young acquaintance of , who have get he degree , and be drive homeward in triumph in he yellow postchaise . he catch a sight of the figure , madly gesticulat as he work up the hill , and of poor Pen's pale and ghastly face as the chaise whir by he . " ! " roar to the postboy , and the horse stop in they mad career , and the carriage pull up some fifty yard before . he presently hear he own name shoute , and beheld the upper half of the body of thrust out of the side - window of the vehicle , and beckon vehemently towards it . stop , hesitat -- nod he head fiercely , and point onwards , as if desirous that the postillion should proceed . he do not speak : but he countenance must have look very desperate , for young , have star at he with a expression of blank alarm , jump out of the carriage presently , run towards hold out he hand , and grasp Pen's , say , " I say -- hullo , old boy , where be you go , and what be the row now ? " " I be go where I deserve to go , " say , with a imprecation . " this be not the way , " say , smile . " this be the Fenbury road . I say , , do not take on because you be pluck . it be nothing when you be use to it . I have be pluck three time , old boy -- and after the first time I do not care . glad it be over , though . you will have better luck next time . " look at he early acquaintance , -- who have be pluck , who have be rusticate , who have only , after repeat failure , learn to read and write correctly , and who , in spite of all these drawback , have attaine the honour of a degree . " this man have pass , " he think , " and I have fail ! " it be almost too much for he to bear . " good - bye , , " say he ; " I be very glad you be through . do not let I keep you ; I be in a hurry -- I be go to tow to - night . " " , " say . " this be not the way to tow ; this be the road , I tell you . " " I be just go to turn back , " say . " all the coach be full with the man go down , " say . wince . " you have not get a place for a ten - pound note . get into my yellow ; I will drop you at , where you have a chance of the mail . I will lend you a
a hat and a coat ; I have get lot . come along ; jump in , old boy -- go it , leather ! " -- and in this way find himself in 's postchaise , and ride with that gentleman as far as the at , fifteen mile from ; where the mail change horse , and where get a place on to . the next day there be a immense excitement in , , where , for some time , a rumour prevail , to the terror of Pen's tutor and tradesman , that Pendennis , madden at lose he degree , have make away with himself - - a battered cap , in which he name be almost discernible , together with a seal bear he crest of a eagle look at a now extinct sun , have be find three mile on the Fenbury road , near a mill - stream , and , for four - and - twenty hour , it be suppose that poor have fling himself into the stream , until letter arrive from he , bear the post-mark . the mail reach at the dreary hour of five ; and he hasten to the inn at , at which he be accustom to put up , where the ever - wakeful porter admit he , and show he to a bed . look hard at the man , and wonder whether know he be pluck ? when in bed be could not sleep there . he toss about until the appearance of the dismal daylight , when he spring up desperately , and walk off to he uncle 's lodging in ; where the maid , who be scour the step , look up suspiciously at he , as he come with a unshaven face , and yesterday 's linen . he think she know of he mishap , too . " good evens ! , what have appen , sir ? " , the valet , ask , who have just arrange the well - brush clothes and shiny boot at the door of he master 's bedroom , and be carry in he wig to the major . " I want to see my uncle , " he cry , in a ghastly voice , and fling himself down on a chair . back before the pale and desperate - look young man , with terrify and wonder glance , and disappear in he master 's apartment . the major put he head out of the bedroom door , as soon as he have he wig on . " what ? examination over ? senior Wrangler , double first class , hay ? say the old gentleman -- I will come directly ; " and the head disappear . " they do not know what have happen , " groan ; " what will they say when they know all ? " Pen have be stand with he back to the window , and to such a dubious light as enjoy of a foggy morning , so that he uncle could not see the expression of the young man 's countenance , or the look of gloom and despair which even have remark . but when the major come out of he dressing - room neat and radiant , and proceed by faint odour from 's shop , from which emporium major Pendennis 's wig and he pocket - handkerchief get they perfume , he hold out one of he hand to , and be about address he in he cheery high - ton voice , when he catch sight of the boy 's face at length , and drop he hand , say , " ! , what be the matter ? " " you will see it in the papers at breakfast , sir , " say . " see what ? " " my name be not there , sir . " " hang it , why should it be ? " ask the major , more perplexed . " I have lose everything , sir , " Pen groan out ; " my honou be go ; I be ruin irretrievably ; I can not go back to . " " lose you honour ? " scream out the major . " heaven alive ! you do not mean to say you have show the white feather ? " laugh bitterly at the word feather , and repeat it . " no , it be not that , sir . I be not afraid of be shot ; I wish to anybody would . I have not get my degree . I -- I be pluck , sir . " the major have hear of plucking , but in a very vague and cursory way , and conclude that it be some ceremony perform corporally upon rebellious university youth . " I wonder you can look I in the face after such a disgrace , sir , " he say ; " I wonder you submit to it as a gentleman . " " I could not help it , sir . I do my classical papers well enough it be those infernal mathematics , which I have always neglect . " " be it -- be it do in public , sir ? " the major say . " what ? " " the -- the plucking ? " ask the guardian , look anxiously in the face . perceive the error under which he guardian be labour , and in the midst of he misery the blunder cause the poor wretch a faint smile , and serve to bring down the conversation from the tragedy - key , in which have be dispose to carry it on . he explain to he uncle that he have go in to pass he examination , and fail . on which the major say , that
that though he have expect far better thing of he nephew , there be no great misfortune in this , and no dishonour as far as he see , and that must try again . " I again at , " thought , " after such a humiliation as that ! " he feel that , except he go down to burn the place , he could not enter it . but it be when he come to tell he uncle of he debt that the other felt surprise and anger most keenly , and break out in speech most severe upon , which the lad bore , as best might , without flinch . he have determine to make a clean breast , and have form a full , true , and complete list of all he bill and liability at the university , and in . they consist of various item , such as : . Oxbridge do . Oxbridge do . for horse . , for shirt and glove . . . book . . binding . , for dessert . and . . hotel bill in . in . Sundries . all which item the reader may fill in at he pleasure -- such account have be inspect by the parent of many university youth , -- and it appear that Pen's bill in all amount to about seven hundred pound ; and , furthermore , it be calculate that he have have more than twice that sum of ready money during he stay at . this sum he have spend , and for it have to show -- what ? " you need not press a man who be down , sir , " say to he uncle , gloomily . " I know very well , sir , how wick and idle I have be . my mother will not like to see I dishonoure , sir , " he continue , with he voice fail ; " and I know she will pay these account . but I shall ask she for no more money . " " as you like , sir , " the major say . " you be of age , and my hand be washed of you affair . but you can not live without money , and have no means of make it that I see , though you have a fine talent in spend it , and it be my belief that you will proceed as you have begin , and ruin you mother before you be five year older .-- good morning ; it be time for I to go to breakfast . my engagement will not permit I to see you much during the time that you stay in . I presume that you will acquaint you mother with the news which you have just convey to I . " and pull on he hat , and trembl in he limb somewhat , major Pendennis walk out of he lodging before he nephew , and go ruefully off to take he accustom corner at the club . he see the examination - list in the morning papers , and read over the name , not understand the business , with mournful accuracy . he consult various old fogy of he acquaintance , in the course of the day , at he club ; , a Dean , various civilian ; and , as it be call , " take they opinion , " show to some of they the amount of he nephew 's debt , which he have dot down on the back of a card , and ask what be to be do , and whether such debt be not monstrous , preposterous ? what be to be do ?-- there be nothing for it but to pay . and the other tell the major of young man who owed twice as much -- five time as much -- as , and with no means at all to pay . the consultation , and calculation , and opinion , comfort the major somewhat . after all , he be not to pay . but he think bitterly of the many plan he have form to make a man of he nephew , of the sacrifice which he have make , and of the manner in which he be disappoint . and he write off a letter to , inform he of the direful event which have take place , and begge the Doctor to break they to Helen . for the orthodox old gentleman preserve the regular routine in all thing , and be of opinion that it be more correct to " break " a piece of bad news to a person by means of a ( possibly maladroit and unfeeling ) messenger , than to convey it simply to its destination by a note . so the major write to , and then go out to dinner , one of the saddest man in any dining - room that day . , too , write he letter , and skulk about street for the rest of the day , fancie that everybody be look at he and whisper to he neighbour , " that be of , who be pluck yesterday . " he letter to he mother be full of tenderness and remorse : he weep the bitterest tear over it -- and the repentance and passion soothe he to some degree . he see a party of roaring young blades from in the coffee - room of he hotel , and slink away from they , and pace the street . he remember , he say , the print which he see hang up at 's window in the rain , and a book which he read at a stall near the Temple : at night he go to the pit of the play , and see , but
but he do not in the least recollect in what piece . on the second day there come a kind letter from he tutor , contain many grave and appropriate remark upon the event which have befall he , but strongly urge not to take he name off the university book , and to retrieve a disaster which , everybody know , be owe to he own carelessness alone , and which he might repair by a month 's application . he say he have order Pen's skip to pack up some trunk of the young gentleman 's wardrobe , which duly arrive with fresh copy of all bill lay on the top . on the third day there arrive a letter from home ; which read in he bedroom , and the result of which be that he fall down on he knee with he head in the bedclothes , and then pray out he heart and humble himself ; and have go downstairs and eat a immense breakfast he sally forth and take he place at the and , , by the coach for that evening . 's a letter as the major wrote of course , send to , and he go off with that alacrity which a good man show when he have disagreeable news to commit . he wish the deed be do , and do quickly . he be sorry , but que voulez -vous ? the tooth must be take out , and he have you in the chair , and it be surprising with what courage and vigour of wrist he apply the forcep . perhaps he would not be quite so active or eager if it be he tooth ; but , in fine , it be you duty to have it out . so the doctor , have read the epistle out to and , with many damnatory comment upon the young scapegrace who be goin deeper and deeper into perdition , leave those lady to spread the news through the Clavering society , which they do with they accustomed accuracy and despatch , and strode over to Fairoaks to break the intelligence to the widow . she have the news already . she have read Pen's letter , and it have relieve she somehow . a gloomy presentiment of evil have be hang over she for many , many month past . she know the worst now , and she darling boy be come back to she repentant and tender - hear . do she want more ? all that the rector could say ( and he remark be both dictate by common - sense , and make respectable by antiquity ) could not bring Helen to feel any indignation or particular unhappiness , except that the boy should be unhappy . what be this degree that they make such a outcry about , and what good would it do ? why do and he uncle insist upon send the boy to a place where there be so much temptation to be risk , and so little good to be win ? why do not they leave he at home with he mother ? as for he debt , of course they must be pay ; -- he debt !--be not he father 's money all he , and have not he a right to spend it ? in this way the widow meet the virtuous doctor , and all the arrow of he indignation somehow take no effect upon she gentle bosom . for some time past , a agreeable practice , know since time ever so ancient , by which brother and sister be will not to exhibit they affection towards one another , and in which and he little sister have be accustom to indulge pretty frequently in they childish day , have be give up by the mutual consent of those two individual . come back from college after a absence from home of some month , in place of the simple girl whom he have leave behind he , find a tall , slim , handsome young lady , to whom he could not somehow proffer the kiss which he have be in the habit of administering previously , and who receive he with a gracious curtsey and a proffer hand , and with a great blush which rise up to the cheek , just upon the very spot which yoing have be use to salute . I be not good at description of female beauty ; and , indeed , do not care for it in the least ( think that goodness and virtue be , of course , far more advantageous to a young lady than any mere fleeting charms of person and face ) , and so shall not attempt any particular delineation of bell at the age of sixteen year . at that age she have attain she present altitude of five foot four inch , so that she be call tall and gawky by some , and a Maypole by other , of she own sex , who prefer littler woman . but if she be a Maypole , she have beautiful ros about she head , and it be a fact that many swain be dispose to dance round she . she be ordinarily pale , with a faint rise tinge in she cheek ; but they flush up in a minute when occasion call , and continue so blushing ever so long , the ros remain after the emotion have pass away which have summon those pretty flower into existence . she eye have be describe as very large from she earliest childhood , and retain that characteristic in later life . good -natured critic ( always female ) say that she be in the habit of make play with those eye , and ogl the gentleman and lady in she company ; but the fact be ,
, that have make they so to shine and to look , and they could no more help so look and shine than one star can help be brighter than another . it be doubtless to mitigate they brightness that 's eye be provide with two pair of veil in the shape of the longest and finest black eyelash , so that , when she close she eye , the same people who find fault with those orb , say that she want to show she eyelash off ; and , indeed , I daresay that to see she asleep would have be a pretty sight . as for she complexion , that be nearly as brilliant as 's , and without the powder which she ladyship use . she nose must be leave to the reader 's imaginaton : if she mouth be rather large ( as avers , who , but for she know appetite , one would think could not swallow anything larger than a button ) everybody allow that she smile be charme , and show off a set of pearly tooth , whilst she voice be so low and sweet , that to hear it be like listen to sweet music . because she be in the habit of wear very long dress , people of course say that she foot be not small : but it may be that they be of the size become she figure , and it do not follow , because Mrs . be always put she foot out , that all other lady should be perpetually bring theirs on the tapis . in fine , at the age of sixteen , be a sweet young lady . many thousand of such be to be find , let we hope , in this country where there be no lack of goodness , and modesty , and purity , and beauty . now , since she have learn to think for herself ( and in the past two year she mind and she person have both develop themselves considerably ) have only be half pleased with Pen's general conduct and bear . he letter to he mother at home have become of late very rare and short . it be in vain that the fond widow urge how constant 's occupations and study be and how many he engagement . " it be better that he should lose a prize " say " than forget he mother ; and indeed , mamma , I do not see that he get many prize . why do not he come home and stay with you , instead of pass he vacation at he great friend ' fine house ? there be nobody there will love he half so much as -- as you do . " " as I do only , ? " sigh out . declare stoutly that she do not love Pen a bit , when he do not do he duty to he mother nor would she be convince by any of 's fond argument , that the boy must make he way in the world ; that he uncle be most desirous that should cultivate the acquaintance of person who be likely to befriend he in life ; that man have a thousand tie and call which woman could not understand , and so forth . perhaps Hel no more believe in these excuse than she adopted daughter do ; but she try to believe that she believe they , and comforte herself with the maternal infatuation . and that be a point whereon I suppose many a gentleman have reflect , that , do what we will , we be pretty sure of the woman 's love that once have be ours ; and that that untiring tenderness and forgiveness never fail we . also , there have be that freedom , not to say audacity , in 's latter talk and way , which have shocke and displease . not that he ever offend she by rudeness , or address to she a word which she ought not to hear , for be a gentleman , and by nature and education polite to every woman high and low ; but he speak lightly and laxly of woman in general ; be less courteous in he action than in he word --neglectful in sundry way , and in many of the little office of life . it offend that he should smoke he horrid pipe in the house ; that he should refuse to go to church with he mother , or on walk or visit with she , and be find yawning over he novel in he dressing - gow , when the gentle widow return from those duty . the hero of 's early infancy , about whom she have pass so many , many night talk with ( who recit endless story of the boy 's virtue , and love , and bravery , when he be away at school ) , be a very different person from the young man whom now she know ; bold and brilliant , sarcastic and defiant , seem to scorn the simple occupations or pleasure , or even devotion , of the woman with whom he liv , and whom he quit on such light pretext . the affair , too , when come to hear of it ( which she do first by some sarcastic allusion of major Pendennis , when on a visit to Fairoaks , and then from they neighbour at , who have plenty of information to give she on this head ) , vastly shock and outrage . a Pendennis fl himself away on such a woman as that ! 's boy gallop away from home , day after day , to fall on he knee to a actress , and drink with she horrid father ! a good son want to bring
bring such a man and such a woman into he house , and set she over he mother ! " I would have run away , mamma ; I would , if I have have to walk barefoot through the snow , " say . " and you would have leave I too , then ? " answer ; on which , of course , withdraw she previous observation , and the two woman rush into each other 's embrace with that warmth which belong to both they nature , and which characterise not a few of they sex . come all come all the indignation of about 's passion ? perhaps she do not know , that , if man throw themselves away upon woman , woman throw themselves away upon man , too ; and that there be no more accounting for love , than for any other physical liking or antipathy : perhaps she have be misinform by the Clavering people and old , who be vastly bitter against , especially since he impertinent behaviour to the and since the wretch have smoke cigar in church - time : perhaps , finally , she be jealous ; but this be a vice in which it be say the lady very seldom indulge . albeit she be angry with , against he mother she have no such feeling ; but devote herself to Hel with the utmost force of she girlish affection --such affection as woman , whose heart be disengage , be apt to bestow upon the near female friend . it be devotion -- it be passion -- it be all sort of fondness and folly ; it be a profusion of caress , tender epithets and endearment , such as it do not become sober historian with beard to narrate . do not let we men despise these instinct because we can not feel they . these woman be make for we comfort and delectation , gentleman , -- with all the rest of the minor animal . but as soon as hear that be unfortunate and unhappy , all she wrath against he straightway vanish , and give place to the most tender and unreasonable compassion . he be the Pen of old day once more restore to she , the frank and affectionate , the generous and tender - hear . she at once take side with against , when he outcry at the enormity of transgression . debts ? what be he debt ? they be a trifle ; he have be throw into expensive society by he uncle 's order , and of course be obliged to live in the same manner as the young gentleman whose company he frequent . Disgrace by not get he degree ? the poor boy be ill when he go in for the examination : he could not think of he mathematics and stuff on account of those very debt which oppress he ; very likely some of the odious tutor and master be jealous of he , and have favourite of they own whom they want to put over he head . other people dislike he , and be cruel to he , and be unfair to he , she be very sure . and so , with flush cheek and eye bright with anger , this young creature reason ; and she go up and seize 's hand , and kiss she in the Doctor 's presence , and she look brave the Doctor , and seem to ask how he da to say a word against she darling mother 's ? when that divine take he leave , not a little discomfit and amaze at the pertinacious obstinacy of the woman , repeat she embrace and argument with tenfold fervour to , who feel that there be a great deal of cogency in most of the latter . there must be some jealousy against . she feel quite sure that he have offend some of the examiner , who have take a mean revenge of he -- nothing more likely . altogether , the announcement of the misfortune vex these two lady very little indeed . , who be plunge in he shame and grief in , and tear with great remorse for think of he mother 's sorrow , would have wonder , have he see how easily she bear the calamity . indeed , calamity be welcome to woman if they think it will bring truant affection home again : and if you have reduce you mistress to a crust , depend upon it that she will not repine , and only take a very little bit of it for herself , provide you will eat the remainder in she company . and directly the doctor be gone , order fire to be light in 's room , and he bed to be air ; and have these preparations complete by the time have finish a most tender and affectionate letter to Pen : when the girl , smile fondly , take she mamma by the hand , and lead she into those apartment where the fire be blazing so cheerfully , and there the two kind creature sate down on the bed , and talk about ever so long . add a postscript to 's letter , in which she call he she dearest , and bay he come home instantly , with two of the handsomest dash under the word , and be happy with he mother and he affectionate sister . in the middle of the night -- as these two lady , after read they bible a great deal during the evening , and after take just a look into Pen' room as they pass to they own -- in the middle of the night , I say , , whose head not unfrequently choose to occupy that pillow which the nightcap of the late Pendennis have
have be accustom to press , cry out suddenly , " , be you awake ? " stir and say , " yes , I be awake . " the truth be , though she have be lie quite still and silent , she have not be asleep one instant , but have be look at the night - lamp in the chimney , and have be think of for hour and hour . then ( who have be act with similar hypocrisy , and lie , occupy with she own thought , as motionless as 's brooch , with Pen's and 's hair in it , on the frilled white pincushion on the dressing - table ) begin to tell of a notable plan which she have be form in she busy little brain ; and by which all Pen's embarrassment would be make to vanish in a moment , and without the least trouble to anybody . " you know , mamma , " this young lady say , " that I have be live with you for ten year , during which time you have never take any of my money , and have be treat I just as if I be a charity girl . now , this obligation have offend I very much , because I be proud and do not like to be beholden to people . and as , if I have go to school -- only I would not -- it must have cost I at least fifty pound a year , it be clear that I owe you fifty time ten pound , which I know you have put in the bank at for I , and which do not belong to I a bit . now , to - morrow we will go to , and see that nice old , with the bald head , and ask he for it , -- not for he head , but for the five hundred pound : and I dare say he will send you two more , which we will save and pay back ; and we will send the money to , who can pay all he debt without hurt anybody and then we will live happy ever after . " what reply to this speech need not be repeat , as the widow 's answer be make up of a great number of incoherent ejaculation , embrace , and other irrelative matter . but the two woman sleep well after that talk ; and when the night - lamp go out with a splutter , and the sun rise gloriously over the purple hill , and the bird begin to s and pipe cheerfully amidst the leafless tree and glisten evergreens on Fairoak lawn , wake too , and as she look at the sweet face of the girl sleep beside she , she lip part with a smile , blush on she cheek , she spotless bosom heaive and fall with gentle undulation , as if happy dream be swee over it -- 's mother feel happy and grateful beyond all power of word , save such as pious woman offer up to the beneficent Dispenser of love and mercy -- in whose honour a chorus of such praise be constantly rise up all round the world . although it be and rather cold weather , so sincere be Pen's remorse , and so determine he plan of economy , that he would not take a inside place in the coach , but sate up behind with he friend the , who remember he former liberality , and lent he plenty of great - coat . perhaps it be the cold that make he knee tremble as he get down at the lodge - gate , or it may be that he be agitate at the notion of see the kind creature for whose love he have make so selfish a return . be in wait to receive he master 's baggage , but he appear in a fustian jacket , and no longer wear he livery of drab and blue . " I 'se garner and stable man , and live in the ladge now , " this worthy man remark , with a grin of welcome to , and something of a blush ; but instantly as turn the corner of the shrubbery and be out of eye - shot of the coach , make she appearance , she face beam with love and forgiveness -- for forgive be what some woman love best of all . we may be sure that the widow , have a certain other object in view , have lose no time in writing off to a account of the noble , the magnanimous , the magnificent offer of , fill up she letter with a profusion of benediction upon both she child . it be probably the knowledge of this money - obligation which cause to blush very much when he see , who be in waiting in the hall , and who this time , and for this time only , break through the little arrangement of which we have speak , as have subsist between she and for the last few year ; but the truth be , there have be a great deal too much say about kiss in the present chapter . so the come home , and the fatted calf be kill for he , and he be make as happy as two simple woman could make he . no allusion be make to the mishap , or question ask as to he farther proceedings , for some time . but debate these anxiously in he own mind , and up in he own room , where he pass much time in cogitation . a few day after he come home , he ride to on he horse , and come back on the top of
of the coach . he then inform he mother that he have leave the horse to be sell ; and when that operation be effect , he hand she over the cheque , which she , and possibly Pen himself , thought be a act of uncommon virtue and self - denial , but which pronounce to be only strict justice . he rarely mention the loan which she have make , and which , indeed , have be accept by the widow with certain modification ; but once or twice , and with great hesitation and stammering , he allude to it , and thanke she ; but it evidently pain he vanity to be beholden to the orphan for succour . he be wild to find some means of repay she . he leave off drink wine , and betake himself , but with great moderation , to the refreshment of whisky - and -water . he give up cigar -smok ; but it must be confess that of late year he have like pipe and tobacco as well or even better , so that this sacrifice be not a very severe one . he fall asleep a great deal after dinner when he join the lady in the drawing - room , and be certainly very moody and melancholy . he watch the coach with great interest , walk in to read the papers at Clavering assiduously , dine with anybody who would ask he ( and the widow be glad that he should have any entertainment in they solitary place ) , and play a good deal at cribbage with . he avoid , who , in he turn , whenever pass , give he very severe look from under he shovel - hat . he go to church with he mother , however , very regularly , and read prayer for she at home to the little household . always humble , it be greatly diminish now : a couple of maid do the work of the house of Fairoaks : the silver dish - cover never see the light at all . put on he livery to go to church , and assert he dignity on , but it be only for form 's sake . he be gardener and out - door man , vice , resign . there be but little fire in Fairoaks kitchen , and and the maid drank they evening beer there by the light , of a single candle . all this be do , and the state of thing do not increas he cheerfulness . for some time say no power on earth could induce he to go back to again , after he failure there ; but one day say to he , with many blush , that she think , as some sort of reparation , of punishment on himself for he -- for he idleness , he ought to go back and get he degree , if he could fetch it by do so ; and so back go . a plucked man be a dismal be in a university ; belong to no set of man there , and own by no one . feel himself pluck indeed of all the fine feather which he have win during he brilliant year , and rarely appear out of he college ; regularly go to morn chapel , and shutt himself up in he room of night , away from the noise and supper of the undergraduates . there be no dun about he door , they be all pay -- scarcely any card be leave there . the man of he year have take they degree , and be gone . he go into a second examination , and pass with perfect ease . he be somewhat more easy in he mind when he appear in he bachelor 's gown . on he way back from he pay a visit to he uncle in ; but the old gentleman receive he with very cold look , and would scarcely give he he forefinger to shake . he call a second time , but , the valet , say he master be from home . come back to , and to he book and to he idleness , and loneliness and despair . he commence several tragedy , and write many copy of verse of a gloomy cast . he form plan of reading and break they . he think about enlisting -- about the spanish legion -- about a profession . he chaf against he captivity , and curse the idleness which have cause it . say he be break he heart , and be sad to see he prostration . as soon as they could afford it , he should go abroad -- he should go to -- he should be free from the dull society of two poor woman . it be dull -- very , certainly . the tender widow 's habitual melancholy seem to deepen into a sadder gloom ; and see with alarm that the dear friend become every year more languid and weary , and that she pale cheek grow more wan . the inmate of Fairoak be drowsily pursue this humdrum existence , while the great house upon the hill , on the other side of the , be shak off the slumber in which it have lain during the life of two generation of master , and give extraordinary sign of renew liveliness . just about the time of Pen's little mishap , and when he be so absorb in the grief occasion by that calamity as to take no notice of event which befell person less interesting to himself than , a announcement appear in the provincial journal which cause no small sensation in the county at least , and in all the town , villag , hall and mansion , and parsonage for many mile
mile round . at ; at ; at ; on , as the squire 's carriage meet the vicar 's one - horse contrivance , and the inmate of both vehicle stop on the road to talk ; at gate , as the bell be toll in the sunshine , and the white smock and scarlet cloak come troope over the green common , to worship ; in a hundred societie round about -- the word be , that Clavering be to be inhabit again . some five year before , the county papers have advertise the marriage at , at the , of , , only son of , , of , with , daughter of , of , , and widow of the late , . at that time the legend in the county be that Clavering , who have be ruin for many a year , have marry a widow from with some money . some of the county folk catch a sight of the newly - marry pair . the Kickleburys , travel in , have see they . occupy the at , give party , and live comfortably -- but could never come to . another year -- young , of , make a vacation tour , have fall in with the Clavering occupy , on the . at , at , at , at the bath and gambling place of the and , this worthy couple might occasionally be hear of by the curiious , and rumour of they come , as it be by gust , to 's ancestral place . they last place of abode be , where they appear to have live in great fashion and splendour after the news of the death of , , of , reach he orphan daughter in . of 's antecedent little can be say that would be advantageous to that respect baronet . the son of a outlaw , live in a dismal old chateau near , this gentleman have make a feeble attempt to start in life with a commission in a dragoon regiment , and have break down almost at the outset . transaction at the gambling - table have speedily effect he ruin ; after a couple of year in the army he have be force to sell out , have pass some time in 's prison of the , and have then ship over to to join the gouty exile , he father . and in , and , for some year , this decay and abortive prodigal might be see lurking about billiard - room and water - place , punt at gambling - house , dancing at boarding - house ball , and ride steeple - chase on other folk ' horse . it be at a boarding - house at that make what he call the lucky coup of marry the widow Amory , very lately return from . he father die soon after , by consequence of whose demise he wife become . the title so delighted of , that he double he daughter 's allowance ; and die himself soon after , leave a fortune to she and she child the amount of which be , if not magnify by rumour , something very splendid indeed . before this time there have been , not rumour unfavourable to 's reputation , but unpleasant impression regard she ladyship . the best English people abroad be shy of make she acquaintance ; she manners be not the most refin ; she origin be lamentably low and doubtful . the retired , who be to be find in considerable force in most of the continental town frequent by , speak with much scorn of the disreputable old lawyer and indigo - smuggler she father , and of , she first husband , who have be mate of the in which come out to join she father at . neither father nor daughter be in society at , or have ever be heard of at . , who have be of , have once say to he wife , that he could tell a queer story about 's first husband ; but greatly to 's disappointment , and that of the young lady he daughter , the old judge could never be get to reveal that mystery . they be all , however , glad enough to go to 's party , when she ladyship take the in the at , and blaze out in the polite world there in the winter of 183-- . the take she up . , we excellent ambassador , pay she mark attention . the prince of the family frequent she salon . the most rigid and note of the lady resident in the french capital acknowledge and countenance she ; the virtuous , the severe , the venerable Countess of -- people , in a word , renowne for austerity , and of quite a dazzling moral purity :-- so great and beneficend a influence have the possession of ten ( some say twenty ) thousand a year exercise upon 's character and reputation . and she munificence and good - will be unbounded . anybody ( in society ) who have a scheme of charity be sure to find she purse open . the french lady of piety get money from she to support they school and convent ; she subscribe indifferently for the Armenian patriarch ; for , who come to to collect fund for he monastery on ; for the to , and the Orthodox settlement in , the largest and most savage of the . and it be on record of she , that , on the same day on which get five Napoleon from she in support of the poor persecute Jesuits , who be at that time in very bad odour in , put she down in she subscription - list for the , who have have
have a vision which order he to convert the Pope of . and more than this , and for the benefit of the worldly , she ladyship give the best dinner , and the grandest ball and supper , which be know at during that season . and it be during this time , that the good - natured lady must have arrange matter with she husband 's creditor in , for reappear in he native country , without fear of arrest ; be announce in the , and the county paper , as have take up he residence at 's ; and one day the anxious old housekeeper at beheld a carriage and four horse drive up the long avenue , and stop before the moss - grow step in front of the vast melancholy portico . three gentleman be in the carriage -- a open one . on the back seat be we old acquaintance , of , whilst in the place of honou sate a handsome and portly gentleman envelope in mustachio , whisker , fur collar , and braid , and by he a pale languid man who descende feebly from the carriage , when the little lawyer , and the gentleman in fur , nimbly jump out of it . they walk up the great moss - grow step to the hall - door , and a foreign attendent , with earring and a gold - lace cap , pull strenuously at the great bell - handle at the crack and sculpture gate . the bell be hear clange loudly through the vast gloomy mansion . resound presently upon the marble pavement of the hall within ; and the door open , and finally , the housekeeper , , she aide - de - camp , and , the keeper , appear bow humbly . , the keeper , pull the wisp of hay - coloured hair which adorn he sunburnt forehead , kick out he left heel as if there be a dog bite at he calf , and bring down he head to a bow . drop a curtsey . , she aide - de -camp , make a curtsey and several rapid bow likewise ; and , with a great deal of emotion , quaver out , " welcome to , . it do my poor eye good to see one of the family once more . " the speech and the greeting be all address to the grand gentleman in fur and braiding , who wear he hat so magnificently on one side , and twirl he mustachio so royally . but he burst out laugh , and say , " you have saddle the wrong horse , old lady -- I be not Claver what be come to revisit the hall of my ancestor . friend and vassal ! behold you rightful lord ! " and he point he hand towards the pale , languid gentleman who say , " do not be a ass , Ned " " yes , , I be ; I recollect you quite well . forget I , I suppose ?-- how dy do ? " and he take the old lady 's trembl hand ; and nod in she astonished face , in a not unkind manner . declare upon she conscience that she would have know anywhere , that he be the very image of , he father , and of who have go before . " o yes -- thanky -- of course -- very much obliged -- and that sort of thing , " say , look vacantly about the hall " old place , be not it , ? never see it but once , when my governor quarrell with gwandfather in the year twenty - thwee . " Dismal ?--beautiful !--to Castle of !-- the of , by ! " say the individual address as . " what a fireplace ! you might roast a elephant in it . Splendo carve gallery ! , by ! I would lay five to two it be . " " the upper part by ; the lower be alter by the eminent Dutch architect , , in the first he time , by , fourth baronet , " say the housekeeper . " of indeed , " say the " , , you know everything . " " I know a few thing , , " answer . " I know that be not a Snyder over the mantelpiece -- bet you three to one it be a copy . we will restore it , my boy . a lick of varnish , and it will come out wonderfully , sir . that old fellow in the red gown , I suppose , be . " " sheriff of the county , and sate in parliament in the reign of , " say the housekeeper , wonder at the stranger 's knowledge ; " that on the right be , wife of , second baronet , by , represent in the character of , the goddess of , -- she son , the third baronet , by she side , as , of , with a bow and arrow ; that on the next panel be , make a knight banneret by the , and whose property be confuscate by . " " thank you -- need not go on , , " say the , " we will walk about the place ourselves . Frosch , give I a cigar . have a cigar , ? " try a cigar which 's courier hand to he , and over which the lawyer splutter fearfully . " need not come with we , . what be -- he --name -- you --Smbe --feed the horse and wash they mouths . not stay long . come along , strong , -- I know the way : I be here in twenty - thwee
thwee , at the end of my gwandfather 's time . " and and , for such be the style and title of 's friend , pass out of the hall into the reception - room , leave the discomfit to disappear by a side - door which lead to she apartment , now the only habitable room in the long - uninhabited mansion . it be a place so big that no tenant could afford to live in it ; and and he friend walk through room after room , admir they vastness and dreary and desert grandeur . on the right of the hall - door be the saloon and draw - room , and on the other side the oak room , the parlour , the grand dining - room , the library , where have find book in old day . Round three side of the hall run a gallery , by which , and correspond passage , the chief bedrooms be approach , and of which many be of stately proportion and exhibit mark of splendour . on the second story be a labyrinth of little discomfortable garret , destin for the attendant of the great folk who inhabit the mansion in the day when it be first build : and I do not know any more cheering mark of the increase philanthropy of we own time , than to contrast we domestic architecture with that of we ancestor , and to see how much better servants and poor be care for now , than in time when my lord and my lady sleep under gold canopy , and they servants lay above they in quarter not so airy or so clean as stable be now . and down the house the two gentleman wander , the owner of the mansion be very silent and resign about the pleasure of possesse it ; whereas the , he friend , examine the premise with so much interest and eagerness that you would have think he be the master , and the other the indifferent spectator of the place . " I see capability in it -- capability in it , sir , " cry the . " Gad , sir , leave it to I , and I will make it the pride of the country , at a small expense . what a theatre we can have in the library here , the curtain between the column which divide the room ! what a famous room for a galop !-- it will hold the whole shire . we will hang the morning parlour with the tapestry in you second salon in the , and furnish the oak room with the Moyen - age cabinet and the armour . look splendid against black oak , and there be a glass in the , which will suit that high mantelpiece to a inch , sir . the long saloon , white and crimson of course ; the draw - room yellow satin ; and the little drawing - room light blue , with lace over --hay ? " " I recollect my old governor can I in that little room , " say sententiously ; " he always hate I , my old governor . " " be the , I suppose , for my lady 's room -- the suite in the landing , to the south , the bedroom , the sit - room , and the dressing - room . we will throw a conservatory out , over the balcony . where will you have you room ? " " put mine in the north wing , " say the , with a yawn , " and out of the reach of 's confound piano . I can not bear it . she be scweech from morning till night . " the burst out laugh . he settle the whole further arrangement of the house in the course of they walk through it ; and , the promenade end , they go into the steward 's room , now inhabit by , and where be sit poring over a plan of the estate , and the old housekeeper have prepare a collation in honour of she lord and master . then they inspect the kitchen and stable , about both of which be rather interested , and be for examine the garden ; but the Baronet say , " d --- the garden , and that sort of thing ! " and finally he drive away from the house as unconcernedly as he have enter it ; and that night the people of learn that have pay a visit to the , and be come to live in the county . when this fact come to be know at , all the folk in the place be set in commotion : and , half - pay captain and old maid and dowager , sport squireens of the viciniage , farmer , tradesman , and factory people -- all the population in and round about the little place . the news be brotch to Fairoaks , and receive by the ladie there , and by , with some excitement . " . say there be a very pretty girl in the family , , " say , who be as kind and thoughtful upon this point as woman generally be : " a , 's daughter by she first marriage . of course , you will fall in love with she as soon as she arrive . " Helen cry out , " do not talk nonsense , . " laugh , and say , " well , there be the young for you . " " he be but four year old , " reply . " but I shall conseal myself with that handsome officer , 's friend . he be at church last , in the pew , and he mustachio be beautiful
beautiful . " indeed the number of 's family ( whereon the member have all be mention in the above paragraph ) be pretty soon know in he town , and everything else , as nearly as human industry and ingenuity could calculate , regard he household . the avenue and grounds be dot now with town folk of the summer evening , who make they way up to the great house , pee about the premise , and criticise the improvement which be take place there . load upon load of furniture arrive in numberless van from and ; and numerous as the van be , there be not one but know what it contain , and escort the baggage up to the . he and have form a intimate acquaintance by this time . the occupy those very lodging at , which the peaceful Smirke have previously tenanted , and be deep in the good graces of , he landlady ; and of the whole town , indeed . the be splendo in person and raiment ; fresh - coloured , blue - eyed , black - whiskered , broad - chested , athletic -- a slight tendency to fulness do not take away from the comeliness of he jolly figure -- a braver soldier never present a broader chest to the enemy . as he strode down Clavering , he hat on one side , he cane clank on the pavement , or wave round he in the execution of military cut and soldatesque manoeuvre -- he jolly laughter ring through the otherwise silent street -- he be as welcome as sunshine to the place , and a comfort to every inhabitant in it . on the first market - day he know every pretty girl in the market : he joke with all the woman : have a word with the farmer about they stock , and dine at the at the , where he set they all die with laugh by he fun and joke . " Tu be sure he be a vine veller , yotu be sure that he be , " be the universal opinion of the gentleman in top - boot . he shook hand with a score of they , as they ride out of the inn - yard on they old nag , wave he hat to they splendidly as he smoke he cigar in the inn - gate . in the course of the evening he be free of the landlady 's bar , know what rent the landlord pay , how many acre he far , how much malt he put in he strong beer ; and whether he ever run in a little brandy unexcise by king from , or the fishing villag along the coast . he have try to live at the great house first ; but it be so dull he could not stand it . " I be a creature bear for society , " he tell . " I be down here to see 's house set in order ; for between ourselves , have no energy , sir , no energy ; he be not the chest for it , sir ( and he throw out he own trunk as he speak ) ; but I must have social intercourse . go to be at seven , and take Polly with she . there be nobody but I and the Ghost for the first two night at the great house , and I own it , sir , I like company . most old soldier do . " Glander ask strong where he have serve ? curl he mustache , and say with a laugh , that the other might almost ask where he have not serve . " I begin , sir , as cadet of Hungarian Uhlans , and when the war of independence break out , quit that service in consequence of a quarrel with my governor , and be one of seven who escape from , and be blow up in one of 's fireship , at the age of seventeen . I will show you my of the Redeemer , if you will come over to my lodging and take a glass of grog with I , , this evening . I have a few of those bauble in my desk . I have the of ; give it I " ( he pronounce 's name with wonderful accuracy and gusto ) " upon the field of . I be a lieutenant of the fourth regiment , sir , and we march through 's line -- bang thro ' 'em into , sir , without fire a shot . ah , , that be a mismanaged business . I receive this wound by the side of the before , -- where he would have pound the stock - jobbing Pedroite , have not follow my advice ; and I serve in with the King 's troops , until the death of my dear friend , , when I see the game be over , and hang up my toasting iron , . offer I a regiment , the 's ; but I could not -- damme , I could not -- and now , sir , you know -- the strong they call I abroad -- as well as he know himself . " in this way almost everybody in come to know . he tell , he tell the landlord of the , he tell at the reading - room , he tell , and the young one , at dinner : and , finally , he tell , who , yawn into Clavering one day , find the in company with ; and who be delighted with he new acquaintance . before many day be over , be as much at home in 's draw - room as he be in 's first floor
floor ; and make the lonely house very gay with he good - humour and ceaseless flow of talk . the two woman have never before see such a man . he have a thousand story about battle and dangers to interest they -- about captive , polish beautie , and spanish nun . he could se score of song , in half a dozen language , and would sit down to the piano and troll they off in a rich manly voice . both the lady pronounce he to be delightful -- and so he be ; though , indeed , they have not have much choice of man 's society as yet , have see in the course of they life but few person , except old and the major , and , who be a genius , to be sure ; but then you geniuse be somewhat flat and moody at home . and strong acquaint he new friend at Fairoaks , not only with he own biography , but with the whole history of the family now come to . it be he who have make the marriage between he friend and the widow Amory . she want rank , and he want money . what match could be more suitable ? he organise it ; he make those two people happy . there be no particular romantic attachment between they ; the widow be not of a age or a person for romance , and , if he have he game at billiards , and he dinner , car for little beside . but they be as happy as people could be . Clavering would return to he native place and country , he wife 's fortune would pay he encumbrance off , and he son and here would be one of the first man in the county . " and ? " ask . be uncommonly curious about . strong laugh . " oh , be a muse -- be a mystery -- be a femme incomprise . " " what be that ? " ask simple -- but the give she no answer : perhaps could not give she one . " paint , write poem , compose music , ride like . be a paragon , in a word . " " I hate clever woman , " say . " thank you , " say . for she part she be sure she should be charme with , and quite long to have such a friend . and with this she look full in the face , as if every word the little hypocrite say be truth . thus , a intimacy be arrange and prepare beforehand between the Fairoaks family and they wealthy neighbour at the ; and and be to the full as eager for they arrival , as even the most curious of the Clavering folk . a Londoner , who see fresh face and yawn at they every day may smile at the eagerness with which country people expect a visitor . a cockney come amongst they , and be remember by he rural entertainer for year after he have leave they , and forget they very likely -- float far away from they on the vast sea . but the islander remember long after the mariner have sai away , and can tell you what he say and what he wear , and how he look and how he laugh . in fine , a new arrival be a event in the country not to be understand by we , who do not , and have rather not , know who live next door . when the painter and upholsterer have do they work in the house , and so beautify it , under 's superintendence , that he might well be proud of he taste , that announce that he should go to , where the whole family have arrive by this time , and should speedily return to establish they in they renovated mansion . Detachment of domestic proceed they . Carriage come down by sea , and be bring over from by horse which have previously arrive under the care of grooms and coachman . one day the ' Alacrity ' coach bring down on its roof two large and melancholy man , who be drop at the lodge with they trunk , and who be and , metropolitan footman , who have no objection to the country , and bring with they state and other suit of the uniform . on another day , the mail deposite at the gate a foreign gentleman , adorn with many ringlet and chain . he make a great riot at the lodge - gate to the keeper 's wife ( who , be a west - country woman , do not understand he or he ) , because there be no carriage in waiting to drive he to the house , a mile off , and because he could not walk entire leagu in he fatigue state and varnish boot . this be , formerly chef of he Highness the , of . , and at present of the bouche of , :-- 's library , picture , and piano have arrive previously in charge of the intelligent young , he aide - de - camp . he be , moreover , aide by a professed female cook , likewise from , who have inferior female under she order . he do not dine in the steward 's room , but take he nutriment in solitude in he own apartment , where a female servant be affect to he private use . it be a grand sight to behold he in he dressing - gown compose a menu . he always sate down and play the piano for some time before that . if interrupt , he remonstrate pathetically with he little maid . every great
great artist , he say , have need of solitude to perfectionate he work . but we be advance matter in the fulness of we love and respect for , and bring he prematurely on the stage . the have a hand in the engagement of all the domestic , and , indeed , seem to be the master of the house . there be those among they who say he be the house - steward , only he dine with the family . , he know how to make himself respecte , and two of by no means the least comfortable room of the house be assign to he particular use . he be walk upon the terrace finally upon the eventful day when , amidst a immense jangling of bell from , where the flag be fly , a open carriage and one of those travel chariot or family ark , which only English philoprogenitiveness could invent drive rapidly with foam horse through the gate , and up to the step of the Hall . the two battan of the sculptured door flew open . the superior officer in black , the large and melancholy gentleman , now in livery with they hair in powder , the country menial engage to aid they , be in waiting in the hall , and bow like elm when autumn wind wail in the park . through this avenue pass Claver with a most unmoved face : , with a pair of bright black eye , and a good - humoured countenance , which waggle and nod very graciously : master , who be hold he mamma 's skirt ( and who stop the procession to look at the largest footman , whose appearance seem to strike the young gentleman ) , and , governess to , and , she ladyship 's daughter , give she arm to . it be summer , but fire of welcome be crackl in the great hall chimney , and in the room which the family be to occupy . have look at the procession from one of the lime - tree in the avenue . " est la , " he say , lay he jewell hand on he richly - embroider velvet glass button , " t'ai vue , je the benis , of ma sylphide , of mon ange ! " and he div into the thicket , and make he way back to he furnace and saucepan . the next the same party which have just make its appearance at , come and publicly take possession of the ancient pew in the church , where so many of the 's ancestor have pray , and be now knee in effigy . there be such a run to see the new folk , that the be desert , to the disgust of its pastor ; and as the state barouche , with the grey and coachman in silver wig , and solemn footman , draw up at the old churchyard - gate , there be such a crowd assemble there as have not be see for many a long day . know everybody , and salute for all the company -- the country people vow my lady be not handsome , to be sure , but pronounce she to be uncommon fine dress , as indeed she be -- with the finest of shawl , the finest of peliss , the brilliantest of bonnet and wreat , and a power of ring , cameo , brooch , chain , bangles , and other nameless gimcrack ; and ribbon of every breadth and colour of the rainbow flam on she person . appear meek in dove - colour , like a vestal virgin --while master be in the costume , then prevalent , of , a celebrate Highland outlaw . the Baronet be not more animated than ordinarily -- there be a happy vacuity about he which enable he to face a dinner , a death , a church , a marriage , with the same indifferent ease . a pew for the Clavering servant be fill by these domestic , and the enraptured congregation see the gentleman from with " vlower on they heed , " and the miraculous coachman with he silver wig , take they place in that pew so soon as he horse be put up at the Clavering Arms . in the course of the service , begin to make such a yelling in the pew , that , the tallest of the footman , be beckon by he master , and rise and go and carry out , who roar and beat he on the head , so that the powder fly round about , like clouds of incense . be he pacify until place on the box of the carriage , where he play at horse with 's whip . " you see the little beggar be never be to church before , , " the draw out to a young lady who be visit he ; " no wonder he should make a row : I do not go in town neither , but I think it be right in the country to give a good example -- and that sort of thing . " laugh and say , " the little boy have not give a particularly good example . " " Gad , I do not know , and that sort of thing , " say the Baronet . " it be not so bad neither . whenever he want a thing , always cwy , and whenever he cwy he get it . " here the child in question begin to howl for a dish of sweetmeat on the luncheon - table , and make a lunge across the table - cloth , upset a glass of wine over the best waistcoat of one of the guest present , , who be greatly
greatly annoyed at be make to look foolish , and at have he spotless cambric shirt front blotch with wine . " we do spoil he so , " say Claver to , finally gaze at the cherub , whose hand and face be now froth over with the species of lather which be insert in the confection call meringue a la creme . " it be very wrong , " say , as if she have never do such a thing herself as spoil a child . " say she spoil my brother , -- do you think anything could , ? look at he , -- be not he like a little angel ? " " , I be quite wight , " say the Baronet . " he have cwy , and he have get it , you see . go it , , old boy . " " be a very judicious parent , " whisper . do not you think so , ? I sha not call you -- I shall call you . I admire you so at church . you robe be not well make , nor you bonnet very fresh . but you have such beautiful grey eye , and such a lovely tint . " " thank you , " say , laugh . " you cousin be handsome , and think so . he be uneasy de sa personne . he have not see the world yet . have he genius ? have he suffer ? a lady , a little woman in a rumple satin and velvet shoe -- a -- come here , and say he have suffer . I , too , have suffer , -- and you , , have you heart ever be touch ? " say " no ! " but perhaps blush a little at the idea or the question , so that the other say ,-- " ! I see it all . it be the beau cousin . tell I everything . I already love you as a sister . " " you be very kind , " say , smile , " and -- and it must be own that it be a very sudden attachment . " " all attachment be so . it be electricity -- spontaneity . it be instantaneous . I know I should love you from the moment I see you . do you not feel it yourself ? " " not yet , " say ; " but -- I daresay I shall if I try . " " call I by my name , then . " " but I do not know it , " cry out . " my name be Blanche -- be not it a pretty name ? call I by it . " " Blanche -- it be very pretty , indeed . " " and while mamma talk with that kind - look lady -- what relation be she to you ? she must have be pretty once , but be rather passee ; she be not well gantee , but she have a pretty hand -- and while mamma talk to she , come with I to my own room , -- my own , own room . it be a darling room , though that horrid creature , , do arrange it . be you eprise of he ? he say you be , but I know better ; it be the beau cousin . yes -- il a beaux yeux . Je n'aime pa les blonds , ordinairement . car je suis blonde moi -- je suis Blanco et blonde , " -- and she look at she face and make a moue in the glass ; and never stop for 's answer to the question which she have put . Blanche be fair , and like a sylph . she have fair hair , with green reflection in it . but she have dark eyebrow . she have long black eyelash , which veil beautiful brown eye . she have such a slim waist , that it be a wonder to behold ; and such a slim little foot , that you would have think the grass would hardly bend under they . she lip be of the colour of faint rosebud , and she voice warble limpidly over a set of the sweetest little pearly tooth ever see . she show they very often , for they be very pretty . she be very good - natured , and a smile not only show she tooth wonderfully , but likewise exhibit two lovely little pink dimple , that nestle in either cheek . she show she drawing , which the other thought charme . she play she some of she waltze , with a rapid and brilliant finger , and be still more char . and she then read she some poem , in and , likewise of she own composition , and which she keep lock in she own book -- she own dear little book ; it be bound in blue velvet , with a gilt lock , and on it be print in gold the title of ' . ' " !-- be not it a pretty name ? " the young lady continue , who be pleased with everything that she do , and do everything very well . own that it be . she have never see anything like it before ; anything so lovely , so accomplished , so fragile and pretty ; warbl so prettily , and trip about such a pretty room , with such a number of pretty book , picture , flower , round about she . the honest and generous country girl forget even jealousy in she admiration . " indeed , Blanche , " she say , " everything in the room be pretty ; and you be the prettiest of
of all . " the other smile , look in the glass , go up and take both of 's hand , and kiss they , and sit down to the piano , and shake out a little song , as if she have be a nightingale . this be the first visit pay by Fairoaks to , in return for 's visit to Fairoaks , in reply to Fairoaks 's card leave a few day after the arrival of 's family . the intimacy between the young lady spring up like 's - stalk to the sky in a single night . the large footman be perpetually walk with little rose - colou pink note to Fairoak ; where there be a pretty house - may in the kitchen , who might possibly tempt those gentleman to so humble a place . send music , or send a new novel , or a picture from the ' journal des , ' to ; or my lady 's compliment arrive with flower and fruit ; or beg and pray to come to dinner ; and dear , if she be strong enough ; and , if a humdrum party be not too stupid for he ; and would send a pony -carriage for ; and would take no denial . neither nor wish to refuse . and , who be , indeed , somewhat ailing , be glad that the two should have they pleasure ; and would look at they fondly as they set forth , and ask in she heart that she might not be call away until those two being whom she love best in the world should be join together . as they go out and cross over the bridge , she remember summer evening five - and - twenty year ago , when she , too , have bloom in she brief prime of love and happiness . it be all over now . the moon be look from the purpling sky , and the star glitter there , just as they use in the early , well - remember evening . he be lie dead far away , with the billow roll between they . ! how well she remember the last look of he face as they part . it look out at she through the vista of long year , as sad and as clear as then . so and find the society at a uncommonly agreeable resort of summer evening . Blanche vow that she raffol of ; and , very likely , be pleased with Blanche . he spirit come back : he laugh and rattle till wonder to hear he . it be not the same Pen , yawn in a shooting jacket , in the parlour , who appear alert and brisk , and smile and well dress , in 's drawing - room . sometimes they have music . have a sweet contralto voice , and sang with , who have have the best continental instruction , and be charme to be she friend 's mistress . sometimes join in these concerts , or oftener look sweet upon as she sang . sometimes they have glee , when 's chest be of vast service , and he boom out in a prodigious bass , of which he be not a little proud . " good fellow , strong -- be not he , ? " would say to she . " play at ecarte with -- play anything , pitch - and - toss , pianoforty , cwibbage if you like . how long do you think he be be stay with I ? he come for a week with a carpet - bag , and , he be be stay here thwee year . good fellow , be not he ? do not know how he get a shillin ' though , begad I do not , . " and yet the , if he lose he money to , always pay it ; and if he live with he friend for three year , pay for that too -- in good - humour , in kindness and joviality , in a thousand little service by which he make himself agreeable . what gentleman could want a better friend than a man who be always in spirit , never in the way or out of it , and be ready to execute any commission for he patron , whether it be to s a song or meet a lawyer , to fight a duel or to carve a capon ? although and commonly go to together , yet sometimes take walk there unattend by she , and about which he do not tell she . he take to fish the , which run through the , and pass not very far from the garden - wall . and by the oddest coincidence , would walk out ( have be to look at she flower ) , and would be quite surprised to see fishing . I wonder what trout catch while the young lady be look on ? or whether be the pretty little fish which play round he fly , and which be endeavour to hook ? it must be own , he become very fond of that healthful and invigorating pursuit of angling , and be whipp the continually with he fly . as for she have a kind heart ; and have , as she own , herself " suffer " a good deal in the course of she brief life and experience -- why , she could compassionate other susceptible being like , who have suffer too . she love for and that dear redouble : if they be not at the , she be not easy unless she herself be at Fairoak . she play with ; she read French and german with ; and read French and german along with they
they . he turn sentimental ballad of and into verse for the ladie , and Blanche unlock ' ' for he , and impart to he some of the plaintive outpouring of she own tender Muse . it appear from these poem that this young creature have indeed suffer prodigiously . she be familiar with the idea of suicide . death she repeatedly longe for . a fade rose inspire she with such grief that you would have think she must die in pain of it . it be a wonder how a young creature ( who have have a snug home or be at a comfortable boarding - school , and have no outward grief or hardship to complain of ) should have suffer so much -- should have find the means of get at such a ocean of despair and passion ( as a runaway boy who will get to sea ) , and have embark on it should survive it . what a talent she must have have for weeping to be able to pour out so many of Larmes ! they be not particularly briny , 's tear , that be the truth ; but , who read she verse , think they very well for a lady -- and write some verse himself for she . he be very violent and passionate , very hot , sweet and strong : and he not only write verse ; but -- of the villain ! o , the deceiver ! he alter and adapt former poem in he possession , and which have be compose for a certain , for the use and to the name of . innocent every house have its skeleton in it somewhere , and it may be a comfort to some unhappy folk to think that the luckier and most wealthy of they neighbour have they misery and cause of disquiet . we little innocent Muse of , who sang so nicly and talk so sweetly , you would have think she must have make sunshine where ever she go , be the skeleton , or the misery , or the bore , or the of , and of most of the inhabitant thereof . as one little stone in you own shoe or you horse 's , suffice to put either to torture and to make you journey miserable , so in life a little obstacle be sufficient to obstruct you entire progress , and subject you to endless annoyance and disquiet . who would have guess that such a smile little fairy as Blanche could be the cause of discord in any family ? " I say , Strong , " one day the Baronet say , as the pair be converse after dinner over the billiard - table , and that great unbosomer of secret , a cigar ; " I say , Strong , I wish to the doose you wife be dead . " " so do I . that be a cannon , by . but she will not ; she will live for ever -- you see if she do not . why do you wish she off the hook , , my boy ? " ask . " because then you might marry . she be not bad - look . she will have ten thousand , and that be a good bit of money for such a poor old devil as you , " draw out the other gentleman . " and gad , strong , I hate she worse and worse every day . I can not stand she , strong , by gad , I can not . " " I would not take she at twice the figure , " say , laugh . " I never see such a little devil in my life . " " I should like to poison she , " say the sententious Baronet ; " by I should , " " why , what have she be at now ? " ask he friend . " nothing particular , " answer ; " only she old trick . that girl have such a knack of make everybody miserable that , hang I , it be quite surprising . last night she send the governess cry away from the dinner - table . afterwards , as I be pass 's room , I hear the poor little beggar howling in the dark , and find he sister have be frightene he soul out of he body , by tell he story about the ghost that be in the house . at lunch she give my lady a turn ; and though my wife be a fool , she be a good soul -- I be hang if she be not . " " what do do to she ? " strong ask . " why , hang I , if she do not begin talk about the late Amory , my predecessor , " the say , with a grin . " she get some picture out of the , and say she be sure it be like she dear father , she want to know where she father 's grave be . hang she father ! whenever talk about he , always burst out cry : and the little devil will talk about he in order to spite she mother . today when she begin , I get in a confounded rage ; say I be she father ; and -- and that sort of thing , and then , sir , she take a shy at I . " " and what do she say about you , ? " , still laugh , inquire of he friend and patron . " , she say I be not she father ; that I be not fit to comprehend she ; that she father must have be a man of genius , and fine
fine feeling , and that sort of thing : whereas i have marry she mother for money . " " well , do not you ? " ask . " it do not make it any the pleasanter to hear because it be true , do not you know , " answer . " I be not a literary man and that ; but I be not such a fool as she make I out . I do not know how it be , but she always manage to put I in the hole , do not you understand . she turn all the house round she in she quiet way , and with she confound sentimental air . I wish she be dead , Ned . " " it be my wife whom you want dead just now , " Strong say , always in perfect good - humour ; upon which the with he accustom candour , say , " well ; when people bear my life out , I do wish they be dead , and I wish be down a well , with all my heart . " thus it will be see from the above report of this candid conversation that we accomplish little friend have some peculiarity or defect of character which render she not very popular . she be a young lady of some genius , exquisite sympathy and considerable literary attainment , live , like many another genius , with relative who could not comprehend she . neither she mother nor she stepfather be person of a literary turn . 's and the be the extent of the 's read , and still write like a schoolgirl of thirteen , and with a extraordinary disregard to grammar and spelling . and as feel very keenly that she be not appreciate , and that she live with person who be not she equal in intellect or conversational power , she lose no opportunity to acquaint she family circle with they inferiority to herself , and not only be a martyr , but take care to let everybody know that she be so . if she suffer , as she say and think she do , severely , be we to wonder that a young creature of such delicate sensibility should shriek and cry out a good deal ? without sympathy life be nothing ; and would it not have be a want of candour on she part to affect a cheerfulness which she do not feel , or pretend a respect for those towards whom it be quite impossible she should entertain any reverence ? if a poetess may not bemoan she lot , of what earthly use be she lyre ? Blanco struck hers only to the saddest of tune ; and sang elegy over she dead hope , dirge over she early frost - nipt bud of affection , as become such a melancholy fate and Muse . she actual distress , as we have say , have not be up to the present time very considerable : but she grief lay ; like those of most of we , in she own soul -- that be sad and habitually dissatisfie , what wonder that she should weep ? so dribble out of she eye any day at command : she could furnish a unlimited supply of tear , and she faculty of shedding they increase by practice . for sentiment be like another complaint mention by , as increase by self - indulgence ( I be sorry to say , lady , that the complaint in question be call the dropsy ) , and the more you cry , the more you will be able and desirous to do so . have begin to gush at a very early age . be she favourite bard from the period when she first could feel : and she have subsequently improve she mind by a sedulous study of novel of the great modern author of the french language . there be not a romance of and which the indefatigable little creature have not devoure -- by the time she be sixtee : and , however little she sympathise with she relative at home , she have friend , as she say , in the spirit -world , mean the tender , the passionate and poetic , the amiable Trenmor , that high - soul convict , that angel of the galley , -- the fiery , -- and the other numberless heroe of the french romance . she have be in love with and while she be yet at school , and have settle the divorce question , and the rights of woman , with , before she have leave off pinafore . the impetuous little lady play at love with these imaginary worthy as a little while before she have play at maternity with she doll . pretty little poetical spirit ! it be curious to watch they with those plaything . to -day the blue - eye one be the favourite , and the black - eyed one be push behind the drawer . to -morrow blue - eye may take its turn of neglect and it may be a odious little wretch with a bur not nose , or tear bead of hair , and no eye at all , that take the first place in 's affection , and be dandled and caress in she arm . as novelist be suppose to know everything , even the secret of female heart , which the owner themselves do not perhaps know , we may state that at eleven year of age , as be then call , have felt tender emotion towards a young organ - grinder at , whom she Persist in believe to be a prince carry off from he parent ; that at twelve a old and hideous drawing - master ( but , ah , what
what age or personal defect be proof against woman 's love ? ) have agitate she young heart ; and that , at thirteen , be at 's boarding - school , in the , which , as everybody know , be next door to 's ( Chevalier of the of ) pension for young gentleman , a correspondence by letter take place between the seduisante and two young gentleman of the College of , who be pensioner of the . in the above paragraph we young friend have be call by a name different to that under which we be lately present to she . the fact be , that , call at home , have really at the first be christen -- but assume the name of of she own will and fantasy , and crown herself with it ; and the weapon which the Baronet , she stepfather , hold in terror over she , be the threat to call she publicly by she name of , by which menace he sometimes manage to keep the young rebel in order . we have speak just now of child 's doll , and of the manner in which those little people take up and neglect they darling toy , and very likely this history will show that assume and put away she live doll with a similar girlish inconstancy . she have have host of dear , dear , darling , friend ere now , and have quite a little museum of lock of hair in she treasure - chest , which she have gather in the course of she sentimental progress . some dear friend have marry : some have go to other school : one beloved sister she have lose from the pension , and find again , o , horror ! she darl , she keep the book in she father 's shop , a grocer in the : in fact , she have meet with a number of disappointment , estrangement , disillusionment , as she call they in she pretty french jargon , and have see and suffer a great deal for so young a woman . but it be the lot of sensibility to suffer , and of confiding tenderness to be deceive , and she feel that she be only undergo the penalties of genius in these pang and disappointment of she young career . meanwhile , she manage to make the honest lady , she mother , as uncomfortable as circumstance would permit ; and cause she worthy stepfather to wish she be dead . with the exception of , whose invincible good - humour be proof against she sarcasm , the little lady rule the whole house with he tongue . if talk about instead of , or call a object a hobject , as this unfortunate lady would sometimes do , calmly correcte she , and frighten the good soul , she mother , into error only the more frequent as she grow more nervous under she daughter 's eye . it be not to be suppose , consider the vast interest which the arrival of the family at inspire in the inhabitant of the little town , that alone , of all the folk in , should have remain unmoved and incurious . at the first appearance of the family in church , note every article of toilette which the lady wore , from they bonnet to they brodequin , and take a survey of the attire of the ladie 's maid in the pew allot to they . we fear that 's sermon , though it be one of he oldest and most value composition , have little effect upon on that day . in a very few day afterwards , she have manage for herself a interview with 's confidential attendent in the housekeeper 's room at the ; and she card in and , state that she receive the newest fashions from from she correspondent , and that she be in the custom of make court and ball dress for the nobility and gentry of the shire , be in the possession of and , and favourably receive , as she be happy to hear , by those ladie . , 's lady , become soon a great frequenter of 's drawing - room , and partook of many entertainment at the milliner 's expense . a meal of green tea , scandal , hot - cake , and a little novel reading , be always at the service of , whenever she be free to pass a evening in the town . and she find much more time for these pleasure than she junior officer , 's maid , who seldom could be spare for a holiday , and be work as hard as any factory - girl by that inexorable little Muse , she mistress . the Muse love to be dress becomingly , and , have a lively fancy and a poetic desire for change , be for altering she attire every day . she maid have a taste in dressmaking -- to which be she have be a apprentice at , before she enter into 's service there -- be keep from morning till night altering and remodel 's habiliment ; and rise very early and go to be very late , in obedience to the untiring caprice of she little taskmistress . the girl be of respectable English parent . there be many of we people , colonist of , who have see better day , who be not quite ruin , who do not quite live upon charity , and yet can not get on without it ; and as she father be a cripple incapable of work , and she return home would only increase the burthen and add to the misery of the family , poor Pincott be fain to stay where she could maintain herself ,
, and spare a little relief to she parent . we Muse , with the candour which distinguished she , never fail to remind she attendant of the real state of matter . " I should send you away , , for you be a great deal too weak , and you eye be fail you , and you be always cry and snivell and want the doctor ; but I wish that you parent at home should be support , and I go on endure you for they sake , mind , " the dear Blanche would say to she timid little attendent . or , " , you wretch appearance and slavish manner , and red eye , positively give I the migraine ; and I think I shall make you wear rouge , so that you may look a little cheerful ; " or , " , I can not bear , even for the sake of you starving parent , that you should tear my hair out of my head in that manner ; and I will thank you to write to they and say that I dispense with you service . " after which sort of speech , and after keep she for a hour trembl over she hair , which the young lady love to have comb , as she peruse one of she favourite french novel , she would go to be at one o'clock , and say , " Pincott , you may kiss I . good night . I should like you to have the pink dress ready for the morning . " and so with bless upon she attendant , she would turn round and go to sleep . the Muse might lie in bed as long as she choose of a morning , and avail herself of that privilege ; but have to rise very early indeed to get she mistress 's task do ; and have to appear next day with the same red eye and the same wan face , which displease by they want of gaiety , and cause the mistress to be so angry , because the servant persist in be and look unwell and unhappy . not that Blanche ever think she be a hard mistress . indeed , she make quite a friend of , at time , and write some very pretty verse about the lonely little tiring - maid , whose heart be far away . we belove Blanche be a superior being , and expect to be wait upon as such . and I do not know whether there be any other lady in this world who treat they servants or dependant so , but it may be that there be such , and that the tyranny which they exercise over they subordinate , and the pang which they can manage to inflict with a soft voice , and a well - breed simper , be as cruel as those which a slave -driver administer with a oath and a whip . but Blanche be a Muse -- a delicate little creature , quite tremulous with excitability , whose eye fill with tear at the smallest emotion ; and who know , but that it be the very fineness of she feeling which cause they to be froiss so easily ? you crush a butterfly by merely touch it . Vulgar people have no idea of the sensibility of a Muse . so little be occupy all day and night in stitching , hemm , rip , comb , iron , crimp , for she mistress ; read to she when in bed , -- for the girl be mistress of the two language , and have a sweet voice and manner -- could take no share in 's soiree , nor indeed be she much miss , or consider of sufficient consequence to appear at they entertainment . but there be another person connect with the Clavering establishment , who become a constant guest of we friend , the milliner . this be the chief of the kitchen , , with whom soon form a intimacy . not have be accustom to the appearance or society of person of the french nation , the rustic inhabitant of Clavering be not so favourably impress by 's manners and appearance , as that gentleman might have desire that they should be . he walk among they quite unsuspiciously upon the afternoon of a summer day , when he service be not require at the , in he usual favourite costume , namely , he light green frock or paletot , he crimson velvet waistcoat , with blue glass buttons , he pantalon , of a very large and decide check pattern , he orange satin neckcloth , and he jean - boot , with tip of shiny leather , -- these , with a gold - embroider cap , and a richly gilt cane , or other variety of ornament of a similar tendency , form he usual holiday costume , in which he flatter himself there be nothing remarkable ( unless , indeed , the beauty of he person should attract observation ) , and in which he consider that he exhibit the appearance of a gentleman of good parisian ton . he walk then down the street , grinn and ogl every woman he meet with glance , which he mean should kill they outright , and pee over the railing , and in at the window , where female were , in the tranquil summer evening . but , 's maid , shrank back with a Lor bless we , as ogle she over the laurel - bush ; the , and they mamma , stare with ; and presently a crowd begin to follow the interesting foreigner , of rag urchin and child , who leave they dirt - pie in the street to pursue he . for
for some time he think that admiration be the cause which lead these person in he wake , and walk on , pleas himself that he could so easily confer on other so much harmless pleasure . but the little child and dirt - pie manufacturer be presently succeed by follower of a larger growth , and a number of lad and girl from the factory be let loose at this hour , join the mob , and begin laughing , jeering , hooting , and call opprobrious name at the . some cry out " ! Frenchy ! " some exclaim " ! " one ask for a lock of he hair , which be long and in richly - flow ringlet ; and at length the poor artist begin to perceive that he be a object of derision rather than of respect to the rude grinning mob . it be at this juncture that spy the unlucky gentleman with the train at he heel , and hear the scornful shout with which they assail he . she run out of she room , and across the street to the persecute foreigner ; she hold out she hand , and , address he in he own language , invite he into she abode ; and when she have house he fairly within she door , she stand bravely at the threshold before the gi factory girl and boy , and say they be a pack of coward to insult a poor man who could not speak they language , and be alone and without protection . the little crowd , with some ironical cheer and hooting , nevertheless feel the force of 's vigorous allocution , and retreat before she ; for the old lady be rather respect in the place , and she oddity and she kindness have make she many friend there . poor be grateful indeed to hear the language of he country ever so ill spoken . Frenchmen pardon we fault in they language much more readily than we excuse they bad ; and will face we blunders throughout a long conversation , without the least propensity to grin . the rescue artist vow that be he guardian angel , and that he have not as yet meet with such suavity and politeness among les Anglaise . he be as courteous and complimentary to she as if it be the fairest and noblest of lady whom he be address for pay homage after he fashion to all womankind , and never dream of a distinction of rank in the realm of beauty , as he phrase be . a cream , flavoure with pineapple -- a mayonnaise of lobster , which he flatter himself be not unworthy of he hand , or of she to whom he have the honour to offer it as a homage , and a box of preserve fruit of , be bring by one of the chef 's aide - de - camp , in a basket , the next day to the milliner 's , and be accompany with a gallant note to the amiable . " she kindness , " say , " have make a green place in the desert of he existence , -- she suavity would ever contrast in memory with the grossierete of the rustic population , who be not worthy to possess such a jewel . " a intimacy of the most confidential nature thus spring up between the milliner and the chief of the kitchen ; but I do not know whether it be with pleasure or mortification that receive the declaration of friendship which the young proffer to she , for he persist in call she " respectable , " " vertueuse , " -- and in stating that he should consider she as he mother , while he hope she would regard he as she son . ah ! it be not very long ago , think , that word have be address to she in that dear french language , indicate a different sort of attachment . and she sigh as she look up at the picture of she Carabineer . for it be surprise how young some people 's heart remain when they head have need of a front or a little hair - dye , -- and , at this moment , , as she tell young , feel as romantic as a girl of eighteen . when the conversation take this turn -- and at they first intimacy be rather inclin so to lead it -- Alcide always politely diverge to another subject : it be as he mother that he persist in consider the good milliner . he would recognise she in no other capacity , and with that relationship the gentle lady be force to contend herself , when she find how deeply the artist 's heart be engage elsewhere . he be not long before he describe to she the subject and origin of he passion . " I declare myself to she , " say , lay he hand on he heart , " in a manner which be as novel as I be charme to think it be agreeable . where cannot love penetrate , respectable ? be the father of invention !-- I inquire of the domestic what be the plat of which Mademoiselle partake with most pleasure ; and build up my little battery accordingly . on a day when she parent have go to dine in the world ( and I be grieve to say that a grossier dinner at a restaurateur , in the , or in the seem to form the delight of these unrefined person ) , the entertain some comrade of the pension ; and I advise myself to send up a little repast suitable to so delicate young palate . she lovely name be Blanche . the name of the maiden be white ;
; the wreath of ros which she wear be white . I determine that my dinner should be as spotless as the snow . at she accustom hour , and instead of the rude giget a l'eau , which be ordinarily serve at she too simple table , I send she up a little potage a la Reine -- a la Reine Blanche I call it , -- as white as she own tint -- and confection with the most fragrant cream and almonds . I then offer up at she shrine a filet de merlan a l'gne , and a delicate plat which I designate as a la Saint - Therese , and of which my charme partook with pleasure . I follow this by two little entree of sweetbread and chicken ; and the only brown thing which I permit myself in the entertainment be a little roast of lamb , which I lay in a meadow of spinach , surround with croustillon , represent sheep , and ornament with daisie and other savage flower . after this come my second service : a pudding a la ( who , , be a maiden princess ) ; a dish of opal - coloured plover 's egg which I call tourtereaux a la Roucoule ; place in the midst of they two of those tender volatile , bille each other , and confection with butter ; a basket contain little gateaux of apricot , which , I know , all young lady adore ; and a jelly of marasquin , bland insinuating , intoxicat as the glance of beauty . this I designat a mon . and when the ice be brotch in -- a ice of plombiere and cherry -- how do you think I have shape they , ? in the form of two heart unit with a arrow , on which I have laid , before it enter , a bridal veil in cut - paper , surmount by a wreath of virginal orange - flower . I stand at the door to watch the effect of this entry . it be but one cry of admiration . the three young lady fill they glass with the sparkling ay , and carry I in a toast . I hear it -- I hear speak of I -- I hear she say , ' tell that we thank he -- we admire he -- we love he ! ' my foot almost fail I as she speak . " since that , can I have any reason to doubt that the young artist have make some progress in the heart of the ? I be modest , but my glass inform I that I be not ill - look . other victories have convince I of the fact . " " dangerous man ! " cry the milliner . " the blond missis of see nothing in the dull inhabitant of they brumous isle , which can compare with the ardour and vivacity of the child of the south . we bring we sunshine with we ; we be Frenchmen , and accustom to conquer . be it not for this affair of the heart , and my determination to marry a Anglaise , do you think I would stop in this island ( which be not altogether ungrateful , since I have find here a tender mother in the respectable ) , in this island , in this family ? my genius would use itself in the company of these rustic -- the poesy of my art can not be understand by these carnivorous insulary . no -- the man be odious , but the woman -- the woman ! I own , dear , be seduce ! I have vow to marry one ; and as I can not go into you market and purchase , accord to the custom of the country , I be resolve to adopt another custom , and fly with one to . the blonde miss will go . she be fascinated . she eye have tell I so . the white dove want but the signal to fly . " " have you any correspondence with she ? " ask , in amazement , and not know whether the young lady or the lover might be labour under a romantic delusion . " I correspond with she by means of my art . she partake of dish which I make expressly for she . I insinuate to she thus a thousand hint which as she be perfectly spiritual , she receive . but I want other intelligence near she . " " there be , she may , " say , who , by aptitude or education , seem to have some knowledge of affair of the heart , but the great artist 's brow darken at this suggestion . " Madame , " he say , " there be point upon which a gallant man ought to silence himself ; though , if he break the secret , he may do so with the least impropriety to he best friend -- he adopt mother . know then , that there be a cause why should be hostile to I -- a cause not uncommon with you sex -- jealousy . " " Perfidious monster ! " say the confidante . " ah , no , " say the artist , with a deep bass voice , and a tragic accent worthy of the and he favourite melodrame , " not perfidious , but fatal . yes , I be a fatal man , . to inspire hopeless passion be my destiny . I can not help it that woman love I . be it my fault that that young woman deperish and languish to the view of the eye , consume by a flame which I can not return ? ! there be other in this family who be
be similarly unhappy . the governess of the young have encounter I in my walk , and look at I in a way which can bear but one interpretation . and herself , who be of mature age , but who have oriental blood , have once or twice address compliment to the lonely artist which can admit of no mistake . I avoid the household , I seek solitude , I undergo my destiny . I can marry but one , and be resolve it shall be to a lady of you nation . and , if she fortune be sufficient I think would be the person who would be most suitable . I wish to ascertain what she mean be before I lead she to . " whether be as irresistible a conqueror as he nameake , or whether he be simply crazy , be a point which must be leave to the reader 's judgment . but the latter if he have have the benefit of much french acquaintance , have perhaps meet with man amongst they who fancie themselves almost as invincible ; and who , if you credit they , have make equal havoc in the heart of les Anglaise . both and we reader have already hear 's candid opinion of the lady who have give he she fortune and restore he to he native country and home , and it must be own that the Baronet be not far wrong in he estimate of he wife , and that be not the wisest or the best educated of woman . she have have a couple of year 's education in , in a suburb of , which she persist in calling Ackney to she die day , whence she have be summon to join she father at at the age of fifteen . and it be on she voyage thither , on board the , , in which ship she have two year previously make she journey to , that she form the acquaintance of she first husband , , who be third mate of the vessel in question . we be not go to enter into the early part of 's history , but , under whose charge go out to she father , who be one of the 's consignee , and part owner of the and many other vessel , find reason to put the rebellious rascal of a mate in iron , until they reach the cape , where the leave he officer behind ; and finally deliver he ward to she father at , after a stormy and perilous voyage in which the Ramchunder and the cargo and passengers incur no small danger and damage . some month afterwards make he appearance at , have work he way out before the mast from the cape -- marry the rich attorney 's daughter in spite of that old speculator -- set up as indigo -planter and fail -- set up as agent and fail again -- set up as editor of the and fail again -- quarrell ceaselessly with he father - in - law and he wife during the progress of all these mercantile transaction and disaster , and end he career finally with a crash which compelle he to leave and go to . it be in the course of these luckless proceedings , that probably make the acquaintance of , the respect judge of the of , who have be mention before : and , as the truth must out , it be by make a improper use of he father - in - law 's name , who could write perfectly well , and have no need of a amanuensis , that fortune finally forsook and cause he to abandon all further struggle with she . not be in the habit of read the law - report very assiduously , the european public do not know of these fact as well as people do in , and and she father finde she residence in not a comfortable one , it be agree that the lady should return to , whither she come with she little daughter or , then four year old . they be accompany by 's nurse , who have be present to the reader in the last chapter as the confidential maid of , : and take a house for they in the near neighbourhood of he residence in . it be a very hard bitter summer , and the rain it raine every day for some time after 's arrival . be very pompous and disagreeable , perhaps asham , perhaps anxious , to get rid of the indian lady . she believe that all the world in be talk about she husband 's disaster , and that the and and the court of director be aware of she unlucky history . she have a good allowance from she father ; she have no call to live in ; and she determine to go abroad . away she go , then , glad to escape the gloomy surveillance of the odious bully , . people have no objection to receive she at the continental town where she stop , and at the various boarding - house , where she royally pay she way . she call , to be sure ( though otherwise she speak with a little foreign twang , very curious and not unpleasant ) ; she dress amazingly ; she be conspicuous for she love of eating and drink , and prepare curry and pillaw at every boarding - house which she frequent ; but she singularity of language and behaviour only give a zest to she society , and be deservedly popular . she be the most good - natured , jovial , and generous of woman . she be up to any party of pleasure by whomsoever propose . she bring three time more champagne and fowl
fowl and ham to the picnic than anyone else . she take endless boxe for the play , and ticket for the masked ball , and give they away to everybody . she pay the boarding - house people month beforehand ; she help poor shabby mustachiod buck and dowager whose remittance have not arrive , with constant supplies from she purse ; and in this way she tramp through , and appear at , at , at , at , at , as she fancy lead she . news of 's death reach she at the latter place , where be then stay , unable to pay he hotel bill , as , indeed , be he friend , the ; and the good - natured widow marry the descendant of the ancient house of Clavering -- professe , indeed , no particular grief for the scapegrace of a husband whom she have lose . we have bring she thus up to the present time when she be mistress of , in the midst of which , the celebrated painter , pourtray she with she little boy by she side . follow she mamma in most of she peregrination , and so learn a deal of life . she have a governess for some time ; and after she mother 's second marriage , the benefit of 's select pension in the . when the come to , she of course come with they . it be only within a few year , after the death of she grandfather , and the birth of she little brother , that she begin to understand that she position in life be alte , and that , nobody be daughter , be a very small personage in a house compare with master , here to a ancient baronetcy and a noble estate . but for little , she would have be a heiress , in spite of she father : and though she know , and car not much about money , of which she never have any stint , and though she be a romantic little Muse , as we have see , yet she could not reasonably be grateful to the persons who have so contribute to change she condition : nor , indeed , do she understand what the latter really be , until she have make some further progress , and acquire more accurate knowledge in the world . but this be clear , that she stepfather be dull and weak : that drop she h , and be not refin in manners or appearance ; and that little be a spoiled quarrelsome urching , always have he way , always tread upon she foot , always upset he dinner on she dress , and keep she out of she inheritance . none of these , as she feel , could comprehend she : and she solitary heart naturally pine for other attachment , and she seek around she where to bestow the precious boon of she unoccupied affection . this dear girl , then , from want of sympathy , or other cause , make herself so disagreeable at home , and frightene she mother and bore she stepfather so much , that they be quite as anxious as she could be that she should settle for herself in life ; and hence 's desire express to he friend , in the last chapter , that . strong should die , and that he would take Blanche to himself as a second . but as this could not be , any other person be welcome to win she : and a smart young fellow , well - look and well educate like we friend , be quite free to propose for she if he have a mind , and would have be receive with open arm by as a son - in - law , have he have the courage to come forward as a competitor for 's hand . , however , besides other drawback , choose to entertain a extreme diffidence about himself . he be asham of he late failure , of he idle and nameless condition , of the poverty which he have bring on he mother by he folly , and there be as much of vanity as remorse in he present state of doubt and distrust . how could he ever hope for such a prize as this brilliant Blanco Amory , who live in a fine park and mansion , and be wait on by a score of grand domestic , whilst a maid - servant bring in they meagre meal at Fairoaks , and he mother be oblige to pinch and manage to make both end meet ? obstacle seem for he insurmountable , which would have vanish have he march manfully upon they : and he prefer despairing , or dally with he wish , -- or perhaps he have not positively shape they as yet , -- to attempt to win gallantly the object of he desire . many a young man fail by that species of vanity call shyness , who might , for the asking have he will . but we do not pretend to say that have , as yet , ascertain he : or that he be do much more than think about fall in love . be charme and lively . she fascinate and cajol he by a thousand art or natural graces or flattery . but there be lurking reason and doubt , besides shyness and vanity , withhold he . in spite of she cleverness , and she protestation , and she fascination , Pen's mother have divine the girl , and do not trust she . see Blanco light - minded and frivolous , detect many wants in she which offend the pure and pious - minded lady ; a want of reverence for she parent , and for thing
thing more sacred , think : worldliness and selfishness couch under pretty word and tender expression . and battle these point strongly at first with the widow -- be as yet enthusiastic about she new friend , and not far - go enough in love to attempt any concealment of he feeling . he would laugh at these objection of 's , and say , " Psha , mother ! you be jealous about -- all woman be jealous . " but when , in the course of a month or two , and by watch the pair with that anxiety with which brooding woman watch over they son 's affection -- and in acknowledging which , I have no doubt there be a sexual jealousy on the mother 's part , and a secret pang -- when see that the intimacy appear to make progress , that the two young people be perpetually find pretext to meet , and that be at Fairoaks or at the every day , the poor widow 's heart begin to fail she -- she darling project seem to vanish before she ; and , give way to she weakness , she fairly tell one day what she view and longing be ; that she feel herself break , and not long for this world , and that she hope and pray before she go , that she might see she two child one . the late event , Pen's life and career and former passion for the actress , have break the spirit of this tender lady . she feel that he have escape she , and be in the maternal nest no more ; and she cling with a sickening fondness to , who have be leave to she by in . kiss and soothe she in he grand patronise way . he have see something of this , he have long think he mother want to make this marriage -- do know anything of it ? ( not she ,-- . say -- not for worlds would she have breathe a word of it to ) -- " well , well , there be time enough , he mother would not die , " say , laughingly : " he would not hear of any such thing , and as for the Muse , she be too grand a lady to think about poor little I -- and as for , who know that she would have I ? she would do anything you tell she , to be sure . but be I worthy of she ? " " o , , you might be , " be the widow 's reply ; not that ever doubt that he be ; and a feeling of indefinable pleasure and self - complacency come over he as he think over this proposal , and image to himself , as he memory remember she for year past , always fair and open , kindly and pious , cheerful , tender and true . he look at she with brightening eye as she come in from the garden at the end of this talk , she cheek rather flush , she look frank and smile -- a basket of ros in she hand . she take the finest of they and bring it to , who be refresh by the odour and colour of these flower ; and hang over she fondly and give it to she . " and I might have this prize for the asking ! " think with a thrill of triumph , as he look at the kindly girl . " why , she be as beautiful and as generous as she ros . " the image of the two woman remain for ever after in he mind , and he never recal it but the tear come into he eye . before very many week ' intimacy with she new acquaintance , however , be oblige to give in to 's opinion , and own that the Muse be selfish , unkind , and inconstant . of course Blanco confide to she bosom friend all the little grief and domestic annoyance ; how the family could not comprehend she and she move among they a isolate being ; how she poor mamma 's education have be neglect , and she be force to blush for she blunder ; how be a weak person deplorably unintellectual , and only happy when smoke he odious cigar ; how , since the birth of she little brother , she have see she mother 's precious affection , which she value more than anything in life , estrange from she once darl daughter ; how she be alone , alone , alone in the world . but these grief , real and heart - rende though they might be to a young lady of exquisite sensibility , do not convince of the propriety of 's conduct in many small incidents of , for instance , life might be very provoking , and might have deprive of she mamma 's affection , but this be no reason why Blanche should box the child 's ears because he upset a glass of water over she draw , and why she should call he many opprobrious name in the english and french language ; and the preference accord to little be certainly no reason why Blanche should give herself imperial air of command towards the boy 's governess , and send that young lady upon message through the house to bring she book or to fetch she pocket - handkerchief . when a domestic perform a errand for honest , she be always thankful and pleased ; whereas she could not but perceive that the little Muse have not the slightest scruple in give she command to all the world round about she , and in disturbing anybody 's ease or comfort , in order to
to administer to she own . it be 's first experience in friendship ; and it pain the kind creature 's heart to be oblige to give up as delusion , one by one , those charms and brilliant quality in which she fancy have dress she new friend , and to find that the fascinating little fairy be but a mortal , and not a very amiable mortal after all . what generous person be there that have not be so deceive in he time ?-- what person , perhaps , that have not so disappointed other in he turn ? after the scene with little , in which that refractory son and heir of the house of have receive the compliment in and , and the accompanying box on the ear from he sister , who have plenty of humwe , could not help call to mind some very touching and tender verse which the Muse have read to she out of , and which begin , " my pretty baby brother , may angels guard thy rest , " in which the Muse , after compliment the baby upon the station in life which it be about to occupy , and contrast it with she own lonely condition , vow nevertheless that the angel boy would never enjoy such affection as hers be , or find in the false world before he anything so constant and tender as a sister 's heart . " it may be , " the forlorn one say , " it may be , you will slight it , my pretty baby sweet , you will spurn I from you bosom , I will cling around you foot ! o let I , let I , love you ! the world will prove to you as false as ' tis to other , but I be ever true . " and behold the be box the darling brother 's ears instead of kneeling at he foot , and give she first lesson in the cynical philosophy -- not quite she first , however , -- something like this selfishness and waywardness , something like this contrast between practice and poetry , between grand versified aspiration and every day life , she have witness at home in the person of we young friend . but then be different . be a man . it seem natural somehow that he should be self - willed and should have he own way . and under he waywardness and selfishness , indeed there be a kind and generous heart . of it be hard that such a diamond should be change away against such a false stone as this . in a word , begin to be tired of she admire Blanche . she have assay she and find she not true ; and she former admiration and delight , which she have express with she accustom generous artlessness , give way to a feeling , which we shall not call contempt , but which be very near it ; and which cause to adopt towards a grave and tranquil tone of superiority , which be at first by no means to the Muse 's liking . nobody like to be find out , or , have hold a high place , to submit to step down . the consciousness that this event be impend do not serve to increase 's good -humour , and as it make she peevish and dissatisfie with herself , it probably render she even less agreeable to the persons round about she . so there arise , one fatal day , a battle - between and , in which the friendship between they be all but aslain outright . Dearest Blanche have be unusually capricious and wick on this day . she have be insolent to she mother ; savage with little ; odiously impertinent in she behaviour to the boy 's governess ; and intolerably cruel to , she attendant . not venture to attack she friend ( for the little tyrant be of a timid feline nature , and only use she claw upon those who be weaker than herself ) , she maltreate all these , and especially poor , who be menial , confidante , companion ( slave always ) , accord to the caprice of she young mistress . this girl , who have be sit in the room with the young lady , be drive thence in tear , occasion by the cruelty of she mistress , and rak with a parting sarcasm as she go sobb from the door , fairly break out into a loud and indignant invective -- wonder how one so young could forget the deference owe to she elder as well as to she inferior in station ; and professe so much sensibility of she own , could torture the feeling of other so wantonly . tell she friend that she conduct be absolutely wicked , and that she ought to ask pardon of on she knee for it . and have deliver herself of a hot and voluble speech whereon the delivery astonished the speaker as much almost as she auditor , she run to she bonnet and shawl , and go home across the park in a great flurry and perturbation , and to the surprise of , who have not expect she until night . alone with , give a account of the scene , and give up she friend henceforth . " of , " she say , " you be right ; Blanche , who seem so soft and so kind , be , as you have say , selfish and cruel . she who be always speak of she affections can have no heart . no honest girl would afflict a mother so , or torture a dependant ; and -- and , I give she up from this day , and I will
will have no other friend but you . " on this the two lady go through the osculatory ceremony which they be in the habit of perform , and get a great secret comfort from the little quarrel -- for 's confession seem to say , " that girl can never be a wife for , for she be light - minded and heartless , and quite unworthy of we noble hero . he will be sure to find out she unworthiness for he own part , and then he will be save from this flighty creature , and awake out of he delusion . " but do not tell , perhaps do not acknowledge to herself , what have be the real cause of the day 's quarrel . be in a very wicked mood , and bend upon mischief everywhere , the little wicked Muse of a Blanche have very soon begin she tricks . she darling have come to pass a long day ; and as they be sit in she own room together , have choose to bring the conversation round to the subject of . " I be afraid he be sadly fickle , " miss Blanche observe ; " . , and many more Clavering people , have tell we all about the actress . " " I be quite a child when it happen , and I do not know anything about it , " answer , blush very much . " he use she very ill , " Blanche say , wag she little head . " he be false to she . " " I be sure he be not , " cry out ; " he act most generously by she ; he want to give up everything to marry she . it be she that be false to he . he nearly break he heart about it : he ---- " " I think you do not know anything about the story , dearest , " interpose . " have say so , " say . " well , he be very clever , " continue the other little dear , " what a sweet poet he be ! have you ever read he poem ? " " only the ' and the Diver , ' which he translate for we , and he , which do not get the prize ; and , indeed , I think it very pompous and prosy , " say , laugh . " have he never write you any poem , then , love ? " ask . " no , my dear , " say . Blanco run up to she friend , kiss she fondly , call she my dearest at least three time , look she archly in the face , nod she head , and say , " promise to tell no -o - body , and I will show you something . " and trip across the room daintily to a little mother - of - pearl inlaid desk , she open it with a silver key , and take out two or three papers crumple and rather stain with green , which she submit to she friend . take they and read they . they be love -verse sure enough -- something about -- about a -- about a river . she look at they for a long time ; but in truth the line be not very distinct before she eye . " and you have answer they , ? " she ask , put they back . " o no ! not for worlds , dearest , " the other say : and when she dearest have quite done with the verse , she tripp back and pop they again into the pretty desk . then she go to she piano , and sang two or three songs of , whose flourish of music she flexible little voice could execute to perfection , and sate by , vaguly listen as she perform these piece . what be think about the while ? she hardly know ; but sate there silent as the song roll by . after this concert the young lady be summon to the room where luncheon be serve ; and whither they of course go with they arm round each other 's waists . and it could not have be jealousy or anger on 's part which have make she silent ; for , after they have trip along the corridor and descende the step , and be about to open the door which lead into the hall , pause , and look she friend kindly and frankly in the face , kiss she with a sisterly warmth . something occur after this -- 's manner of eating , probably , or 's blunder , or smell of cigar -- which vex , and she give way to that series of naughtiness whereor we have speak , and which end in the above little quarrel . full of visitor the difference between the girl do not last long . be always too eager to forgive and be forgive , and as for , she hostility , never very long or durable , have not be provoke by the above scene . nobody care about be accuse of wickedness . no vanity be hurt by that sort of charge : Blanche be rather pleased than provoke by she friend 's indignation , which never would have be raise but for a cause which both know , though neither spoke of . and so , with a sigh , be oblige to confess that the romantic part of she first friendship be at a end , and that the object of it be only worthy of a very ordinary sort of regard . as for , she instantly compose a copy of touching verse , set forth she desertion and disenchantment . it be
be only the old story , she write , of love meeting with coldness , and fidelity return by neglect ; and some new neighbour arrive from about this time , in whose family there be daughter , have the advantage of select a eternal friend from one of these young lady , and impart she sorrow and disappointment to this new sister . the tall footman come but seldom now with note to the sweet ; the pony - carriage be but rarely despatch to Fairoak to be at the order of the ladie there . Blanco adopt a sweet look of suffering martyrdom when come to see she . the other laugh at she friend 's sentimental mood , and treat it with a good -humour that be by no means respectful . but if find new female friend to conseal she , the faithful historian be also bound to say , that she discover some acquaintance of the other sex who seem to give she consolation too . if ever this artless young creature meet a young man , and have ten minute ' conversation with he in a garden walk , in a drawing - room window , or in the interval of a waltz , she confide in he , so to speak -- make play with she beautiful eye -- speak in a tone of tender interest , and simple and touch appeal , and leave he , to perform the same pretty little drama in behalf of he successor . when the first come down to the , there be very few audience before whom miss Blanche could perform : hence have all the benefit of she glance and confidence , and the drawing - room window or the garden walk all to himself . in the town of , it have be say , there be actually young man : in the near surround country , only a curate or two or a rustic young squire , with large foot and ill - make clothes . to the dragoon quarter at the make no overture : it be unluckily he own regiment : he have leave it on bad term with some officer of the corps -- a ugly business about a horse bargain -- a dispute play account -- blind - Hookey -- a white feather -- who need ask ?-- it be not we business to inquire too closely into the bygone of we character , except in so far as they previous history appertain to the development of this present story . but the autumn , and the end of the and the season , bring one or two county family down to they house , and fill tolerably the neighbour little watering - place of , and open we friend 's at , and collect the usual company at the and - ball there . up to this time , the old county family have be rather shy of we friend of . the Fogey of ; the of ; the Welbore of the Barrow , etc. : all sort of story be current among these folk regard the family at ; --indeed , nobody ought to say that people in the country have no imagination who hear they talk about new neighbour . and he , and she birth and parentage , about , about , there have be endless histories which need not be recapitulate ; and the family of the have be three month in the county before the great people around begin to call . but at the end of the season , the of , of the , come to , and the Countess Dowager of , whose son be also a magnate of the land , to occupy a mansion on the at -- these great folk come publicly , immediately , and in state , to call upon the family of Clavering ; and the carriage of the county family speedily follow in the track which have be leave in the avenue by they lordly wheel . it be then that begin to have a opportunity of exercising that skill which he possess , and of forget , in the occupations of he art , the pang of love . it be then that the large footman be too much employ at to be able to bring message , or dally over the cup of small beer with the poor little maid at Fairoaks . it be then that Blanche find other dear friend than , and other place to walk in besides the river - side , where be fish . he come day after day , and whip the stream , but the " fish , fish ! " would not do they duty , nor the Peri appear . and here , though in strict confidence , and with a request that the matter go no further , we may as well allude to a delicate business , of which previous hint have be give . mention have be make , in a former page , of a certain hollow tree , at which use to take he station when engage in he passion for , and the cavity of which he afterwards use for other purpose than to insert he bait and fishing - cans in . the truth be , be convert this tree into a post-office . under a piece of moss and a stone , he use to put little poem , or letter equally poetical , which be address to a certain Undine , or who frequent the stream , and which , once or twice , be replace by a receipt in the shape of a flower , or by a modest little word or two of acknowledgment , write in a delicate hand , in or , and on pink scent paper . certainly , use to walk by this stream ,
, as we have see ; and it be a fact that she use pink scent paper for she correspondence . but after the great folk have invade , and the family coach pass out of the lodge - gate , evening after evening , on they way to the other great country house , nobody come to fetch Pen's letter at the post-office ; the white paper be not exchange for the pink , but lay undistur under its stone and its moss , whilst the tree be reflect into the stream , and the go roll by . there be not much in the letter certainly ; in the pink note scarcely anything -- merely a little word or two , half jocular , half sympathetic , such as might be write by any young lady . but oh , you silly Pendennis , if you want this one , why do you not speak ? perhaps neither party be in earnest . you be only play at be in love , and the sportive little Undine be humoure you at the same play . but if a man be baulk at this game , he not unfrequently lose he temper ; and when nobody come any more for Pen's poem , he begin to look upon those composition in a very serious light . he feel almost tragical and romantic again , as in he first affair of the heart :-- at any rate he be bend upon have a explanation . one day he go to the and there be a roomful of visitor : on another , be not to be see ; she be go to a ball that night , and be lie down to take a little sleep . Pen curse ball , and the narrowness of he means , and the humility of he position in the country that cause he to be pass over by the giver of these entertainment . on a third occasion , be in the garden , and he run thither ; she be walk there in state with no less personage than the and of and the episcopal family , who scowl at he , and draw up in great dignity when he be present to they , and they hear he name . the have hear it before , and also of the little transaction in the 's . " the say you be a sad young man , " good - nature whisper to he . " what have you be a doing of ? , I hope , to vex such a dear as yours ? how be you dear ? why do not she come and I ? we can not see she this ever such a time . we be a goin about a gaddin , so that we do not see no neighbour now . give my love to she and , and come all to dinner to - morrow . " be too unwell to come out but and come , and there be a great party , and only get a opportunity of a hurried word with . " you never come to the river now " he say . " I can not , " say Blanche , " the house be full of people . " " Undine have leave the stream , " go on , choose to be poetical . " she never ought to have go there , " answer . " she will not go again . it be very foolish : very wrong : it be only play . besides , you have other consolation at home , " she add , look he full in the face a instant , and drop she eye . if he want she , why do he not speak then ? she might have say " yes " even then . but as she speak of other consolation at home , he think of , so affectionate and so pure , and of he mother at home , who have bend she fond heart upon unit he with she adopt daughter . " Blanche ! " he begin , in a vexed tone ,-- " ! " " be look at we , , " the young lady say . " I must go back to the company , " and she run off , leave to bite he nail in perplexity , and to look out into the moonlight in the garden . indeed be look at . she be talk with , or appear to listen to the talk of , , 's son , and grandson of the , who be seat in state in the place of honour , gravely receive 's bad grammar , and patronise the vacuous , whose interest in the county she be desirous to secure . and have be at together , where the latter , during he heyday of good fortune and fashion , have be the superior of the young patrician , and perhaps rather supercilious towards he . they have meet for the first time , since they part at the , at the table to - day , and give each other that exceedingly impertinent and amusing demi-nod of recognition which be practise in only , and only to perfection by man , -- and which seem to say , " Confound you -- what do you do here ? " " I know that man at , " say to --" a , I think . " " yes , " say . " he seem rather sweet upon , " the gentleman go on . look at they , and perhaps thought so too , but say nothing . " a man of large property in the county , be not he ? he use to talk about represent it . he use to speak at the union .
. whereabouts do he estate lie ? " smile . " he estate lie on the other side of the river , near the lodge - gate . he be my cousin , and I live there . " " where ? " ask , with a laugh . " why , on the other side of the river , at , " answer . " Many pheasant there ? cover look rather good , " say the simple gentleman . smile again . " we have nine hen and a cock , a pig , and a old pointer . " " Pendennis do not preserve , then ? " continue . " you should come and see he , " the girl say , laugh , and greatly amuse at the notion that she be a great county gentleman , and perhaps have give himself out to be such . " indeed , I quite long to renew we acquaintance , " say , gallantly , and with a look which fairly say , " it be you that I would like to come and see " -- to which look and speech vouchsaf a smile , and make a little bow . here Blanche come step up with she most fascinating smile and ogle , and beg dear to come and take the second in a song . be ready to do anything good - natured , and go to the piano ; by which listen as long as the duet last , and until begin for herself , when he strode away . " what a nice , frank , amiable , well - breed girl that be , , " say to a gentleman who have come over with he from -- " the tall one , I mean , with the ringlet and red lip -- monstrous red , be not they ? " " what do you think of the girl of the house ? " ask . " I think she be a lean , scraggy humbug , " say , with great candour . " she drag she shoulders out of she dress , she never let she eye alone : and she go simper and ogl about like a french waiting - maid . " Pynsent , be civil , " cry the other , " somebody can hear . " " oh , it be of , " say . " evening , ; we be just talk of you charming cousin . " " any relation to my old friend , major Pendennis ? " ask . " he nephew . have the pleasure of meet you at , " say with he very best air -- the acquaintance between the gentleman be make in a instant . in the afternoon of the next day , the two gentleman who be stay at be find by on he return from a fishing excursion , in which he have no sport , seat in he mother 's drawing - room in comfortable conversation with the widow and she ward . , tall and gaunt , with large red whisker and a imposing tuft to he ching , be strid over a chair in the intimate neighbourhood of . she be amuse by he talk , which be simple , straightforward , rather humorous and keen , and intersperse with homely expression of a style which be sometimes call slang . it be the first specimen of a young dandy that have see or hear : for she have be but a chit at the time of 's introduction at Fairoaks , nor indeed be that ingenuous gentleman much more than a boy , and he refinement be only that of a school and college . , as he enter the Fairoak premise with he companion , eye and note everything . " old gardener , " he say , see at the lodge -- " old red livery waistcoat -- clothes hang out to dry on the gooseberry - bushes -- blue apron , white duck -- gad , they must be young 's white duck -- nobody else wear 'em in the family . rather a shy place for a suck county member , ay , ? " " Snug little crib , " say , " pretty cosy little lawn . " " at home , old gentleman ? " say to the old domestic . answer , " no , be ago out . " " be the lady at home ? " ask the younger visitor . answer , " yes , they be ; " and as the pair walk over the trim gravel , and by the neat shrubbery , up the step to the hall - door , which old open , note everything that he see ; the barometer and the letter - bag , the umbrella and the lady ' clog , Pen' hat and tartan wrapper , and old open the drawing - room door , to introduce the new - comer . such minutia attract instinctively ; he seize they in spite of himself . " old fellow do all the work , " he whisper to . " . should not wonder if he be the housemaid . " the next minute the pair be in the presence of the Fairoaks lady ; in whom could not help recognise two perfectly well - breed lady , and to whom make he obeisance , with florid bow , and extra courtesy , accompany with a occasional know leer at he companion . do not choose to acknowledge these signal , except by extreme haughtiness towards , and particular deference to the ladie . if there be one thing laughable in 's eye , it be poverty . he have the soul of a butler who have be bring from he pantry to make fun in the drawing - room
room . he joke be plenty , and he good - nature thoroughly genuine , but he do not seem to understand that a gentleman could wear a old coat , or that a lady could be respectable unless she have she carriage , or employ a french milliner . " charme place , ma 'am , " say he , bow to the widow ; " noble prospect -- delightful to we Cockny , who seldom see anything but . " the widow say simply , she have never be in but once in she life -- before she son be bear . " village , ma 'am , fine village , " say , " and increase every day . it will be quite a large town soon . it be not a bad place to live in for those who can not get the country , and will repay a visit when you honour it . " " my brother , major Pendennis , have often mention you name to we , " the widow say , " and we have be very much amuse by some of you droll book , sir , " continue , who never could be bring to like 's book , and detest they tone most thoroughly . " he be my very good friend , " say , with a low bow , " and one of the best know man about town , and where know , ma 'am , appreciate -- I assure you appreciate . he be with we friend , at - - . have a touch of the gout and so , between ourselves , have you brother . I be go to Stillbrook for the pheasant - shoot , and afterwards to , where and I shall probably meet ; " and he pour out a flood of fashionable talk , introduce the name of a score of peer , and ratt on with breathless spirit , whilst the simple widow listen in silent wonder . what a man , she think ; be all the man of fashion in like this ? I be sure will never like he . be in the meanwhile engage with . he name some of the house in the neighbourhood whither he be go , and hope very much that he should see at some of they . he hope that she aunt would give she a season in . he say , that in the next parliament it be probable that he should canvass the county , and he hope to get 's interest here . he spoke of triumph as a orator at , and ask be he come into parliament too ? he talk on very pleasantly , and greatly to 's satisfaction , until himself appear , and , as have be say , find these gentleman . behave very courteously to the pair , now that they have find they way into he quarter ; and though he recollect with some twinge a conversation at , when be present , and in which after a great debate at the union , and in the midst of considerable excitement produce by a supper and champagne -cup ,-- he have announce he intention of come in for he native county , and have absolutely return thanks in a fine speech as the future member ; yet 's manner be so frank and cordial , that hope might have forget he little fanfaronnade , and any other braggadocio speech or action which he might have make . he suite himself to the tone of the visitor , then , and talk about and , and the old set at , with careless familiarity and high - breed ease , as if he live with marquise every day , and a duke be no more to he than a village curate . but at this juncture , and it be then six o'clock in the evening , Betsy , the maid , who do not know of the advent of strangers , walk into the room without any preliminary but that of flinge the door wide open before she , and bear in she arm a tray , contain three tea-cup , a tea - pot , and a plate of thick bread - and - butter . all 's splendour and magnificence vanish away at this -- and he falter and become quite abashed . " what will they think of we ? " he think : and , indeed , thrust he tongue in he cheek , think the tea infinitely contemptible , and leer and wink at to that effect . but to the transaction appear perfectly simple -- there be no reason present to he mind why people should not drink tea at six if they be mind , as well as at any other hour ; and he ask of , when they go away , " what the devil he be grinn and wink at , and what amuse he ? " " do not you see how the cub be asham of the thick bread - and - butter ? I dare say they be go to have treacle if they be good . I will take a opportunity of tell old Pendennis when we get back to town , " chuckle out . " do not see the fun , " say . " never think you do , " grow between he tooth ; they walk home rather sulkily . Wagg tell the story at dinner very smartly , with wonderful accuracy of observation . he describe old , the clothes that be dry , the clog in the hall , the drawing - room , and its furniture and picture ;-- " old man with a beak and bald head -- feu I bet two to one ; sticking - plaster full - length of a youth
youth in a cap and gown -- the present of , of course ; the widow when young in a miniature , ; she have the gown on when we come , or a dress make the year after , and the tip cut off the finger of she glove which she stitch she son 's collar with ; and then the sarving may come in with they tea so we leave the and the Countess to they bread - and - butter . " Blanche , near whom he sate as he tell this story , and who adore les homme desprit , burst out laugh , and call he such a odd , droll creature . but , who begin to be utterly disgusted with he , break out in a loud voice , and say , " I do not know , , what sort of lady you be accustom to meet in you own family , but by gad , as far as a first acquaintance can show , I never meet two better - breed woman in my life , and I hope , ma 'am , you will call upon th'ey , " he add , address , who be seat at 's right hand . turn to the guest on he left , and whisper . " that be what I call a sticker for . " and , give the young gentleman a delighted tap with she fan , wink she black eye at he , and say , " , you be a good feller . " after the affair with , a difference ever so slight , a tone of melancholy , perhaps a little bitter , might be perceive in 's converse with she cousin . she seem to weigh he and find he want too ; the widow see the girl 's clear and honest eye watch the young man at time , and a look of almost scorn pass over she face , as he lounge in the room with the woman , or lazily saunter smoke upon the lawn , or lol under a tree there over a book which he be too listless to read . " what have happen between you ? " eager - sight ask of the girl . " something have happen . have that wick little Blanche be make mischief ? tell I , . " " nothing have happen at all , " say . " then why do you look at so ? " ask he mother quickly . " look at he , dear mother ! " say the girl . " we two woman be no society for he : we do not interest he ; we be not clever enough for such a genius as . he waste he life and energie away among we , tie to we apron - string . he interest himself in nothing : he scarcely care to go beyond the garden - gate . even and strong pall upon he , " she add with a bitter laugh ; " and they be man , you know , and we superior . he will never be happy while he be here . why , be he not face the world , and without a profession ? " " we have get enough , with great economy , " say the widow , she heart begin to beat violently . " have spend nothing for month . I be sure he be very good . I be sure he might be very happy with we . " " do not agitate yourself so , dear mother , " the girl answer . " I do not like to see you so . you should not be sad because be unhappy here . all man be so . they must work . they must make themselves name and a place in the world . look , the two captains have fight and see battle ; that , who come here , and who will be very rich , be in a public office ; he work very hard , he aspire to a name and a reputation . he say be one of the best speaker at , and have as great a character for talent as any of the young gentleman there . Pen himself laugh at 's celebrity ( and indeed he be a horrid person ) , and say he be a dunce , and that anybody could write he book . " " I be sure they be odious and vulgar , " interpose the widow . " yet he have a reputation .-- you see the say , ' the celebrated have be sojourn at -- let we fashionable and eccentric look out for something from he caustic pen. ' if can write better than this gentleman , and speak better than , why do not he ? , he can not make speeches to we ; or distinguish himself here . he ought to go away , indeed he ought . " " dear , " say , take the girl 's hand . " be it kind of you to hurry he so ? I have be wait . I have be save up money these many month -- to -- to pay back you advance to we . " " Hush , mother ! " cry , embrace she friend hastily . " it be you money , not mine . never speak about that again . how much money have you save ? " say there be more than two hundred pound at the bank , and that she would be enable to pay off all 's money by the end of the next year . " give it he -- let he have the two hundred pound . let he go to and be a lawyer : be something , be worthy
worthy of he mother -- and of mine , dearest mamma , " say the good girl ; upon which , and with she usual tenderness and emotion , the fond widow declare that be a blessing to she and the best of girl -- and I hope no one in this instance will be dispose to contradict she . the widow and she daughter have more than one conversation on this subject ; and the elder give way to the superior reason of the honest and stronger - minded girl ; and indeed , whenever there be a sacrifice to be make on she part , this kind lady be only too eager to make it . but she take she own way , and do not loose sight of the end she have in view , in imparting these new plan to . one day she tell he of these project , and it who that have form they ; how it be who insist upon he go to and study ; how it be who would not hear of the -- the money arrangement when he come back from -- be settle just then : how it be whom he have to thank , if indeed he think that he have to go . at that news Pen' countenance blaze up with pleasure , and he hug he mother to he heart with a ardour that I fear disappoint the fond lady ; but she rally when he say , " by ! she be a noble girl , and may bless she mother ! I have be wear myself away for month here , longe to work , and not know how . I have be frett over the thought of my shame , and my debt , and my past curse extravagance and folly . I have suffer infernally . my heart have be half broken -- never mind about that . if I can get a chance to redeem the past , and to do my duty to myself and the best mother in the world , indeed , indeed , I will . I will be worthy of you yet . heaven bless you ! ! why be not she here , that I may go and thank she ? " go on with more incoherent phrasis ; pace up and down the room , drank glass of water , jump about he mother with a thousand embrace -- begin to laugh -- begin to s -- be happier than she have see he since he be a boy -- since he have taste of the fruit of that awful tree of , which , from the beginning , have temp all mankind . be not at home . be on a visit to the , daughter to my , sister to the late , and by consequence a distant kinswoman of 's , as she ladyship , who be deeply verse in genealogy , be graciously to point out to the modest country lady . be greatly delighted at the relationship be acknowledge ; though perhaps not over well please that take bell home with she for a couple of day to , and do not make the slightest invitation to . there be to be a ball at , and it be to be 's first appearance . the dowager come to fetch she in she carriage , and she go off with a white dress in she box , happy and blush , like the rose to which compare she . this be the night of the ball -- a public entertainment at the . " by ! " say , " I will ride over --No , I will not ride , but I will go too . " he mother be charme that he should do so ; and , as he be debat about the conveyance in which he should start for , call opportunely , say he be go himself , and that he would put he horse , the , into the gig , and drive over . when the grand company begin to fill the house at , the , who , as he patron say , be never in the way or out of it , seldom intrude himself upon its society , but go elsewhere to seek he relaxation . " I have see plenty of grand dinner in my time , " he say , " and dine , by , in a company where there be a king and royal duke at top and bottom , and every man along the table have six star on he coat ; but dammy , Glander , this finery do not suit I ; and the english lady with they confound buckram air , and the squire with they politics after dinner , send I to sleep -- sink I dead if they do not . I like a place where I can blow my cigar when the cloth be remove , and when I be thirsty , have my beer in its native pewter . " so on a gala - day at , the would contend himself with superintend the arrangement of the table , and drill the major - domo and servants ; and have look over the bill - of - fare with , would not care to take the least part in the banquet . " send I up a cutlet and a bottle of claret to my room , " this philosopher would say , and from the window of that apartment , which command the terrace and avenue , he would survey the company as they arrive in they carriage , or take a peep at the ladie in the hall through a oeil - de - boeuf which command it from he corridor . and the guest be seat , Strong would cross the park to
to 's cottage at , or to pay the landlady a visit at the Clavering Arms , or to drop in upon over she novel and tea . wherever the go he be welcome , and whenever he come away a smell of hot brandy - and - water linger behind he . the -- not the worst horse in 's stable -- be appropriate to 's express use ; and the old Campaigner saddle he or bring he home at all hour of the day or night , and drive or ride he up and down the country . where there be a public - house with a good tap of beer -- where there be a tenant with a pretty daughter who play on the piano -- to , to the play , or the barrack -- to , if any fun be on foot there ; to the rural fair or races , the and he brown horse make they way continually ; and this worthy gentleman live at free quarter in a friendly country . the soon take and the to . the latter be as familiar with the hotel and landlord there as with every other inn round about ; and have be accommodate with a bedroom to dress , they enter the ballroom . the be splendid . he wear three little gold cross in a brochette on the portly breast of he blue coat , and look like a foreign field - marshal . the ball be public and all sort of person be admit and encourage to come , young Pynsent have view upon the county and be patroness of the ball . there be a quadrille for the aristocracy at one end , and select benche for the people of fashion . towards this end the do not care to penetrate far ( as he say he do not care for the nob ) ; but in the other part of the room he know everybody -- the wine - merchant ' , innkeeper ' , tradesman 's , solicitor ' , squire -farmer ' daughter , they sire and brother , and plunge about shaking hand . " who be that man with the blue ribbon and the three - point star ? " ask . a gentleman in black with ringlet and a tuft stood gaze fiercely about he , with one hand in the arm -hole of he waistcoat and the other holding he claque . " by , it be ! " cry strong , burst out laugh . " Bon jour , ! -- , ! " " de la croix de , ! " say the chef , lay he hand on he decoration . " by , here be some more ribbon ! " say , amuse . a man with very black hair and whisker , dye evidently with the purple of , with twinkling eye and white eyelash , and a thousand wrinkle in he face , which be of a strange red colour , with two under - vest , and large glove and hand , and a profusion of diamonds and jewel in he waistcoat and stock , with coarse foot crumple into immense shiny boot , and a piece of parti-coloured ribbon in he button - hole , here come up and nod familiarly to the . the shook hand . " my friend , " say . " , of the bodyguard of he Highness the of . " that officer bow to the salute of ; who be now look out eagerly to see if the person want have enter the room . not yet . but the band begin presently perform ' see the Conquering hero come , ' and a host of fashionable -- Dowager Countess of , and , , , of Clavering , and , , . , , and , ( as the county paper afterwards describe they ) , enter the room . rush by , run up to , and seize she hand . " bless you ! " he say , " I want to speak to you -- I must speak to you -- let I dance with you . " " not for three dance , dear , " she say , smile : and he fall back , bite he nail with vexation , and forget to salute . after 's , 's follow in the procession . not ey it hard , hold a most musky pocket - handkerchief up to he face , and burst with laughter behind it . " who be the gal in green along with , ? " he ask of . " that be , 's daughter , " reply the Chevalier . the Colonel could hardly contain himself for laughing . contain some ball - practise under some calico drapery in the shady embrasure of a window , choose to assume a very gloomy and frown countenance , and to watch dance she first quadrille with for a partner . that gentleman be as solemn and severe as be upon such occasion , and walk through the dance as he would have walk up to he pew in church , without a smile upon he face , or allow any outward circumstance to interfere with he attention to the grave duty in which he be engage . but 's face be beam with pleasure and good - nature . the light and the crowd and music exci she . as she spread out she white rob , and perform she part of the dance , smile and happy , she brown ringlet flow back over she fair shoulders from she honest rosy face , more than one gentleman in the room admire and look after she ; and , who have a house in and give herself no small air of fashion when in the country , ask of
of who the young person be , mention a reign beauty in whom , in she ladyship 's opinion , be rather like , and pronounce that she would " do . " would have be very much surprised if any protegee of hers would not " do , " and wonder at 's impudence in judge upon the point at all . she survey with majestic glance through she eyeglass . she be pleased with the girl 's artless look , and gay innocent manner . she manner be very good , she ladyship thought . she arm be rather red , but that be a defect of she youth . she tone be far better than that of the little pert , who be dance opposite to she . be , indeed , the vis -a - vis of , and smile most killingly upon she dearest friend , and nod to she and talk to she , when they meet during the quadrille evolutions , and patronise she a great deal . she shoulder be the whitest in the whole room : and they be never easy in she frock for one single instant : nor be she eye , which roll about incessantly : nor be she little figure :-- it seem to say to all the people , " come and look at I -- not at that pink , healthy , bouncing country lass , , who scarcely know how to dance till I teach she . this be the true parisian manner -- this be the prettiest little foot in the room , and the prettiest little chaussure too . look at it , . look at it , , you who be scowl behind the curtain -- I know you be long to dance with I . " go on dancing , and keep a attentive eye upon in the embrasure of the window . he do not quit that retirement during the first quadrille , nor until the second , when the good - nature beckon to he to come up to she to the dais or place of honour where the dowager be , -- and whither go blushing and exceedingly awkward , as most conceit young fellow be . he perform a haughty salutation to , who hardly acknowledge he bow , and then go and pay he respects to the widow of the late Amory , who be splendid in diamonds , velvet , lace , feather , and all sort of millinery and goldsmith 's ware . yong , then in the fifth form at , and ardently expect he beard and he commission in a dragoon regiment , be the second partner who be honoure with 's hand . he be rapt in admiration of that young lady . he think he have never see so charme a creature . " I like you much better than the french girl " ( for this young gentleman have be dance with before ) , he candidly say to she . laugh , and look more good - humoured than ever ; and in the midst of she laughter catch a sight of , and continue to laugh as he , on he side , continue to look absurdly pompous and sulky . the next dance be a waltz , and young thought , with a sigh , that he do not know how to waltz , and vow he would have a master the next holiday . again claim 's hand for this dance ; and beheld she , in a fury , twirl round the room , she waist encircle by the arm of that gentleman . he never use to be angry before when , on summer evening , the chair and table be remove , and the governess call downstairs to play the piano , he and the ( who be a splendid performer , and could dance a british hornpipe , a german waltz , or a spanish fandango , if need were ) , and the two young lady , Blanche and , improvise little ball at . enjoy this dancing so much , and be so animated , that she even animate . Blanche , who could dance beautifully , have a unlucky partner , , of the Dragoon , then station at . for , though devote himself with great energy to the object in view , could not get round in time : and , not have the least ear for music , be unaware that he movement be too slow . so , in the waltz as in the quadrille , Blanche see that she dear friend have the honour of the dance , and be by no means pleased with the latter 's success . after a couple of turn with the heavy dragoon , she plead fatigue , and request to be lead back to she place , near she mamma , to whom be talk ; and she ask he why he have not ask she to waltz , and have leave she for the mercy of that great odious man in spur and a red coat ? " I think spur and scarlet be the most fascinating object in the world to young lady , " answer . " I never should have da to put my black coat in competition with that splendo red jacket . " " you be very unkind and cruel and sulky and naughty , " say , with another shrug of the shoulders . " you have better go away . you cousin be look at we over 's shoulder . " " will you waltz with I ? " say . " not this waltz . I can not , have just send away that good . look at , do you ever see such a creature ? but I will dance the next waltz with you ,
, and the quadrille too . I be promise , but I will tell Poole that I have forget my engagement to you . " " women forget very readily , " Pendennis say . " but they always come back , and be very repentant and sorry for what they have do , " Blanche say . " see , here come the Foker , and dear lean on he . how pretty she look ! " come up , and put out she hand to , to whom Pynsent make a sort of bow , appear to be not much more graceful than that domestic instrument to which compare he . but 's face be full of kindness . " I be so glad to have come , dear , " she say . " I can speak to you now . how be mamma ? the three dances be over , and I be engage to you for the next , " " I have just engage myself to , " say ; and nod she head , and make she usual little curtsey . " I do not intend to give he up , , " she say . " well , then , he will waltz with I , dear , " say the other . " will not you , ? " " I promise to waltz with . " " Provok ! " say , and make a curtsey in she turn she go and place herself under the ample wing of . be delighted with he mischief . the two prettiest girl in the room be quarrell about he . he flatter himself he have punish . he lean in a dandified air , with he elbow over the wall , and talk to : he quizze unmercifully all the man in the room -- the heavy dragoon in they tight jacket -- the country dandy in they queer attire -- the strange toilette of the ladie . one seem to have a bird 's nest in she head ; another have six pound of grape in she hair , besides she false pearl . " it be a coiffure of almonds and raisin , " say " and might be serve up for dessert . " in a word , he be exceedingly satirical and amusing . during the quadrille he carry on this kind of conversation with unflinching bitterness and vivacity , and keep Blanche continually laugh , both at he wickedness and joke , which be good , and also because be again they vis - a - vis , and could see and hear how merry and confidential they be . " yoArthu be charme to - night , " she whisper to , across 's shell - jacket , as be perform cavalier seul before they , draw through that figure with a thumb in the pocket of each waistcoat . " who ? " say . " , " answer Blanche , in french . " oh , it be such a pretty name ! " and now the young lady go over to side , and perform a pas seul in he turn . he have no waistcoat pocket to put he hand into , and they look large and swoll as they hang before he depend from the tight arm in the jacket . during the interval between the quadrille and the succeed waltz , do not take any notice of , except to ask she whether she partner , , be a amusing youth , and whether she like he so well as she other partner , . have plan which two dagger in 's gentle bosom , proceed to rattle on with Blanche Amory , and to make joke good or bad , but which be always loud . be at a loss to account for she cousin 's sulky behaviour , and ignorant in what she have offend he ; however , she be not angry in she turn at 's splenetic mood , for she be the most good - natured and forgive of woman , and besides , a exhibition of jealousy on a man 's part be not always disagreeable to a lady . as would not dance with she , she be glad to take up with the active , who be a still better performer than ; and be very fond of dancing , as every brisk and innocent young girl should be , when the waltz music begin she set off , and choose to enjoy herself with all she heart . on this occasion occupy the floor in conjunction with a lady of proportion scarcely inferior to he own ; , a large young woman in a strawberry - ice colour crape dress , the daughter of the lady with the grape in she head , whose bunch have admire . and now take he time , and with he fair partner Blanche hang lovingly on the arm which encircle she , set out upon he waltzing career , and felt , as he whir round to the music , that he and Blanche be perform very brilliantly indeed . very likely he look to see if think so too ; but she do not or would not see he , and be always engage with she partner . but 's triumph be not destin to last long ; and it be doom that poor Blanche be to have yet another discomfiture on that unfortunate night . while she and be whir round as light and brisk as a couple of opera-dancer , honest and the lady round whose large waist he be cling , be twist round very leisurely accord to they nature , and indeed be in everybody 's way . but they be more in 's way than in anybody be else , for he and Blanche , whilst execute they rapid
rapid gyration , come bolt up against the heavy dragoon and he lady , and with such force that the centre of gravity be lose by all four of the circumvolve body ; and be fairly upset , as be Pen himself , who be less lucky than he partner , who be only throw upon a bench against a wall . but come fairly down upon the floor , sprawl in the general ruin with and . the , though heavy , be good - natured , and be the first to burst out into a loud laugh at he own misfortune , which nobody therefore heed . but be savage at she mishap ; place on she seant , and look pitifully round , present a object which very few people could see without laugh ; and be furious when he hear the people giggle about he . he be one of those sarcastic young fellow that do not bear a laugh at he own expense , and of all thing in the world fear ridicule most . as he get up and be laugh at he ; everybody be laugh ; and he partner be laugh ; and boil with wrath against the pair , and could have stab they both on the spot . he turn away in a fury from they , and begin blundere out apology to . it be the other couple 's fault -- the woman in pink have do it -- hope be not hurt -- would she not have the courage to take another turn ? in a pet say she be very much hurt indeed , and she would not take another turn ; and she accept with great thanks a glass of water which a cavalier , who wear a blue ribbon and a three - point star , rush to fetch for she when he have see the deplorable accident . she drank the water , smile upon the bringer gracefully , and turn she white shoulder at in the most marked and haughty manner , besotch the gentleman with the star to conduct she to she mamma ; and she hold out she hand in order to take he arm . the man with the star tremble with delight at this mark of she favour ; he bow over she hand , press it to he coat fervidly , and look round he with triumph . it be no other than the happy Mirobolant whom Blanche have select as a escort . but the truth be , that the young lady have never fairly look in the artist 's face since he have be employ in she mother 's family , and have no idea but it be a foreign nobleman on whose arm she be lean . as she go off , forget he humiliation in he surprise , and cry out , " by , it be the cook ! " the instant he have utter the word , he be sorry for have speak they -- for it be Blanche who have herself invite to escort she , nor could the artist do otherwise than comply with a lady 's command . Blanco in she flutter do not hear what say ; but hear he , and cast a furious glance at he over he shoulder , which rather amuse . he be in a mischievous and sulky humour ; want perhaps to pick a quarrel with somebody ; but the idea of have insult a cook , or that such a individual should have any feeling of honou at all , do not much enter into the mind of this lofy young aristocrat , the apothecary 's son . it have never enter that poor artist 's head , that he as a man be not equal to any other mortal , or that there be anything in he position so degrading as to prevent he from give he arm to a lady who ask for it . he have see in the fete in he own country fine lady , not certainly demoiselle ( but the demoiselle Anglaise he know be a great deal more free than the spinster in ) , join in the dance with Blaise or Pierre ; and he would have take Blanco up to , and possibly have ask she to dance too , but he hear exclamation , which strike he as if it have shoot he , and cruelly humiliate and angere he . she do not know what cause he to start , and to grind a oath between he tooth . but , who be acquaint with the poor fellow 's state of mind , have have the interesting information from we friend , be luckily in the way when want , and say something rapidly in , which the other understood , the beg to come and take a ice before she go back to . upon which the unhappy relinquish the arm which he have hold for a minute , and with a most profound and piteous bow , fall back . " do not you know who it be ? " strong ask of , as he lead she away . " it be the . " " how should I know ? " ask Blanche . " he have a croix ; he be very distingue ; he have beautiful eye . " " the poor fellow be mad for you beaux yeux , I believe , " Strong say . " he be a very good cook , but he be not quite right in the head . " " what do you say to he in the unknown tongue ? " ask . " he be a Gascon , and come from the border of , " Strong answer . " I tell he he would lose he place if he walk with you . " "
" poor ! " say Blanche . " do you see the look he give ? " -- ask , enjoy the idea of the mischief --" I think he would like to run little through with one of he spit . " " he be a odious , conceit , clumsy creature , that , " say Blanche . " look as if he would like to kill he too , so do Pynsent , " Strong say . " what ice will you have -- water ice or cream ice ? " " . who be that odd man star at I -- he be decore too . " " that be my friend , a very queer character , in the service of the of . Hallo ! what be that noise ? I will be back in a instant , " say the , and spring out of the room to the ballroom , where a scuffle and a noise of high voice be hear . the refreshment - room , in which now find herself , be a room set apart for the purpose of supper , which Rincer the landlord have provide for those who choose to partake , at the rate of five shilling per head . also , refreshment of a superior class be here ready for the ladie and gentleman of the county familie who come to the ball ; but the commoner sort of person be keep out of the room by a waiter who stand at the portal , and who say that be a select room for and 's party , and not to be open to the public till supper - time , which be not to be until past midnight . , who dance with he constituent 's daughter , take they and they mamma in for they refreshment there . strong , who be manager and master of the revel wherever he go , have of course the entree -- and the only person who be now occupy the room be the gentleman with the black wig and the order in he button -- hole ; the officer in the service of he Highness the of . this gentleman have establish himself very early in the evening in this apartment , where , say he be confoundedly thirsty , he call for a bottle of champagne . at this order the waiter instantly suppose that he have to do with a grandee , and the Colonel sate down and begin to eat he supper and absorb he drink , and enter affably into conversation with anybody who enter the room . and find he there , when they leave the ballroom , which they do pretty early -- to go and smoke a cigar , and look at the people gather outside the ballroom on the shore , which he declare be much better fun than to remain within ; to hang on to a 's arm , as he be always pleased to do on the arm of the greatest man in the company . not have star at these gentleman in so odd a manner , as they pass through the ' select ' room , that Clavering make inquirie of the landlord who he be , and hint a strong opinion that the officer of the 's service be drink . , too , have have the honour of a conversation with the servant of the indian potentate . it be 's cue to speak to everybody ( which he do , to do he justice , in the most ungracious manner ) ; and he take the gentleman in the black wig for some constituent , some merchant captain , or other outlandish man of the place . , then , come into the refreshment - room with a lady , the wife of a constituent , on he arm , the ask he if he would try a glass of ? take it with great gravity , bow , taste the wine , and pronounce it excellent , and with the utmost politeness retreate before . this gravity and decorum route and surprise the more than any other kind of behaviour probably would : he star after stupidly , and pronounce to the landlord over the counter that he be a rum one . blush , and hardly know what to say . be a county 's grandson , go to set up as a parliament man . not on the other hand , wear order and diamonds , jingle sovereign constantly in he pocket , and pay he way like a man ; so not know what to say , say , " yes , -- yes , ma 'am , do you say tea ? cup a tea for , , " and so get off that discussion regard 's qualitie , into which the 's officer appear inclin to enter . in fact , if the truth must be tell , , have remain at the buffet almost all night , and employ himself very activly whilst there , have considerably flush he brain by drinking , and he be still go on drinking , when and enter the room . when the run out of the apartment , attract by the noise in the dancing - room , the rise from he chair with he little red eye glow like coal , and , with rather a unsteady gait advanc towards , who be sipp she ice . she be absorb in absorb it , for it be very fresh and good ; or she be not curiious to know what be go on in the adjoining room , although the waiter were , who run after . so that when she look up from she glass , she beheld this strange man star at she out of he little red eye . " who be he
he ? it be quite exciting . " " and so you be , " say he , after gaze at she . " , by ! " " who -- who speak to I ? " say , alias Blanche . but the noise in the ballroom be really become so loud , that we must rush back thither , and see what be the cause of the disturbance . be both Quarrelsome and Sentimental civil war be rage , high word passing , people push and squeeze together in a unseemly manner , round a window in the corner of the ballroom , close by the door through which the shouldere he way . through the open window , the crowd in the street below be send up sarcastic remark , such as " into he ! " " where be the police ? " and the like ; and a ring of individual , amongst whom be conspicuous , be gather round on the one side ; whilst several gentleman and lady surround we friend on the other . strong penetrate into this assembly , elbow by , who be charme at the 's appearance , and cry , " save he , save he ! " in frantic and pathetic accent . the cause of the disturbance , it appear , be the angry little chef of 's culinary establishment . shortly after have quit the room , and whilst , greatly irate at he downfall in the waltz , which have make he look ridiculous in the eyes of the nation , and by 's behaviour to he , which have still further insult he dignity , be endeavour to get some coolness of body and temper , by look out of window towards the sea , which be sparkl in the distance , and murmur in a wonderful calm -- whilst he be really try to compose himself , and own to himself , perhaps , that he have act in a very absurd and peevish manner during the night -- he feel a hand upon he shoulder ; and , on look round , beheld , to he utter surprise and horror , that the hand in question belong to , whose eye be glar out of he pale face and ringlet at . to be tap on the shoulder by a french cook be a piece of familiarity which make the blood of the Pendennise to boil up in the vein of they descendant , and he be astounde , almost more than enrage , at such a indignity . " you speak french ? " say in he own language to . " what be that to you , pray ? " say , in . " at any rate , you understand it ? " continue the other , with a bow . " yes , sir , " say , with a stamp of he foot ; " I understand it pretty well . " " Vous I comprendrez alors , , " reply the other , roll out he r with force , " quand je vous dis que vous etes un lache . -- un lache , entendez - vous ? " " what ? " say , start round on he . " you understand the meaning of the word and its consequence among man of honou ? " the artist say , put he hand on he hip , and star at . " the consequence be , that I will fl you out of window , you impudent scoundrel , " bawl out ; and dart upon the , he would very likely have put he threat into execution , for the window be at hand , and the artist by no means a match for the young gentleman -- have not and another heavy officer flng themselves between the combatant , -- have not the lady begin to scream , -- have not the fiddle stop , have not the crowd of people come run in that direction , -- have not , with a face of great alarm , look over they head and ask for 's sake what be wrong , -- have not the opportune Strong make he appearance from the refreshment - room , and find Alcides grind he tooth and jabber oath in he , and look uncommonly wicked , although try to appear as calm as possible , when the lady and the crowd come up . " what have happen ? " strong ask of the chef , in spanish . " I be , " say the other , slapp he breast , " and he have insult I . " " what have he say to you ? " ask . " Il m'a appele -- , " hiss out the little . strong could hardly help laugh . " come away with I , poor , " he say . " we must not quarrel before lady . come away ; I will carry you message to .-- the poor fellow be not right in he head , " he whisper to one or two people about he ; -- and other , and anxious 's face visible amongst these , gather round and ask the cause of the disturbance . do not know . " the man be go to give he arm to a young lady , on which I say that he be a cook , and the man call I a coward and challenge I to fight . I own I be so surprised and indignant , that if you gentleman have not stop I , I should have throw he out of window , " say . " d --- he , serve he right , too , -- the impudent foreign scoundrel , " the gentleman say . " I -- I be very sorry if I hurt
hurt he feeling , though , " add and be glad to hear he say that ; although some of the young buck say , " no , hang the fellow , -- hang those impudent foreigner -- little thrashing would do they good . " " you will go and shake hand with he before you go to sleep -- will not you , ? " say , come up to he . " foreigners may be more susceptible than we be , and have different manners . if you hurt a poor man 's feeling , I be sure you would be the first to ask he pardon . would not you , dear ? " she look all forgiveness and gentleness , like a angel , as she speak ; and take both she hand , and look into she kind face , and say indeed he would . " how fond that girl be of I ! " he think , as she stand gazing at he . " shall I speak to she now ? no -- not now . I must have this absurd business with the over . " ask -- would not he stop and dance with she ? she be as anxious to keep he in the room , as he to quit it . " will not you stop and waltz with I , ? I be not afraid to waltz with you . " this be a affectionate , but a unlucky speech . see himself prostrate on the ground , have tumble over and the dragoon , and fling Blanche up against the wall -- see himself on the ground , and all the people laugh at he , and amongst they . " I shall never dance again , " he reply , with a dark and determined face . " never . I be surprise you should ask I . " " be it because you can not get Blanche for a partner ? " ask , with a wicked , unlucky captiousness . " because I do not wish to make a fool of myself , for other people to laugh at I , " answer -- " for you to laugh at I , . I see you and . by ! no man shall laugh at I . " " , , do not be so wick ! " cry out the poor girl , hurt at the morbid perverseness and savage vanity of . he be glar round in the direction of as if he would have like to engage that gentleman as he have do the cook . " who think the worse of you for stumbling in a waltz ? " if do , we do not . " why be you so sensitive , and ready to think evil ? " here again , by ill luck , come up to , and say " I have it in command from to ask whether I may take you in to supper ? " " I -- I be go in with my cousin , " say . " O-- pray , no ! " say . " you be in such good hand , that I can not do better than leave you : and I be go home . " " good - night , , " say , drily -- to which speech ( which , in fact , mean , " go to the deuce for a insolent , jealous , impertinent jackanape , whose ear I should like to box " ) do not vouchsafe any reply , except a bow : and in spite of 's imploring look , he leave the room . " how beautifully calm and bright the night outside be ! " say ; " and what a murmur the sea be make ! it would be pleasanter to be walk on the beach , than in this hot room . " " very , " say . " what a strange congregation of people , " continue . " I have have to go up and perform the agreeable to most of they -- the attorney 's daughter -- the apothecary 's wife -- I scarcely know whom . there be a man in the refreshment - room , who insist upon treat I to champagne -- a seafaring - look man--extraordinarily dress , and see half tipsy . as a public man one be bound to conciliate all these people , but it be a hard task -- especially when one would so very much like to be elsewhere " -- and he blush rather as he speak . " I beg you pardon , " say --" I -- I be not listen . indeed -- I be frightene about that quarrel between my cousin and that -- that -- french person . " " you cousin have be rather unlucky to - night , " say . " there be three or four person whom he have not succeed in pleasing -- ; what be he name -- the officer -- and the young lady in red with whom he dance -- and -- and the poor chef -- and I do not think he seem to be particularly pleased with I . " " do not he leave I in charge to you ? " say , look up into 's face , and drop she eye instantly , like a guilty little story - tell coquette . " indeed , I can forgive he a good deal for that , " Pynsent eagerly cry out , and she take he arm , and he lead off he little prize in the direction of the supper - room . she have no great desire for that repast , though it be serve in 's well - know style , as the county paper say , give
give a account of the entertainment afterwards ; indeed , she be very distraite ; and exceedingly pain and unhappy about and quarrelsome ; jealous and selfish ; fickle and violent and unjust when he anger lead he astray ; how could she mother ( as indeed have by a thousand word and hint ) ask she to give she heart to such a man ? and suppose she be to do so , would it make he happy ? but she get some relief at length , when , at the end of half a hour -- a long half - hour it have see to she -- a waiter bring she a little note in pencil from , who say , " I meet below ready to fight I ; and I ask he pardon . I be glad I do it . I want to speak to you to - night , but will keep what I have to say till you come home . bless you . dance away all night with , and be very happy .-- Pen . " be very thankful for this letter , and to think that there be goodness and forgiveness still in she mother 's boy . go downstairs , he heart reproach he for he absurd behaviour to , whose gentle and imploring look follow and rebuk he ; and he be scarcely out of the ballroom door but he long to turn back and ask she pardon . but he remember that he have leave she with that confound Pynsent . he could not apologise before he . he would compromise and forget he wrath , and make he peace with the . the be pace down below in the hall of the inn when descend from the ballroom ; and he come up to , with all sort of fun and mischief light up he jolly face . " I have get he in the coffee - room , " he say , " with a brace of pistol and a candle . or would you like sword on the beach ? be a dead hand with the foil , and kill four garde - du -corps with he own point in the barricade of . " " Confound it , " say , in a fury , " I can not fight a cook ! " " he be a of , " reply the other . " they present arm to he in he own country . " " and do you ask I , , to go out with a servant ? " ask fiercely ; " I will call a policeman he but -- but ---- " " you will invite I to hair trigger ? " cry strong , with a laugh . " thank you for nothing ; I be but joke . I come to settle quarrel , not to fight they . I have be soothe down ; I have tell he that you do not apply the word ' cook ' to he in a offensive sense : that it be contrary to all the custom of the country that a hire officer of a household , as I call it , should give he arm to the daughter of the house . " and then he tell the grand secret which he have have from of the violent passion under which the poor artist be labour . when yoArthu hear this tale , he break out into a hearty laugh , in which strong join , and he rage against the poor cook vanish at once . he have be absurdly jealous himself all the evening , and have longe for a pretext to insult . he remember how jealous he have be of Oaks in he first affair ; he be ready to pardon anything to a man under a passion like that : and he go into the coffee - room where be wait , with a outstretched hand , and make he a speech in , in which he declare that he be " sincerement fache d'avoir use une expression qui avoin pu blesser , et qu'il donnoit sa parole comme un gentilhomme qu'il ne l'avoit jamais , jamais -- intende , " say , who make a shot at a french word for " intend , " and be secretly much pleased with he own fluency and correctness in speak that language . " Bravo , bravo ! " cry strong , as much amuse with Pen' speech as please by he kind manner . and the of course withdraw , and sincerely regret the expression of which he make use . " have disprove my word himself , " say with great politeness ; " he have show that he be a galant homme . " and so they shook hand and part , in the first place despatch he note to before he and strong commit themselves to the . as they drive along , compliment upon he behaviour , as well as upon he skill in . " you be a good fellow , , and you speak like , by . " " I have be accustom to it from my youth upward , " say ; and have the grace not to laugh for five minute , when he explode into fit of hilarity which have never perhaps understand up to this day . it be daybreak when they get to the , where they separate . by that time the ball at be over too . and be on they way home in the Clavering fly ; be in bed with a easy heart and asleep at 's ; and the Clavering at rest at the inn at , where they have quarter for the night . a short time after the disturbance between and the chef , Blanche have come out of the refreshment - room
room , look as pale as a lemon - ice . she tell she maid , have no other confidante at hand , that she have meet with the most romantic adventure -- the most singular man -- one who have know the author of she be -- she persecute -- she unhappy -- she heroic -- she murder father ; and she begin a sonnet to he mane before she go to sleep . so return to , in company with he friend the , without have utter a word of the message which he have be so anxious to deliver to at . he could wait , however , until she return home , which be to take place on the succeeding day . he be not seriously jealous of the progress make by in she favour ; and he feel pretty certain that in this , as in any other family arrangement , he have but to ask and have , and , like he mother , could refuse he nothing . when 's anxious look inquired of he what have happene at , and whether she darl project be fulfil , , in a gay tone , tell of the calamity which have befall ; laughingly say , that no man could think about declaration under such a mishap , and make light of the matter . " there will be plenty of time for sentiment , dear mother , when come back , " he say , and he look in the glass with a killing air , and he mother put he hair off he forehead and kiss he , and of course think , for she part , that no woman could resist he : and be exceedingly happy that day . when he be not with she , occupy himself in packing book and portmanteaus , burn and arrange papers , clean he gun and put it into it be case : in fact , in make disposition for departure . for though he be ready to marry , this gentleman be eager to go to too , rightly consider that at three - and - twenty it be quite time for he to begin upon the serious business of life , and to set about make a fortune as quickly as possible . the means to this end he have already shap out for himself . " I shall take chamber , " he say , " and enter myself at a of . with a couple of hundred pound I shall be able to carry through the first year very well ; after that I have little doubt my pen will support I , as it be do with several Oxbridge man now in town . I have a tragedy , a comedy , and a novel , all nearly finished , and for which I can not fail to get a price . and so I shall be able to live pretty well , without draw upon my poor mother , until I have make my way at the bar . then , some day I will come back and make she dear soul happy by marry . she be as good and as sweet - temper a girl as ever liv , besides be really very good - look , and the engagement will serve to steady I , -- will not it , ? " thus , smoke he pipe , and talk to he dog as he saunter through the garden and orchard of the little domain of Fairoaks , this young day - dreamer build castle in the air for himself : " yes , she will steady I , will not she ? and you will miss I when I have go , will not you , old boy ? " he ask of , who quiver he tail and thrust he bry nose into he master 's fist . lick he hand and shoe , as they all do in that house , and receive they homage as other folk do the flattery which they get . come home rather late in the evening of the second day ; and , as ill luck would have it , drive she from . the poor girl could not refuse he offer , but he appearance bring a dark cloud upon the brow of . see this , and be pain by it : the eager widow , however , be aware of nothing , and be anxious , doubtless , that the delicate question should be ask at once , be for go to be very soon after 's arrival , and rise for that purpose to leave the sofa where she now generally lay , and where would come and sit and work or read by she . but when rose , say , with a blush and rather a alarmed voice , that she be also very tired and want to go to bed : so that the widow be disappointed in she scheme for that night at least , and be leave another day in suspense regard he fate . he dignity be offended at be thus oblige to remain in the ant - chamber when he want a audience . such a sultan as he , could not afford to be keep wait . however , he go to be and sleep upon he disappointment pretty comfortably , and do not wake until the early morning , when he look up and see he mother stand in he room . " dear , rouse up , " say this lady . " do not be lazy . it be the most beautiful morning in the world . I have not be able to sleep since daybreak ; and have be out for a hour . she be in the garden . everybody ought to be in the garden and out on
on such a morning as this . " laugh . he see what thought be uppermost in the simple woman 's heart . he good - natured laughter cheer the widow . " oh you profound dissembler , " he say , kiss he mother . " oh you artful creature ! can nobody escape from you wicked trick ? and will you make you only son you victim ? " too laughed , she blush , she flutter , and be agitate . she be as happy as she could be -- a good tender , matchmak woman , the dearest project of whose heart be about to be accomplish . so , after exchange some know look and hasty word , leave ; and this young hero , rise from he bed , proceed to decorate he beautiful person , and shave he ambrosial ching ; and in half a hour he issue out from he apartment into the garden in quest of . he reflection as he make he toilette be rather dismal . " I be go to tie myself for life , " he think , " to please my mother . be the best of woman , and -- and she have give I she money . I wish to I have not receive it ; I wish I have not this duty to perform just yet . but as both the woman have set they heart on the match , why I suppose I must satisfy they -- and now for it . a man may do worse than make happy two of the best creature in the world . " so , now he be actually come to the point , feel very grave , and by no means elate , and , indeed , think it be a great sacrifice he be go to perform . it be 's custom , upon she garden excursion , to wear a sort of uniform , which , though homely , be think by many people to be not unbecoming . she have a large straw hat , with a streamer of broad ribbon , which be useless probably , but the hat sufficiently protect the owner 's pretty face from the sun . over she accustom gown she wear a blouse or pinafore , which , be fasten round she little waist by a smart belt , look extremely well , and she band be guarantee from the thorn of she favourite rose - bushes by a pair of gauntlet , which give this young lady a military and resolute air . somehow she have the very same smile with which she have laugh at he on the night previous , and the recollection of he disaster again offend . but , though she see he come down the walk look so gloomy and full of care , accord to he a smile of the most perfect and provoke good - humour , and go to meet he , hold one of the gauntlet to he , so that he might shake it if he like -- and condescende to do so . he face , however , do not lose its tragic expression in consequence of this favour , and he continue to regard she with a dismal and solemn air . " excuse my glove , " say , with a laugh , press Pen's hand kindly with it . " we be not angry again , be we , ? " " why do you laugh at I ? " say . " you do the other night , and make a fool of I to the people at . " " my dear Arthur , I mean you no wrong , " the girl answer . " you and look so droll as you -- as you meet with you little accident , that I could not make a tragedy of it . dear , it be not a serious fall . and , besides , it be who be the most unfortunate . " " , " bellow out . " I be sure she look so , " say , archly . " you be up in a instant ; but that poor lady sit on the ground in she red crape dress , and look about she with that piteous face -- can I ever forget she ? " -- and begin to make a face in imitation of 's under the disaster , but she check herself repentantly , say , " well , we must not laugh at she , but I be sure we ought to laugh at you , , if you be angry about such a trifle . " " you should not laugh at I , , " say , with some bitterness ; " not you , of all people . " " and why not ? be you such a great man ? " ask , " ah no , , I be such a poor one , " answer . " have not you bait I enough already ? " " my dear Pen , and how ? " cry . " indeed , indeed , I do not think to vex you by such a trifle . I think such a clever man as you could bear a harmless little joke from he sister , " she say , hold she hand out again . " dear Arthur , if I have hurt you , I beg you pardon . " " it be you kindness that humiliate I more even than you laughter , , " say . " you be always my superior . " " what ! superior to the great ? how can it be possible ? " say , who may have have a little wickedness as well as a great deal of kindness in she composition . " you can not
not mean that any woman be you equal ? " " those who confer benefit should not sneer , " say . " I do not like my benefactor to laugh at I , ; it make the obligation very hard to bear . you scorn I because I have take you money , and I be worthy to be scorn ; but the blow be hard come from you . " " money ! ! for shame , ; this be ungenerous , " say , flushing red . " may not we mother claim everything that belong to we ? do not I owe she all my happiness in this world , ? what matter about a few paltry guinea , if we can set she tender heart at rest , and ease she mind regard you ? I would dig in the field , I would go out and be a servant -- I would die for she . you know I would , " say , kindl up ; " and you call this paltry money a obligation ? oh , , it be cruel -- it be unworthy of you to take it so ! if my brother may not share with I my superfluity , who may ?-- mine ?--I tell you it be not mine ; it be all mamma 's to do with as she choose , and so be everything I have , " say ; " my life be hers . " and the enthusiastic girl look towards the window of the widow 's room , and bless in she heart the kind creature within . be look , unseen , out of that window towards which 's eye and heart be turn as she speak , and be watch she two child with the deepest interest and emotion , long and hope that the prayer of she life might be fulfil ; and if have speak as , who know what temptation might have be spare , or what different trial he would have have to undergo ? he might have remain at Fairoaks all he day , and die a country gentleman . but would he have escape then ? Temptation be a obsequious servant that have no objection to the country , and we know that it take up its lodging in hermitage as well as in city ; and that in the most remote and inaccessible desert it keep company with the fugitive solitary . " be you life my mother 's ? " say , begin to tremble , and speak in a very agitated manner . " you know , , what the great object of hers be ? " and he take she hand once more . " what , ? " she say , drop it , and look at he , at the window again , and then drop she eye to the ground , so that they avoid . she , too , tremble , for she feel that the crisis for which she have be secretly prepare be come . " we mother have one wish above all other in the world , , " Pen say ; " and I think you know it . I own to you that she have speak to I of it ; and if you will fulfil it , dear sister , I be ready . I be but very young as yet ; but I have have so many pain and disappointment , that I be old and weary . I think I have hardly get a heart to offer . before I have almost begin the race in life , I be a tired man . my career have be a failure ; I have be protecte by those whom I by right should have protect . I own that you nobleness and generosity , dear , shame I , whilst they render I grateful . when I hear from we mother what you have do for I ; that it be you who arm I and bay I go out for one struggle more ; I longe to go and throw myself at you foot , and say , ' Laura , will you come and share the contest with I ? ' you sympathy will cheer I while it last . I shall have one of the tenderest and most generous creature under heaven to aid and bear I company . will you take I , dear , and make we mother happy ? " " do you think would be happy if you be otherwise , ? " say in a low sad voice . " and why should I not be , " ask eagerly , " with so dear a creature as you by my side ? I have not my first love to give you . I be a broken man . but indeed I would love you fondly and truly . I have lose many a illusion and ambition , but I be not without hope still . Talent I know I have , wretchedly as I have misapply they : they may serve I yet : they would , have I a motive for action . let I go away and think that I be pledge to return to you . let I go and work , and hope , that you will share my success if I gain it . you have give I so much , dear , will you take from I nothing ? " " what have you get to give , ? " say , with a grave sadness of tone , which make start , and see that he word have commit he . indeed , he declaration have not be such as he would have make it two day earlier , when , full of hope and gratitude , he have run over to , he
he liberatress , to thank she for he recover freedom . have he be permit to speak then , he have speak , and she , perhaps , have listen differently . it would have be a grateful heart ask for hers ; not a weary one offer to she , to take or to leave . be offend with the term in which offer himself to she . he have , in fact , say that he have no love , and yet would take no denial . " I give myself to you to please my mother , " he have say : " take I , as she wish that I should make this sacrifice . " the girl 's spirit would brake a husband under no such condition : she be not mind to run forward because choose to hold out the handkerchief , and she tone , in reply to , show she determination to be independent . " no , , " she say , " we marriage would not make mamma happy , as she fancy ; for it would not content you very long . I , too , have know what she wish were ; for she be too open to conceal anything she have at heart : and once , perhaps , I think -- but that be over now -- that I could have make you -- that it might have be as she wish . " " you have see somebody else , " say , angry at she tone , and recalle the incident of the past day . " that allusion might have be spare , " reply , flinge up she head . " a heart which have wear out love at three - and - twenty , as yours have , you say , should have survive jealousy too . I do not condescmend to say whether I have see or encourage any other person . I shall neither admit the charge , nor deny it : and beg you also to allude to it no more . " " I ask you pardon , , if I have offend you : but if I be jealous , do it not prove that I have a heart ? " " not for I , . perhaps you think you love I now but it be only for a instant , and because you be foil . be there no obstacle , you would feel no ardour to overcome it . no , , you do not love I . you would weary of I in three month , as -- as you do of most thing ; and mamma , see you tired of I , would be more unhappy than at my refusal to be yours . let we be brother and sister , , as heretofore -- but no more . you will get over this little disappointment . " " I will try , " say , in a great indignation . " have you not try before ? " say , with some anger , for she have be angry with for a very long time , and be now determine , I suppose , to speak she mind . " and the next time , , when you offer yourself to a woman , do not say as you have do to I , 'I have no heart -- I do not love you ; but I be ready to marry you because my mother wish for the match . ' we require more than this in return for we love -- that be , I think so . I have have no experience hitherto , and have not have the -- the practice which you suppose I to have , when you speak but now of my have see somebody else . do you tell you first love that you have no heart , ? or you second that you do not love she , but that she might have you if she like ? " " what -- what do you mean ? " ask , blush , and still in great wrath . " I mean , , " say , proudly . " it be but two month since you be sigh at she foot -- make poem to she -- place they in hollow tree by the river - side . I know all . I watch you -- that be , she show they to I . neither one nor the other be in earnest perhaps ; but it be too soon now , , to begin a new attachment . go through the time of you -- you widowhood at least , and do not think of marrying until you be out of mourning " --( here the girl 's eye fill with tear , and she pass she hand across they . ) " I be angry and hurt , and I have no right to be so , and I ask you pardon in my turn now , dear Arthur . you have a right to love Blanche . she be a thousand time prettier and more accomplished than -- than any girl near we here ; and you not could know that she have no heart ; and so you be right to leave she too . I ought not to rebuke you about Blanche Amory , and because she deceive you . pardon I , , " -- and she hold the kind hand out to once more . " we be both jealous , " say . " dear , let we both forgive " -- and he seize she band and would have draw she towards he . he think that she be relent , and already assume the air of a victor . but she shrank back , and she tear pass away ; and she
she fix on he a look so melancholy and severe , that the young man in he turn shrank before it . " do not mistake I , , " she say , " it can not be . you do not know what you ask , and do not be too angry with I for saying that I think you do not deserve it . what do you offer in exchange to a woman for she love , honour , and obedience ? if ever I say these word , dear , I hope to say they in earnest , and by the blessing of to keep my vow . but you -- what tie bind you ? you do not care about many thing which we poor woman hold sacr , I do not like to think or ask how far you incredulity lead you . you offer to marry to please we mother , and own that you have no heart to give away . oh , , what be it you offer I ? what a rash compact would you enter into so lightly ? a month ago , and you would have give yourself to another . I pray you do not trifle with you own or other ' heart so recklessly . go and work ; go and mmend , dear Arthur , for I see you fault , and dare speak of they now : go and get fame , as you say that you can , and I will pray for my brother , and watch we dearest mother at home . " " be that you final decision , ? " yoArthu cry . " yes , " say , bow she head ; and once more give he she hand , she go away . he see she pass under the creeper of the little porch , and disappear into the house . the curtain of he mother 's window fall at the same minute , but he do not mark that , or suspect that have be witnesse the scene . be he please , or be he angry at its termination ? he have ask she , and a secret triumph fill he heart to think that he be still free . she have refuse he , but do she not love he ? that avowal of jealousy make he still think that she heart be he own , whatever she lip might utter . and now we ought , perhaps , to describe another scene which take place at Fairoaks , between the widow and , when the latter have to tell that she have refuse . perhaps it be the hardest task of all which have to go through in this matter : and the one which give she the most pain . but as we do not like to see a good woman unjust , we shall not say a word more of the quarrel which now befell between and she adopt daughter , or of the bitter tear which the poor girl be make to shed . it be the only difference which she and the widow have ever have as yet , and the more cruel from this cause . leave home whilst it be as yet pend -- and , who could pardon almost everything , could not pardon a act of justice in . we reader must now please to quit the wood and sea -shore of the west , and the gossip of , and the humdrum life of poor little Fairoak , and transport himself with , on the ' Alacrity ' coach , to , whither he go once for all to face the world and to make he fortune . as the coach whirl through the night away from the friendly gate of home , many a plan do the young man cast in he mind of future life and conduct , prudence , and peradventure success and fame . he know he be a better man than many who have hithertoo be ahead of he in the race : he first failure have cause he remorse , and bring with it reflection ; it have not take away he courage , or , let we add , he good opinion of himself . a hundred eager fancie and busy hope keep he awake . how much older he mishap and a year 's thought and self - communion have make he , than when , twelve month since , he pass on this road on he way to and from Oxbridge ! he thought turn in the night with inexpressible fondness and tenderness towards the fond mother who bless he when part , and who , in spite of all he past fault and folly , trust he and love he still . blessing be on she ! he pray , as he look up to the star overhead . of ! give he strength to work , to endur , to be honest , to avoid temptation , to be worthy of the loving soul who love he so entirely ! very likely she be awake , too , at that moment , and send up to the same Father purer prayer than he for the welfare of she boy . that woman 's love be a talisman by which he hold and hope to get he safety . and 's -- he would have afain carry she affection with he too , but she have deny it , as he be not worthy of it . he own as much with shame and remorse ; confess how much better and lofte she nature be than he own -- confess it , and yet be glad to be free . " I be not good enough for such a creature , " he own to himself . he draw back before she spotless beauty and innocence
innocence , as from something that scare he . he feel he be not fit for such a mate as that ; as many a wild prodigal who have be pious and guiltless in early day , keep away from a church which he use to frequent once -- shunn it , but not hostile to it -- only feel that he have no right in that pure place . with these thought to occupy he , do not fall asleep until the nipping dawn of a morning , and woke considerably refresh when the coach stop at the old breakfasting place at ----, where he have have a score of merry meal on he way to and from school and college many time since he be a boy . as they leave that place , the sun break out brightly , the pace be rapid , the horn blow , the milestone fly by , smoke and joke with guard and fellow-passenger and people along the familiar road ; it grow more busy and animate at every instant ; the last team of grey come out at ----, and the coach drive into . what young fellow have not feel a thrill as he enter the vast place ? hundred of other carriage , crowd with they thousand of man , be hasten to the great city . " here be my place , " think ; " here be my battle begin , in which I must fight and conquer , or fall . I have be a boy and a dawdler as yet . oh , I long , I long to show that I can be a man . " and from he place on the coach - roor the eager young fellow look down upon the city , with the sort of longing desire which young soldier feel on the eve of a campaign . as they come along the road , have form acquaintance with a cheery fellow - passenger in a shabby cloak , who talk a great deal about man of letter with whom he be very familiar , and who be , in fact , the reporter of a newspaper , as whose representative he have be to attend a great wrestling - match in the west . this gentleman know intimately , as it appear , all the lead man of letter of he day , and talk about , and , and , and this and the other , as if he have be they most intimate friend . as they pass by , this gentleman point out to , the reviewer , walk with he umbrella . cran over the coach to have a long look at the great hurtle . he be a Boniface man , say . and , of the newspaper ( for such be the gentleman 's name and address upon the card which he hand to ) , say " faith he be , and he know he very well . " think it be quite a honour to have see the great , whose work he admire . he believe fondly , as yet , in author , reviewer , and editor of newspaper . even , whose book do not appear to he to be masterpiece of human intellect , he yet secretly rever as a successful writer . he mention that he have meet in the country , and tell he how that famous novelist receive three hundther pound a volume for every one of he novel . begin to calculate instantly whether he might not make five thousand a year . the very first acquaintance of he own whom meet , as the coach pull up at the - house , be he old friend , who come prance down behind a enormous cab - horse . he have white kid glove and white rein , and nature have by this time decorate he with a considerable tuft on the ching . a very small cab - boy , vice Stoopid retire , swing on behind 's vehicle ; knock - kneed and in the tightest leather breech . look at the dusty coach , and the smoking horse of the ' Alacrity ' by which he have make journey in former time . " what , ! " cry out -- " Hullo ! , my boy ! " say the other , and he wave he whip by way of amity and salute to , who be very glad to see he queer friend 's kind old face . have a great respect for who have a acquaintance in such a grand cab ; and be greatly excited and pleased to be at liberty and in . he ask to come and dine with he at the - house , where he put up : he call a cab and rattle away thither in the highest spirit . he be glad to see the bustling waiter and polite bow landlord again ; and ask for the landlady , and miss the old boots and would have like to shake hand with everybody . he have a hundred pound in he pocket . he dress himself in he very best ; dine in the coffee - room with a modest pint of sherry ( for he be determined to be very economical ) , and go to the theatre adjoin . the light and the music , the crowd and the gaiety , charme and exhilarate Pen , as those sight will do young fellow from college and the country , to whom they be tolerably new . he laugh at the joke ; he applaude the song , to the delight of some of the dreary old habitue of the box , who have cease long ago to find the least excitement in they place of nightly resort , and be pleased to see any one so fresh
fresh , and so much amused . at the end of the first piece , he go and strut about the lobby of the theatre , as if he be in a resort of the highest fashion . what tired frequenter of the pave be there that can not remember have have similar early delusion , and would not call they back again ? here be young again , like a ardent votary of pleasure as he be . he be walk with , of the , 's brother , and , 's uncle , a venerable peer , who have be a man of pleasure since the first french revolution . rush upon Pen with eagerness , and insist that the latter should come into he private box , where a lady with the longest ringlet and the fairest shoulders , be seat . this be , the eminent actress of high comedy ; and in the back of the box snooze in a wig , sate old , she papa . he be describe in the theatrical print as the " veteran Blenkinsop " --" the useful Blenkinsop " -- " that old favourite of the public , " -- those part in the drama , which be call the heavy fathers , be usually assign to this veteran , who , indeed , act the heavy father in public , as in private life . at this time , it be about eleven o'clock , be go to be at Fairoaks , and wonder whether she dearest be at rest after he journey . at this time , too , be awake . and at this time yesterday night , as the coach roll over silent common , where cottage window twinkle , and by darkling wood under calm starlit sky , be vow to reform and to resist temptation , and he heart be at home . meanwhile the farce be go on very successfully , and , in a hussar jacket and braide pantaloon , be enchant the audience with she archness , she lovely figure , and she delightful ballad . , be new to the town , would have like to listen to . ; but the other people in the box do not care about she song or she pantaloon , and keep up a incessant chattering . know where she maillot come from . see she when she come out in ' 14 . say she sang out of all tune , to the pain and astonishment of , who think that she be as beautiful as a angel , and that she sang like a nightingale ; and when come on as , the young man of the piece , the gentleman in the box declare that be get too stale , and be for flinging 's bouquet to he . " not for the world , " cry the daughter of the veteran Blenkinsop ; " give it to I . " remember that nobleman 's name , and with a bow and a blush say he believe he have to thank for have propose he at the , at the request of he uncle , major Pendennis . " what , you be 's nephew , be you ? " say the peer . " I beg you pardon , we always call he . " blush to hear he venerable uncle call by such a familiar name . " we ballote you in last week , do not we ? yes , last night . you uncle be not there . " here be delightful news for ! he profess himself very much oblige indeed to , and make he a handsome speech of thanks , to which the other listen with he double opera - glass up to he eye . be full of excitement at the idea of be a member of this polite club . " do not be always look at that box , you naughty creature , " cry . " she be a dev'lish fine woman , that , " say ; " though be a d ---- would fool to marry she . " " a stupid old spooney , " say the peer . " ! " cry out Pendennis . " ! ha ! " laugh out . " we have hear of she before , have not we , ? " it be first love . it be . the year before she have be lead to the altar by , , and formerly envoy to the court of , who have take so active a part in the negotiation before the of , and sign , on behalf of , the peace of Pultusk . " be always as stupid as a owl , " say . " ! pa si bete , " the old peer say . " oh , for shame ! " cry the actress , who do not in the least know what he mean . and look out and beheld he first love once again -- and wonder how he ever could have love she . thus on the very first night of he arrival in , find himself introduce to a , to a actress of genteel comedy and a heavy father of the stage , and to a dashing society of jovial blades , old and young ; for my , though stricken in year , bald of head and enfeeble in person , be still indefatigable in the pursuit of enjoyment , and it be the venerable Viscount 's boast that he could drink as much claret as the youngest member of the society which he frequent . he live with the youth about town : he give they countless dinner at and : a enlighten patron of the drama in all language and of the art , he receive dramatic professor of all nation at he banquet
banquet -- from the and house , from the Haymarket , french from they own pretty little theatre , or the board of the where they dance . and at he villa on the Thames , this pillar of the give sumptuous entertainment to score of young man of fashion , who very affably consort with the ladie and gentleman of the greenroom -- with the former chiefly , for prefer they society as more polished and gay than that of they male breth . go the next day and pay he entrance - money at the , which operation carry off exactly one - third of he hundred pound ; and take possession of the edifice , and eat he luncheon there with immense satisfaction . he plunge into a easy - chair in the library , and try to read all the magazine . he wonder whether the member be look at he , and that they could dare to keep on they hat in such fine room . he sate down and write a letter to Fairoaks on the paper , and say , what a comfort this place would be to he after he day 's work be over . he go over to he uncle 's lodging in with some considerable tremor , and in compliance with he mother 's earnest desire , that he should instantly call on major Pendennis ; and be not a little relieved to find that the major have not yet return to town . he apartment be blank . Brown holland cover he library - table , and bill and letter lay on the mantelpiece , grimly await the return of they owner . the major be on the continent , the landlady of the house say , at , with the of . leave he card upon the shelf with the rest . Fairoak be write on it still . when the major return to , which he do in time for the fog of , after enjoy which he propose to spend with some friend in the country , he find another card of 's , on which , , be engrave , and a note from that young gentleman and from he mother , state that he be come to town , be enter a member of the , and be read hard for the bar . , :--where be it ? major Pendennis remember that some lady of fashion use to talk of dining with , the barrister , who be " in society , " and who live there in the 's , of which prison there be probably a branch in the Temple , and be very likely a officer . , 's son , have also live there , he recollect . he despatch to find out where be , and to report upon the lodging select by . that alert messenger have little difficulty in discovering 's abode . have in he time trace people far more difficult to find than . " what sort of a place be it , ? " ask the major , out of the bed - curtain in the next morning , as the valet be arrange he toilette in the deep yellow fog . " I should say rayther a shy place , " say . " the lawyer live there , and have they name on the door . live three pair high , sir . live there too , sir . " " Suffolk Warringtons ! I should not wonder : a good family , " think the major . " the cadet of many of we good family follow the robe as a profession . comfortable room , eh ? " " Honly see the outside of the door , sir , with 's name and 's paint up , and a piece of paper with ' back at 6 ;' but I could not see no servant , sir . " " economical at any rate , " say the major . " very , sir . three pair , sir . nasty black staircase as ever I see . wonder how a gentleman can live in such a place . " " pray , who teach you where gentleman should or should not live , ? , sir , be go to study for the bar , sir , " the major say with much dignity ; and close the conversation and begin to array himself in the yellow fog . " boy will be boy , " the mollified uncle think to himself . " he have write to I a devilish good letter . say he have have he to dine , and think he a gentlemanlike lad . he mother be one of the best creature in the world . if he have sow he wild oat , and will stick to he business , he may do well yet . think of , the old fool , marry that flame of he ! that Fotheringay ! he do not like to come here until I give he leave , and put it in a very manly nice way . I be deuce angry with he , after he Oxbridge escapade -- and show it too when he be here before -- , I will go and see he , hang I if I do not . " and have ascertaine from that he could reach the Temple without much difficulty , and that a city omnibus would put he down at the gate , the major one day after breakfast at he club -- not the Polyanthus , whereor be just elect a member , but another club : for the major be too wise to have a nephew as a constant inmate of any house where he be in the habit of pass he time -- the major one day enter one of those public
public vehicle , and bade the conductor to put he down at the gate of the . when major reach that dingy portal it be about twelve o'clock in the day ; and he be direct by a civil personage with a badge and a white apron , through some dark alley , and under various melancholy archways into court each more dismal than the other , until finally he reach . if it be dark in , what be it in ? Candle be burn in many of the room there -- in the pupil - room of , the special pleader , where six pupil be scribbl declaration under the tallow ; in 's clerk 's room , where the clerk , a person far more gentlemanlike and cheerful in appearance than the celebrated counsel , he master , be converse in a patronising manner with the manage clerk of a attorney at the door ; and in Curl the wigmaker 's melancholy shop , where , from behind the feeble glimmer of a couple of light , large serpent ' and judge ' wig be loom drearily , with the blank block look at the lamp - post in the court . two little clerk be play at toss - halfpenny under that lamp . a laundress in patten pass in at one door , a newspaper boy issue from another . a porter , whose white apron be faintly visible , pace up and down . it would be impossible to conceive a place more dismal , and the major shudder to think that any one should select such a residence . " ! " he say , " the poor boy must not live on here . " the feeble and filthy oil - lamp , with which the staircase of the be lighted of night , be of course not illuminat the stair by day , and major Pendennis , have read with difficulty he nephew 's name under 's on the wall of no. 6 , find still greater difficulty in climb the abominable black stair , up the banister of which , which contribute they damp exudation to he glove , he grope painfully until he come to the third story . a candle be in the passage of one of the two set of room ; the door be open , and the name of and . Pendennis be very clearly visible to the major as he go in . a irish charwoman , with a pail and broom , open the door for the major . " be that the beer ? " cry out a great voice : " give we hold of it . " the gentleman who be speak be seat on a table , unshorn and smoke a short pipe ; in a farther chair sate , with a cigar , and he leg near the fire . a little boy , who act as the clerk of these gentleman , be grinn in the major 's face , at the idea of he be mistaken for beer . here , upon the third floor , the room be somewhat lighter , and the major could see place . " , my boy , it be I -- it be you uncle , " he say , chok with the smoke . but as most young man of fashion use the weed , he pardon the practice easily enough . get up from the table , and , in a very perturbed manner , from he chair . " beg you pardon for mistak you , " say , in a frank , loud voice . " will you take a cigar , sir ? clear those thing off the chair , , and pull it round to the fire . " fling he cigar into the grate ; and be pleased with the cordiality with which he uncle shook he by the hand . as soon as be could speak for the stair and the smoke , the major begin to ask very kindly about himself and about he mother ; for blood be blood , and he be pleased once more to see the boy . give he news , and then introduce -- a old Boniface man -- whose chamber he share . the major be quite satisfied when he hear that be a younger son of of . he have serve with a uncle of he in and in Wales , year ago . " take a sheep - farm there , sir , make a fortune -- better thing than law or soldiering , " say . " think I shall go there too . " and here the expect beer come in , in a tankard with a glass bottom , , with a laugh , say he suppose the major would not have any , and take a long , deep dratch himself , after which he wip he wrist across he beard with great satisfaction . the young man be perfectly easy and unembarrassed . he be dress in a rag old shooting jacket , and have a bristly blue beard . he be drink beer like a coalheaver , and yet you could not but perceive that he be a gentleman . when he have sate for a minute or two after he dratch he go out of the room , leave it to and he uncle , that they might talk over family affair be they so inclin . " and ready , you chum seem , " the major say . " somewhat different from you dandy friend at . " " time be alter , " yoArthu reply , with a blush . " be only just call , and have no business , but he know law pretty well ; and until I can afford to read with a pleader , I use he
he book , and get he help . " " be that one of the book ? " the major ask , with a smile . a french novel be lie at the foot of Pen's chair . " this be not a work day , sir , " the lad say . " we be out very late at a party last night -- at 's , " add , know he uncle 's weakness . " everybody in town be there except you , sir ; count , Ambassadors , Turks , Stars and Garters -- I do not know who -- it be all in the paper -- and my name , too , " say , with great glee . " I meet a old flame of mine there , sir , " he add , with a laugh . " you know whom i mean , sir , -- -- to whom I be introduce over again . she shook hand , and be gracious enough . I may thank you for be out of that scrape , sir . she present I to the husband , too -- a old beau in a star and a blonde wig . he do not seem very wise . she have ask I to call on she , sir : and I may go now without any fear of lose my heart . " " what , we have have some new love , have we ? " the ask in high good - humour . " some two or three , " say , laugh . " but I do not put on my grand serieux any more , sir . that go off after the first flame . " " very right , my dear boy . Flame and dart and passion , and that sort of thing , do very well for a lad : and you be but a lad when that affair with the Fotheringill -- Fotheringay --( what be she name ? ) come off . but a man of the world give up those folly . you still may do very well . you have be bit , but you may recover . you be heir to a little independence ; which everybody fancie be a doosid deal more . you have a good name , good wit , good manners , and a good person -- and , begad ! I do not see why you should not marry a woman with money -- get into parliament -- distinguish yourself , and -- and , in fact , that sort of thing . remember , it be as easy to marry a rich woman as a poor woman : and a devilish deal pleasanter to sit down to a good dinner , than to a scrag of mutton in lodging . make up you mind to that . a woman with a good jointure be a doosid deal easier a profession than the law , let I tell you that . look out ; I shall be on the watch for you : and I shall die content , my boy , if I can see you with a good ladylike wife , and a good carriage , and a good pair of horse , live in society , and see you friend , like a gentleman . would you like to vegetate like you dear good mother at Fairoaks ? , sir ! life , without money and the best society be not worth have . " it be thus this affectionate uncle spoke , and expound to he simple philosophy . " what would my mother and say to this , I wonder ? " think the lad . indeed old 's moral be not they moral , nor be he wisdom theirs . this affect conversation between uncle and nephew have scarcely conclude , when come out of he bedroom , no longer in rag , but dress like a gentleman , straight and tall and perfectly frank and good - humoured . he do the honour of he rag sitting - room with as much ease as if it have be the finest apartment in . and queer room they be in which the major find he nephew . the carpet be full of hole -- the table stain with many circle of 's previous ale - pots . there be a small library of law - book , book of poetry , and of mathematics , of which he be very fond . ( he have be one of the hardest livers and hardest reader of he time at , where the name of be yet famous for beate bargeman , pull matches , win prize , and drink milk - punch . ) a print of the old college hang up over the mantelpiece , and some batter volume of , bear its well - know arm , be on the book - shelf . there be two easy - chair ; a stand reading - desk pile with bill ; a couple of very meagre briefs on a broken - leg study - table . indeed , there be scarcely any article of furniture that have not be in the wars , and be not wound . " look here , sir , here be Pen's room . he be a dandy , and have get curtain to he bed , and wear shiny boot , and a silver dressing - case . " indeed , Pen's room be rather coquettishly arrange , and a couple of neat print of opera-dancer , besides a drawing of Fairoak , hang on the wall . in 's room there be scarcely any article of furniture , save a great shower - bath , and a heap of book by the bedside : where he lay upon straw like , and smoke he pipe , and
and read half through the night he favourite poetry or mathematics . when he have complete he simple toilette , come out of this room , and proceed to the cupboard to search for he breakfast . " might I offer you a mutton - chop , sir ? we cake them ourselves hot and hot : and I be teach the first principles of law , cook , and morality at the same time . he be a lazy beggar , sir , and too much of a dandy . " and so say , wip a gridiron with a piece of paper , put it on the fire , and on it two mutton - chop , and take from the cupboard a couple of plate and some knife and silver fork , and castor . " but a word , major Pendennis , " he say ; " there be another chop in the cupboard , or shall go out and get you anything you like . " major Pendennis sate in wonder and amusement , but he say he have just breakfast , and would not have any lunch . so cook the chop , and pop they hiss hot upon the plate . fall to at he chop with a good appetite , after look up at he uncle , and see that be still in good - humour . " you see , sir , " say , " . be not here to do th'ey , and we can not employ the boy , for the little beggar be all day occupy clean Pen's boot . and now for another swig at the beer . drink tea ; it be only fit for old woman . " " and so you be at 's last night , " the major say , not in truth know what observation to make to this rough diamond . " I at 's ! not such a flat , sir . I do not care for female society . in fact it bore I . I spend my evening philosophically at the . " " the ? indeed ! " say the major . " I see you do not know what it mean , " say . " ask . he be there after 's . tell major Pendennis about the , -- do not be asham of yourself . " so say it be a little eccentric society of man of letter and man about town , to which he have be present ; and the major begin to think that the young fellow have see a good deal of the world since he arrival in . the of the , school , and inns of court still have some respect for antiquity , and maintain a great number of the custom and institution of we ancestor , with which those person who do not particularly regard they forefather , or perhaps be not very well acquaint with they ; have long since do away . a well - ordain workhouse or prison sus much better provide with the appliance of health , comfort , and cleanliness , than a respectable foundation a venerable College , or a learn . in the latter place of residence man be contente to sleep in dingy closet , and to pay for the sitting - room and the cupboard which be they dormitory , the price of a good villa and gare in the suburb , or of a roomy house in the neglect square of the town . the poorest mechanic in have a cistern and a unbounded suppy of water at he command ; but the gentleman of the inns of court , and the gentleman of the university , have they supply of this cosmetic fetch in jug by laundress and bedmaker , and live in abode which be erect long before the custom of cleanliness and decency obtaine among we . there be individual still alive who sneer at the people and speak of they with epithet of scorn . gentlemen , there can be but little doubt that you ancestor be the Great Unwash : and in the Temple especially , it be pretty certain , that only under the greatest difficulty and restriction the virtue which have be pronounce to be next to godliness could have be practise at all . , of the , who have live for more than thirty year in the chamber under those occupy by and , and who use to be awaken by the roaring of the shower - bath which those gentleman have erect in they apartment -- a part of the contents of which occasionally trick through the roof into 's room , -- declare that the practice be a absurd , newfangle , dandify folly , and daily curse the laundress who slop the staircase by which he have to pass . , now much more than half a century old , have indeed never use the luxury in question . he have do without water very well , and so have we fathers before he . of all those knights and baronet , lord and gentleman , bear arm , whose escutcheon be pain upon the wall of the famious hall of the , be there no philanthropist good - natured enough to devise a set of Hummums for the benefit of the lawyer , he fellow and successor ? the historian make no mention of such a scheme . there be and , with they hydraulic apparatus , but one never hear of a bencher disporting in the fountain ; and can not but think how many a counsel learn in the law of old day might have benefite by the pump . nevertheless , those venerable Inn which have the and and the Winged horse for they ensign , have attraction for person who inhabit they , and a share of
of rough comforts and freedom which men always remember with pleasure . I do not know whether the student of law permit himself the refreshment of enthusiasm , or indulge in poetical reminiscence as he pass by historical chamber , and say , " liv -- upon this site muse upon -- here toil -- here and join in they famous labour -- here compose he great work upon bill , and compile he immortal lead case -- here still toil , with to aid he : " but the man of letter can not but love the place which have be inhabit by so many of he breth , or people by they creation as real to we at this day as the author whose child they be -- and walk in the , and discourse with about the beauty in hoops and patch who be saunter over the grass , be just as lively a figure to I as old rol through the fog with the gentleman at he heel on they way to 's chamber in ; or , with ink ruffle and a wet towel round he head , dash off article at midnight for the , while the printer 's boy be asleep in the passage . if we could but get the history of a single day as it pass in any one of those four -storied house in the dingy court where we friend and dwelt , some might furnish we with a queer volume . there may be a great parliamentary counsel on the ground floor , who drive off to at dinner - time , when he clerk , too , become a gentleman , and go away to entertain he friend , and to take he pleasure . but a short time since he be hungry and briefless in some garret of the ; live by stealthy literature ; hope , and wait , and sicken , and no client come ; exhaust he own means and he friend 's kindness ; have to remonstrate humbly with dun , and to implore the patience of poor creditor . seem to be stare he in the face , when , behold , a turn of the wheel of fortune , and the lucky wretch in possession of one of those prodigious prize which be sometimes draw in the great lottery of the . many a better lawyer than himself do not make a fifth part of the income of he clerk , who , a few month since , could scarcely get credit for blacking for he master 's unpaid boot . on the first floor , perhaps , you will have a venerable man whose name be famous , who have live for half a century in the , whose brain be full of book , and whose shelf be store with classical and legal lore . he have liv alone all these fifty year , alone and for himself , amasse learn , and compile a fortune . he come home now at night alone from the club , where he have be dining freely , to the lonely chamber where he live a godless old recluse . when he die , he will erect a tablet to he honour , and he heir burn a part of he library . would you like to have such a prospect for you old age , to store up learning and money , and end so ? but we must not linger too long by 's door . live over he , who be also a ancient inhabitant of the , and who , when come home to read , be sit down with three steady senior of he standing , to a steady rubber at whist , after a dinner at which they have consum they three steady bottle of . you may see the old boy asleep at the of a . attorneys seldom trouble they , and they have small fortune of they own . on the other side of the third landing , where and live , till long after midnight , sit , who take the highest honour , and who be a fellow of he college , who will sit and read and note case until two o'clock in the morning ; who will rise at seven and be at the pleader 's chamber as soon as they be open , where he will work until a hour before dinner - time ; who will come home from and read and note case again until dawn next day , when perhaps and he friend be return from some of they wild expedition . how differently employ have be ! he have not be throw himself away : he have only be bring a great intellect laboriously down to the comprehension of a mean subject , and in he fierce grasp of that , resolutely exclude from he mind all higher thought , all better thing , all the wisdom of philosopher and historian , all the thought of poet ; all wit , fancy , reflection , art , love , truth altogether -- so that he may master that enormous legend of the law , which he propose to gain he livelihood by expounding . and have be competitor for university honour in former day , and have run each other hard ; and everybody say now that the former be waste he time and energie , whilst all people praise for he industry . there may be doubt , however , as to which be use he time best . the one could afford time to think , and the other never could . the one could have sympathy and do kindness ; and the other must need be always selfish . he could not cultivate a friendship or do a charity , or admire a work of genius , or kindle at the
the sight of beauty or the sound of a sweet song -- he have no time , and no eye for anything but he law - book . all be dark outside he reading - lamp . love , and , and ( which be the expression of we praise and sense of the beautiful world of ) be shut out from he . and as he turn off he lonely lamp at night , he never think but that he have spend the day profitably , and go to sleep alike thankless and remorseless . but he shudder when he meet he old companion on the stair , and shunn he as one that be doom to perdition . it may have be the sight of that cadaverous ambition and self - complacent meanness , which show itself in 's yellow face , and twinkle in he narrow eye , or it may have be a natural appetite for pleasure and joviality , of which it must be confess be exceedingly fond , which deter that luckless youth from pursue he design upon the or the Woolsack with the ardour , or rather steadiness , which be requisite in gentleman who would climb to those seat of honour . he enjoy the Temple life with a great deal of relish : he worthy relative think he be read as become a regular student ; and he uncle write home congratulatory letter to the kind widow at , announce that the lad have sown he wild oat , and be become quite steady . the truth be , that it be a new sort of excitement to Pen , the life in which he be now engage , and have give up some of the dandified pretension , and fine - gentleman air which he have contract among he aristocratic college acquaintance , of whom he now see but little , the rough pleasure and amusement of a bachelor be very novel and agreeable to he , and he enjoy they all . time be he would have envy the dandy they fine horse in , but he be content now to walk in the and look at they . he be too young to succeed in society without a better name and a larger fortune than he have , and too lazy to get on without these adjunct . fondly think he be busy with law because he neglect the social advantage present to he , and , have be at half a dozen ball and evening party , retreate before they dulness and sameness ; and whenever anybody make inquirie of the worthy major about he nephew the old gentleman say the young rascal be reform , and could not be get away from he book . but the major would have be almost as much horrify as be , have he know what be Pen's real course of life , and how much pleasure enter into he law study . a long morning 's reading , a walk in the park , a pull on the river , a stretch up the hill to , and a modest tavern dinner ; a bachelor night pass here or there , in joviality , not vice ( for admired woman so heartily that he never could bear the society of any of they that be not , in he fancy at least , good and pure ) ; a quiet evening at home , alone with a friend and a pipe or two , and a humble potation of british spirit , whereor , the laundress , invariably test the quality ; -- these be we young gentleman 's pursuit , and it must be own that he life be not unpleasant . in term - time , show a most praiseworthy regularity in perform one part of the law - student 's course of duty , and eat he dinner in . indeed , that hall of the be a sight not uninteresting , and with the exception of some trifl improvement and anachronism which have be introduce into the practice there , a man may sit down and fancy that he join in a meal of the seventeenth century . the bar have they mess , the student they table apart ; the bencher sit at the high table on the raised platform surround by picture of judge of the law and portrait of royal personage who have honoure its festivity with they presence and patronage . look about , on he first introduction , not a little amused with the scene which he witness . among he comrade of the student class there be gentleman of all age , from sixty to seventeen ; stout grey - head attorney who be proceed to take the superior dignity , -- dandy and man -- about town who wish for some reason to be barrister of seven year ' standing , -- swarthy , black - eyed native of the Colonies , who come to be call here before they practise in they own island , -- and many gentleman of the irish nation , who make a sojourn in before they return to the green country of they birth . there be little squad of read student who talk law all dinner - time ; there be rowing man , whose discourse be of sculling match , the , and the ; there be other great in politics , and orator of the student 's debat club ; with all of which set , except the first , whose talk be a almost unknown and a quite uninteresting language to he , make a gradual acquaintance , and have many point of sympathy . the ancient and liberal of the provide in its hall , and for a most moderate price , a excellent wholesome dinner of soup , meat , tart , and port wine or sherry
sherry , for the barrister and student who attend that place of refection . the party be arrange in mess of four , each of which quartet have its piece of beef or leg of mutton , its sufficient apple - pie and its bottle of wine . but the honest habitue of the hall , amongst the lower rank of student , who have a taste for good living , have many harmless art by which they improve they banquet , and innocent ' dodge ' ( if we may be permit to use a excellent phrase that have become vernacular since the appearance of the last dictionary ) by which they strive to attain for themselves more delicate food than the common every - day roast meat of the student 's table . " wait a bit , " say , one of these Temple gourmand . " wait a bit , " say , tugge at 's gown -- " the side - table be very full , and there be only three bencher to eat ten dish -- if we wait , perhaps we shall get something from they table . " and look with some amusement , as do with eye of fond desire , towards the bencher 's high table , where three old gentleman be stand up before a dozen silver dish - cover , while the clerk be quaver out a grace . be great in the conduct of the dinner . he aim be to manage so as to be the first , a captain of the mess , and to secure for himself the thirteenth glass of the bottle of port wine . thus he would have the command of the joint on which he operate he favourite cut , and make rapid dexterous appropriation of gravy , which amuse infinitely . poor ! thy pleasure in life be very harmless ; a eager epicure , thy desire do not go beyond eighteen pence . be somewhat older than many of he fellow - student , and there be that about he style and appearance , which , as we have say , be rather haughty and impertinent , that stampe he as a man of ton -- very unlike those pale student who be talk law to one another , and those ferocious dandy , in rowing shirt and astonish pin and waistcoat , who represent the idle part of the little community . the humble and good - natured have feel attract by superior look and presence -- and have make acquaintance with he at the mess by open the conversation . " this be boiled - beef day , I believe , sir , " say to . " upon my word , sir , I be not aware , " say , hardly able to contain he laughter , but add , " I be a stranger ; this be my first term ; " on which begin to point out to he the notability in the Hall . " that be the bencher , the bald one sit under the picture and ave soup ; I wonder whether it be turtle ? they often ave turtle . next be , the 's counsel , and -- and , you know . that be old , the senior of the bar ; they say he be dine here forty year . they often send th'ey down they fish from the bencher to the senior table . do you see those four fellow seat opposite we ? those be regular swell -- tip - top fellow , I can tell you -- , the of 's son , . , 's brother , you know . he will have a good place , I bet any money ; and , who be always with he - - a high fellow too . ! ha ! " here burst into a laugh , " what be it ? " say , still amuse . " I say , I like to mess with those chap , " say , wink he eye knowingly , and pour out he glass of wine . " and why ? " ask . " why ! they do not come down here to dine , you know , they only make believe to dine . they dine here , law bless you ! they go to some of the swell club , or else to some grand dinner - party . you see they name in the at all the fine party in . why , I bet anything that have he cab , or he Brougham ( he be a devil of a fellow , and make the bishop 's money spin , I can tell you ) at the corner of at this minute . they dine ! they will not dine these two hour , I dare say . " " but why should you like to mess with they , if they do not eat any dinner ? " ask , still puzzl . " there be plenty , be not there ? " " how green you be , " say . " excuse I , but you be green . they do not drink any wine , do not you see , and a fellow get the bottle to himself if he like it when he mess with those three chap . that be why get in with th'ey . " " ah , , I see you be a sly fellow , " say , delighte with he acquaintance : on which the other modestly reply , that he have live in the better part of he life , and of course have he eye about he ; and go on with he catalogue to . " there be a lot of here , " he say ; " that 's one , and I can
can not say I like he . you see that handsome chap with the blue neck - cloth , and pink shirt , and yellow waistcoat , that be another ; that be of , and nephew to Major- , he , he , " say , try to imitate the Hibernian accent . " he be always brag about he uncle ; and come into in silver - striped trousers the day he have be present . that other near he , with the long black hair , be a tremendous rebel . by , sir , to hear he at the it make you blood freeze ; and the next be a Irishman , too , , reporter of a newspaper . they all stick together , those irish . it be you turn to fill you glass . what ? you will not have any port ? do not like port with you dinner ? here be you health . " and this worthy man find himself not the less attach to because the latter dislike port wine at dinner . it be while be take he share of one of these dinner with he acquaintance as the captain of he mess , that there come to join they a gentleman in a barrister 's gown , who could not find a seat , as it appear , amongst the persons of he own degree , and who strode over the table and take he place on the bench where sate . he be dress in old clothes and a faded gown , which hang behind he , and he wear a shirt which , though clean , be extremely rag , and very different to the magnificent pink raiment of , who occupy a commanding position in the next mess . in order to notify they appearance at dinner , it be the custom of the gentleman who eat in the to write down they name upon slips of paper , which be provide for that purpose , with a pencil for each mess . write he name first , then come , and the next be that of the gentleman in the old clothes . he smile when he see name , and look at he . " we ought to know each other , " he say . " we be both Boniface man ; my name 's . " " be you ---- ? " say , delighte to see this hero . laugh -- " stun -- yes , " he say , " I recollect you in you freshman 's term . but you appear to have quite cut I out . " " the college talk about you still , " say , who have a generous admiration for talent and pluck . " the bargeman you thrash , , do not you remember , want you up again at . the , the haberdasher ---- " " Hush ! " say --" glad to make you acquaintance , . hear a good deal about you . " the young man be friend immediately , and at once deep in college - talk . and , who have be act rather the fine gentleman on a previous day , when he pretend to that he could not drink port wine at dinner , see take he share with a great deal of gusto , do not scruple about help himself any more , rather to the disappointment of honest . when the dinner be over , ask where he be go . " I think of go home to dress , and hear in , " say . " be you go to meet anybody there ? " he ask . say , " no -- only to hear the music , " of which he be fond . " you have much better come home and smoke a pipe with I , " say , -- " a very short one . come , I live close by in , and we will talk over and old time . " they go away ; sigh after they . he know be a baronet 's son , and he look up with simple reverence to all the aristocracy . and become sworn friend from that night . 's cheerfulness and jovial temper , he good sense , he rough welcome , and he never - fail pipe of tobacco , charme , who find it more pleasant to dive into shilling tavern with he , than to dine in solitary state amongst the silent and polite frequenter of the Polyanthus . Ere long give up the lodging in 's , to which he have migrate on quit he hotel , and find it be much more economical to take up he abode with in , and furnish and occupy he friend 's vacant room there . for it must be say of , that no man be more easily lead than he to do a thing , when it be a novelty , or when he have a mind to it . and , the youth , and , the laundress , divide they allegiance now between and and new Acquaintance Elate with the idea of see life , go into a hundred queer haunt . he like to think he be consort with all sort of man -- so he beheld coalheaver in they tap-room ; boxer in they inn -parlour ; honest citizen disport in the suburb or on the river ; and he would have like to hob and nob with celebrate pickpocket , or drink a pot of ale with a company of burglar and cracksman , have chance afforde he a opportunity of make the acquaintance of this class of society . it be good to see the gravity with which listen to the or the at the 's Arms , and behold the interest which
which he take in the coalheaving company assemble at the - the - . he acquaintance with the public - house of the metropolis and its neighbourhood , and with the frequenter of they various parlour , be prodigious . he be the personal friend of the landlord and landlady , and welcome to the bar as to the clubroom . he like they society , he say , better than that of he own class , whose manners annoye he , and whose conversation bore he . " in society , " he use to say , " everybody be the same , wear the same dress , eat and drink , and say the same thing ; one young dandy at the club talk and look just like another , one miss at a ball exactly resemble another , whereas there be character here . I like to talk with the strongest man in , or the man who can drink the most beer in , or with that tremendous republican of a hatter , who think be the greatest character in history . I like better gin - and - water than claret . I like a sand floor in better than a chalked one in . I prefer , I own it . " indeed , this gentleman be a social ; and it never enter he head while converse with and that he be in any respect they better ; although , perhaps , the deference which they pay he might secretly please he . follow he then to these various resorts of man with great glee and assiduity . but he be considerably younger , and therefore much more pompous and stately than , in fact a young prince in disguise , visit the poor of he father 's kingdom . they respecte he as a high chap , a fine fellow , a regular young swell . he have somehow about he a air of imperious good - humour , and a royal frankness and majesty , although he be only heir - apparent to twopence - halfpenny , and but one in descent from a gallypot . if these position be make for we , we acquiesce in they very easily ; and be always pretty ready to assume a superiority over those who be as good as ourselves . 's condescension at this time of he life be a fine thing to witness . amongst man of ability this assumption and impertinence pass off with extreme youth : but it be curiious to watch the conceit of a generous and clever lad -- there be something almost touch in that early exhibition of simplicity and folly . , so , after read pretty hard of a morning , and , I fear , not law merely , but politics and general history and literature , which be as necessary for the advancement and instruction of a young man as mere dry law , after apply with tolerable assiduity to letter , to review , to elemental book of law , and , above all , to the newspaper , until the hour of dinner be draw nigh , these young gentleman would sally out upon the town with great spirit and appetite , and bend upon enjoy a merry night as they have pass a pleasant forenoon . it be a jovial time , that of four - and - twenty , when every muscle of mind and body be in healthy action , when the world be new as yet , and one move over it spur onwards by good spirit and the delightful capability to enjoy . if ever we feel young afterwards , it be with the comrade of that time : the tune we hum in we old age , be those we learn then . sometimes , perhaps , the festivity of that period revive in we memory ; but how dingy the pleasure - garden have grow , how tatter the garland look , how scant and old the company , and what a number of the light have go out since that day ! grey hair have come on like daylight stream in -- daylight and a headache with it . pleasure have go to be with the rouge on she cheek . well , friend , let we walk through the day , sober and sad , but friendly . I wonder what and would have say , could they have see , as they might not unfrequently have do have they be up and in , in the very early morning when the bridge begin to blush in the sunrise , and the tranquil street of the city to shine in the dawn , and ratt over the echoing flag towards the Temple , after one of they wild night of carouse -- night wild , but not so wicked as such night sometimes be , for be a woman - hater ; and , as we have say , too lofy to stoop to a vulgar intrigue . we young of never could speak to one of the sex but with respectful courtesy , and shrank from a coarse word or gesture with instinctive delicacy -- for though we have see he fall in love with a fool , as he betters and inferior have do , and as it be probable that he do more than once in he life , yet for the time of the delusion it be always as a goddess that he consider she , and choose to wait upon she . man serve woman knee -- when they get on they foot , they go away . that be what a acquaintance of Pen's say to he in he hard homely way ; -- a old friend with whom he have fall in again in -- no other than honest of the , who be now
now employ as pianoforte player , to accompany the eminent lyrical talent which nightly delighte the public at the 's in : and where be hold the little club call the . number of friend frequent this very merry meeting . the Fielding 's head have be a house of entertainment , almost since the time when the famous author of ' ' preside as magistrate in the neighbour ; he place be point out , and the chair say to have be he , still occupy by the president of the night 's entertainment . the worthy Cutts , the landlord of the 's , generally occupy this post when not disable by gout or other illness . he jolly appearance and fine voice may be remember by some of my male reader : he use to s profusely in the course of the harmonic meeting , and he songs be of what may be call the British - and - of -- such as ' the , ' ' dear , this , ' and so forth -- song in which patho and hospitality be blend , and the praise of good liquor and the social affections be chant in a baritone voice . the charms of we woman , the heroic deed of we naval and military commander , be often sung in the ballad of this school ; and many a time in my youth have I admire how Cutt the singer , after he have work we all up to patriotic enthusiasm , by describe the way in which the brave receive he death - wound , or make we join he in tear , which he she liberally himself , as in falter accent he tell how autumn 's fall leaf " proclaim the old man he must die " -- how Cutt the singer become at once Cutts the landlord , and , before the applause which we be make with we fists on he table , in compliment to he heart - stirring melody , have die away , -- be call , " now , gentlemen , give you order , the waiter 's in the room -- , a champagne cup for . I think , sir , you say sausage and mash potatoe ? , attend on the gentleman . " " and I will thank ye give I a glass of punch too , , and take care the wather boil , " a voice would cry not unfrequently , a well - know voice to , which make the lad blush and start when he hear it first -- that of the venerable ; who be now establish in , and one of the great pillars of the harmonic meeting at the 's . the 's manners and conversation bring very many young man to the place . he be a character , and he fame have begin to spread soon after he arrival in the metropolis , and especially after he daughter 's marriage . he be great in he conversation to the friend for the time be ( who be the neighbour drink by he side ) , about " I daughther . " he tell of she marriage , and of the event previous and subsequent to that ceremony ; of the carriage she keep ; of 's adoration for she and for he ; of the hundther pound which he be at perfect liberty to draw from he son - in - law , whenever necessity urge he . and have state that it be he firm intention to " dthraw next , I give ye I secr word and honour next , the fourteenth , when ye will see the money will be hand over to I at 's , the very instant I present the cheque , " the would not unfrequently propose to borrow a half - crown of he friend until the arrival of that day of , when , on the honour of a officer and gentleman , he would repee the thrifling obligetion . have not that enthusiastic attachament to he father - in - law , of which the latter sometimes boast ( although in other stage of emotion cos would inveigh , with tear in he eyes , against the ingratitude of the child of he bosom , and the stinginess of the wealthy old man who have marry she ) ; but the pair have act not unkindly towards ; have settle a small pension on he , which be pay regularly , and forestall with even more regularity by poor cos ; and the period of the payment be always well know by he friend at the 's , whither the honest take care to repair , bank - note in hand , call loudly for change in the midst of the full harmonic meeting . " I think ye will find that note will not be refuse at the of , , my boy , " would say . " Bow , have a glass ? ye need not stind yourself to - night , anyhow ; and a glass of punch will make ye play con spirito . " for he be lavishly free with he money when it come to he , and be scarcely known to button he breech pocket , except when the coin be go , or sometimes , indeed , when a creditor come by . it be in one of these moment of exultation that find he old friend swagger at the singer 's table at the of the 's , and order glass of brandy - and - water for any of he acquaintance who make they appearance in the apartment . , who be on confidential term with the bass singer , make he way up to this quarter of the room , and walk at he friend 's heel . start and blush
blush to see . he have just come from 's party , where he have meet and speak with the 's daughter again for the first time after very old old day . he come up with outstretched hand , very kindly and warmly to greet the old man ; still retain a strong remembrance of the time when 's daughter have be everything in the world to he . for though this young gentleman may have be somewhat capricious in he attachment , and occasionally have transfer he affections from one woman to another , yet he always respect the place where have dwelt , and , like the of , desire that honour should be pay to the lady towards whom he have once throw the pocket - handkerchief . the tipsy return the clasp of Pen's hand with all the strength of a palm which have become very shaky by the constant lift up of weights of brandy - and - water , look hard in face , and say , " Grecious Heavens , be it possible ? I dear boy , I dear fellow , I dear friend ; " and then with a look of muddled curiosity , fairly break down with , " I know you face , I dear dear friend , but , bedad , I have forget you name . " five year of constant punch have pass since and meet . be a good deal change , and the may surly be excused for forget he ; when a man at the actual moment see thing double , we may expect that he view of the past will be rather muzzy . see he condition and laugh , although , perhaps , he be somewhat mortified . " do not you remember I , ? " he say . " I be -- , of . " the sound of the young man 's friendly voice recall and steady 's tipsy remembrance , and he salute , as soon as he know he , with a loud volley of friendly greeting . be he dearest boy , he gallant young friend , he noble collagian , whom he have hold in he inmost heart ever since they have part -- how be he fawther , no , he mother , and he guardian , the general , the major ? " I preshoom , from you apparance , you have come into you prawpertee ; and , bedad , yee will spend it like a man of spirit -- I will go bail for that . no ? not yet come into you estete ? if ye want any thrifle , heark ye , there be poor old have get a guinea or two in he pocket -- and , be heaven ! you shall never want , , I dear boy . what will ye have ? , come hither , and look aloive ; give this gentleman a glass of punch , and I will pay of r't .-- you friend ? I have see he before . permit I to have the honour of make meself know to ye , sir , and request ye will take a glass of punch . " " I do not envy he father - in - law , " think . " and how be my old friend , , ? have you any news of he , and do you see he still ? " " no doubt he be very well , " say the , jingl he money , and whistl the air of a song --' the ' -- for the singing of which he be celebrate at the 's . " I dear boy -- I have forget you name again -- but my name 's , , and I would loike ye to take as many tumbler of punch in my name as ever ye loike . ye know my name ; I be not asham of it . " and so the go maunder on . " it be pay - day with the general , " say , the bass singer , with whom be in deep conversation : " and he be a precious deal more than half seas over . he have already try that ' ' of he , and break it , too , just before I sang ' . ' have you hear my new song , ' the ,' ?--angcor at 's the other night -- compose expressly for I . Per'ap you or you friend would like a copy of the song , sir ? , just ' ave the kyndness to ' and over a ' body Snatcher ' ' ere , will yer 's a portrait of I , sir , as I s it -- as the -- consider rather like . " " thank you , " say ; " hear it nine time -- know it by heart , . " here the gentleman who preside at the pianoforte begin to play upon he instrument , and , look in the direction of the music , beheld that very , for whom he have be ask but now , and whose existence have momentarily forgotten . the little old man sate before the batter piano ( which have injure its constitution wofully by sit up so many night , and speak with a voice , as it be , at once hoarse and faint ) , and accompany the singer , or play with taste and grace in the interval of the song . Bows have see and recollect Pen at once when the latter come into the room , and have remark the eager warmth of the young man 's recognition of . he now begin to play a air , which instantly remember as one which use to be sung by the chorus of villager in ' the
the , ' just before come in . it shook as he hear it . he remember how he heart use to beat as that air be play , and before the divine Emily make she entry . nobody , save , too any notice of old Bows 's play : it be scarcely hear amidst the clatter of knife and fork , the call for poach egg and kidney , and the tramp of guest and waiter . go up and kindly shook the player by the hand at the end of he performance ; and greet with great respect and cordiality . " what , you have not forget the old tune , ? " he say ; " I think you would remember it . I take it , it be the first tune of that sort you ever hear play -- be not it , sir ? you be quite a young chap then . I fear the 's very bad to - night . he break out on a pay - day ; and I shall have the deuce 's own trouble in get home . we live together . we still hang on , sir , in partnership , though em-- though my lady have leave the firm .-- and so you remember old time , do you ? be not she a beauty , sir ?-- you health and my service to you , " -- and he take a sip at the pewter measure of porter which stand by he side as he play . have many opportunity of see he early acquaintance afterwards , and of renew he relation with and the old musician . as they sate thus in friendly colloquy , man of all sort and condition enter and quit the house of entertainment ; and have the pleasure of see as many different person of he race , as the most eager observer need desire to inspect . healthy country tradesman and farmer , in for they business , come and recreate themselves with the jolly singing and supper of the ,-- squad of young apprentice and assistants , the shutter be close over the scene of they labour , come hither for fresh air doubtless , -- rakish young medical student , gallant , dashing , what be call " loudly " dress , and ( must it be own ? ) somewhat dirty , -- be here smoke and drink , and vociferously applaud the song ; young university buck be to be find here , too , with that indescribable genteel simper which be only learn at the knee of ; -- and handsome young guardsman , and florid buck from the 's -- nay , senator english and irish ; and even member of the house of Peers . the bass singer have make a immense hit with he song of ' the , ' and the town rush to listen to it . the curtain draw aside , and appear in the character of the Snatcher , sit on a coffin , with a flask of gin before he , with a spade , and a candle stuck in a skull . the song be sung with a really admirable terrific humour . the singer 's voice go down so low , that it be grumble rumble into the hearer 's awe - stricken soul ; and in the chorus he clamp with he spade , and give a demoniac " ! ha ! " which cause the very glass to quiver on the table , as with terror . none of the other singer , not even Cutt himself , as that high - minded man own , could stand up before the Snatcher , and he commonly use to retire to 's private apartment , or into the bar , before that fatal song extinguish he . poor cos 's ditty , ' the , ' which accompany charmingly on the piano , be sng but to a few admirer , who might choose to remain after the tremendous resurrectionist chant . the room be commonly empty after that , or only leave in possession of a very few and persever votary of pleasure . whilst and he friend be sit here together one night , or rather morning , two habitue of the house enter almost together . " and , " whisper to , salut these gentleman , and in the latter recognise he friend of the coach , who could not dine with Pen on the day on which the latter have invite he , be compelle by he professional duty to decline dinner - engagement on , he have state , with he compliment to . 's paper , the , be lie on the table much bestain by porter , and cheek - by - jowl with 's paper , which we shall call the Day ; the be liberal -- the day be ultra-Conservative . many of we journals be office by irish gentleman , and they gallant brigade do the penning among we , as they ancestor use to transact the fighting in ; and engage under many a flag , to be good friend when the battle be over . " Kidney , , and a glass of stout , " say . " how be you , ? how be ? " " do pretty well , thank ye , , my boy -- faith she be accustom to it , " say . " how be the lady that own ye ? maybe I will step down , and have a glass of punch , way . " " do not bring with you , , for we 's get the measle , " say the friendly , and they straightway fell to talk about matter connect with they trade -- about the foreign mail -- about who be correspondent at ,
, and who write from -- about the expense the be at in sending courier , about the circulation of the , and so forth . , laugh , take the which be lie before he , and point to one of the lead article in that journal , which commence thus -- " as rogue of note in former day who have some wicked work to perform , -- a enemy to be put out of the way , a quantity of false coin to be pass , a lie to be tell or a murder to be do -- employ a professional perjurer or assassin to do the work , which they be themselves too notorious or too cowardly to execute : we notorious contemporary , the day , engage smasher out of door to utter forgery against individual , and call in auxiliary cut - throat to murder the reputation of those who offend he . a black - vizarded ruffian ( whom we will unmask ) , who sign the for name of , be at present one of the chief bravoe and bully in we contemporary 's establishment . he be the eunuch who bring the bowstring , and strangle at the order of the Day . we can convict this cowardly slave , and propose to do so . the charge which he have brotch against , because he be a liberal irish peer , and against the board of poor Law guardians of the , be , " etc . " how do they like the article at you place , ? " ask ; " when the put he hand to it he be a tremendous hand at a smasher . he write the article in two hour -- in -- whew -- you know where , while the boy be wait . " " we governor think the public do not mind a straw about these newspaper row , and have tell the Docthor to stop answer , " say the other . " they two talk it out together in my room . the Docthor would have like a turn , for he say it be such easy writing , and require no reading up of a subject : but the governor put a stopper on he . " " the taste for eloquence be go out , , " say . " ' deed then it be , , " say . " that be fine write when the Docthor write in the Phaynix , and he and blaze away at each other day after day . " " and with powder and shot , too , as well as paper , " say , " , the Docthor be out twice , and win he man . " " they be talk about and , " say , " who be the two irish controversialist of the and the day , be the Protestant champion and the orator . they be the best friend in the world , I believe , in spite of they newspaper controversy ; and though they cry out against the for abuse they country , by they abuse it themselves more in a single article than we should take the pain to do in a dozen volume . how be you , ? " " you servant , -- , I be delighted to have the honour of see ye again . the night 's journey on the top of the Alacrity be one of the most agreeable I ever enjoy in my life , and it be you liveliness and urbanity that make the trip so charme . I have often think over that happy night , sir , and talk over it to . I have see you elegant young friend , , too , here , sir , not unfrequently . he be a occasional frequenter of this hostelry , and a right good one it be . , when I see you I be on the and ; I have now the honour to be sub-editor of the , one of the best - write papers of the empire " -- and he bow very slightly to . he speech be unctuous and measure , he courtesy oriental , he tone , when talk with the two , quite different to that with which he speak to he comrade . " why the devil will the fellow compliment so ? " grow , with a sneer which he hardly take the pain to suppress . " -- who come here ? -- all be abroad to - night : here be . we shall have some fun . well , , ? " " have not be there . I have be , " say , with a air of mystery , " where I be want . get I some supper , John-- something substantial . I hate you grandee who give you nothing to eat . if it have be at , it would have be quite different . the know what I like , and say to the of the chamber , ' , you will have some cold beef , not too much do , and a pint bottle of pale ale , and some brown sherry , ready in my study as usual ;-- be come here this evening . ' the do not eat supper himself , but he like to see a man enjoy a hearty meal , and he know that I dine early . a man can not live upon air , be hang to he . " " let I introduce you to my friend , , " say , with great gravity . " , this be , whom you have hear I talk about . you must know Pen's uncle , the major , , you who know everybody ? " " dine with he the day before
before yesterday at , " say . " we be four -- the french , , and we two commoner . " " why , my uncle be in ---- " be go to break out , but press he foot under the table as a signal for he to be quiet . " it be about the same business that I have be to the palace to - night , " go on simply , " and where I have be keep four hour , in a anteroom , with nothing but yesterday 's , which I know by heart , as I write three of the lead article myself ; and though the come in four time , and once hold the royal teacup and saucer in he hand , he do not so much as say to I , ' Archer , will you have a cup of tea ? ' " " indeed ! what be in the wind now ? " ask -- and turn to , add , " you know , I suppose , that when there be anything wrong at they always send for . " " there be something wrong , " say , " and as the story will be all over the town in a day or two I do not mind tell it . at the last races , where I ride for my old friend the -- the old say to I , , I be uneasy about . I have arrange he marriage with the ; the peace of depend upon it -- for will declare war if the marriage do not take place , and the young fool be so mad about , 's wife , that he actually refuse to be a party to the marriage . well , , I speak to , and have get he into pretty good humour by win the race , and a good bit of money into the bargain , he say to I , ' Archer , tell the I will think of it . ' " " how do you say in ? " ask , who pique himself on know that language . " oh , we speak in -- I teach he when we be boy , and I save he life at , when he fall out of a punt , " say . " I shall never forget the 's look as I bring he out of the water . she give I this diamond ring , and always call I charle to this day . " " must be rather a old woman , , " say . " Dev'lish old -- old enough to be he grandmother ; I tell he so , " answer at once . " but those attachment for old woman be the deuce and all . that be what the feel : that be what shock the poor queen so much . they go away from last night , and be live at this present moment at 's . " " have there be a private marriage , ? " ask . " whether there have or not I do not know , " reply , " all I know be that I be keep wait for four hour at the palace ; that I never see a man in such a state of agitation as the of when he come out to speak to I , and that I be devilish hungry -- and here come some supper . " " he have be pretty well to - night , " say , as the pair go home together : " but I have know he in much greater force , and keep a whole room in a state of wonder . put aside he archery practice , that man be both able and honest -- a good man of business , a excellent friend , admirable to he family as husband , father , and son . " " what be it make he pull the long bow in that wonderful manner ? " " a amiable insanity , " answer . " he never do anybody harm by he talk , or say evil of anybody . he be a stout politician too , and would never write a word or do a act against he party , as many of we do . " " of we ! who be we ? " ask . " or what profession be ? " " of the of the -- of the , my boy , " say ; " of the fourth estate . " " be you , too , of the craft , then ? " say . " we will talk about that another time , " answer the other . they be pass through the as they talk , and by a newspaper office , which be all light up and bright . reporter be come out of the place , or rush up to it in cab ; there be lamps burn in the editor ' room , and above where the compositor be at work : the window of the building be in a blaze of gas . " look at that , , " say . " there she be -- the great engine -- she never sleep . she have she ambassador in every quarter of the world -- she courier upon every road . she officer march along with armie , and she envoy walk into statesman 's cabinet . they be ubiquitous . Yonder journal have a agent , at this minute , give bribe at ; and another inspect the price of potatoe in . look ! here come the gallop in . they will be able to give news to to - morrow : fund will rise or fall , fortunes be make or lose ; will get up ,
, and , hold the paper in he hand , and see the noble marquis in he place , will make a great speech ; and -- and will be call away from he supper at the ; for he be foreign sub-editor , and see the mail on the newspaper sheet before he go to he own . " and so talk , the friend turn into they chamber , as the dawn be begin to peep . in which the 's come to the , in the midst of he revel and enjoyment , humble as they be , and moderate in cost if not in kind , see a awful sword hang over he which must drop down before long and put a end to he frolic and feasting . he money be very nearly spend . he club subscription have carry away a third part of it . he have pay for the chief article of furniture with which he have supply he little bedroom : in fine , he be come to the last five - pound note in he pocket - book , and could think of no method of provide a successor : for we friend have be breed up like a young prince as yet , or as a child in arm whom he mother feed when it cry out . do not know what he comrade 's mean were . a only child , with a mother at she country house , and a old dandy of a uncle who dine with a great man every day , might have a large bank at he command for anything that the other knew . he have gold chain and a dressing - case fit for a lord . he habits be those of a aristocrat ,-- not that he be expensive upon any particular point , for he dine and laugh over the pint of porter and the plate of beef from the cook 's shop with perfect content and good appetite , -- but he could not adopt the penny - wise precaution of life . he could not give twopence to a waiter ; he could not refrain from take a cab if he have a mind to do so , or if it rain , and as surely as he take the cab he overpay the driver . he have a scorn for cleaned glove and minor economy . have he be breed to ten thousand a year he could scarcely have be more free - hand ; and for a beggar , with a sad story , or a couple of pretty piteous - faced child , he never could resist put he hand into he pocket . it be a sumptuous nature , perhaps , that could not be bring to regard money ; a natural generosity and kindness ; and possibly a petty vanity that be pleased with praise , even with the praise of waiter and cabman . I doubt whether the wisest of we know what we own motive be , and whether some of the action of which we be the very proudest will not surprise we when we trace they , as we shall one day , to they source . Warrington then do not know , and have not think proper to confide to he friend , he pecuniary history . that have be wild and wickedly extravagant at college , the other be aware ; everybody at college be extravagant and wild ; but how great the son 's expensis have be , and how small the mother 's mean , be point which have not be as yet submit to 's examination . at last the story come out , while be grimly survey the change for the last five - pound note , as it lay upon the tray from the public - house by 's pot of ale . " it be the last rose of summer , " say ; " its bloom companion have go long ago ; and behold the last one of the garland have shed its leave ; " and he tell Warrington the whole story which we know of he mother 's means , of he own folly , of 's generosity ; during which time smoke he pipe and listen intent . " Impecuniosity will do you good , " friend say , knock out the ash at the end of the narration ; " I do not know anything more wholesome for a man -- for a honest man , mind you -- for another , the medicine lose its effect -- than a state of tick . it be a alterative and a tonic ; it keep you moral man in a perpetual state of excitement : as a man who be ride at a fence , or have he opponent 's single - stick before he , be force to look he obstacle steadily in the face , and brace himself to repulse or overcome it ; a little necessity bring out you pluck if you have any , and nerve you to grapple with fortune . you will discover what a number of thing you can do without when you have no money to buy they . you will not want new glove and varnish boot , and cab to ride in . you have be breed up as a molly - coddle , , and spoil by the woman . a single man who have health and brain , and can not find a livelihood in the world , do not deserve to stay there . let he pay he last halfpenny and jump over . let he steal a leg of mutton and be transport and get out of the country -- he be not fit to live in it . Dixi ; I have speak . give we another pull at the pale ale
ale . " you have certainly speak ; but how be one to live ? " say . " there be beef and bread in plenty in , but you must pay for it with work or money . and who will take my work ? and what work can I do ? " burst out laugh . " suppose we advertise in the , " he say , " for a usher 's place at a classical and commercial academy -- a gentleman , of , and who be pluck for he degree -- " " Confound you , " cry . " -- wish to give lesson in classic and mathematics , and the rudiment of the french language ; he can cut hair , attend to the younger pupil , and play a second on the piano with the daughter of the principal . , , . " " go on , " say , grow . " man take to all sort of profession . why , there be you friend - be a professional blackleg , and travel the continent , where he pick up young gentleman of fashion and fleece they . there be , with whom I be at school , who drive the Ballynafad mail now , and carry honest 's own correspondence to that city . I know a man , sir , a , doctor 's son , like -- well , do not be angry , I mean nothing offensive -- a doctor 's son , I say , who be walk the hospital here , and quarrell with he governor on question of finance , and what do he do when he come to he last five - pound note ? he let he mustachio grow , go into a provincial town , where he announce himself as , chiropodist to the emperor of all the , and by a happy operation on the editor of the country newspaper , establish himself in practice , and live reputably for three year . he have be reconcile to he family , and have succeed to he father 's gallypot . " " hang gallypot , " cry . " I can not drive a coach , cut corn , or cheat at card . there be nothing else you propose . " " yes ; there be we own correspondent , " say . " every man have he secret , look you . before you tell I the story of you money - matter , I have no idea but that you be a gentleman of fortune , for , with you confounded air and appearance , anybody would suppose you to be so . from what you tell I about you mother 's income , it be clear that you must not lay any more hand on it . you can not go on spunging upon the woman . you must pay off that trump of a girl . be she name ?-- here be you health , !-- and carry a hod rather than ask for a shilling from home . " " but how earn one ? " ask . " how do I live , think you ? " say the other . " on my younger brother 's allowance , ? I have secret of my own , my boy ; " and here 's countenance fell . " I make away with that allowance five year ago : if I have make away with myself a little time before , it would have be better . I have play off my own bat , ever since . I do not want much money . when my purse be out , I go to work and fill it , and then lie idle like a serpent or a indian , until I have digest the mass . look , I begin to feel empty , " say , and show a long lean purse , with but a few sovereign at one end of it . " but how do you fill it ? " say . " I write , " say . " I do not tell the world that I do so , " he add , with a blush . " I do not choose that question should be ask : or , perhaps , I be a ass , and do not wish it to be say that write for bread . but I write in the law review : look here , these article be mine . " and he turn over some sheet . " I write in a newspaper now and then , of which a friend of mine be editor . " and , go with to the club one day , call for a file of the , and point with he finger silently to one or two article , which read with delight . he have no difficulty in recognise the style afterwards -- the strong thought and curt period , the sense , the satire , and the scholarship . " I be not up to this , " say , with a genuine admiration of he friend 's power . " I know very little about politics or history , ; and have but a smattering of letter . I can not fly upon such a wing as yours . " " but you can on you own , my boy , which be lighter , and soars higher , perhaps , " the other say , good - naturedly . " those little scrap and verse which I have see of yours show I , what be rare in these day , a natural gift , sir . you need not blush , you conceit young jackanape . you have think so yourself any time these ten year . you have get the sacred flame -- a little of the
the real poetical fire , sir , I think ; and all we oil - lamps be nothing compare to that , though ever so well trim . you be a poet , , my boy , " and so speak , stretch out he broad hand , and clap on the shoulder . yoArthu be so delighted that the tear come into he eye . " how kind you be to I , ! " he say . " I like you , old boy , " say the other . " I be dev'lish lonely in chamber , and want somebody , and the sight of you honest face somehow please I . I like the way you laugh at -- that poor good little snob . and , in fine , the reason why I can not tell -- but so it be , young 'un . I be alone in the world , sir ; and I want some one to keep I company ; " and a glance of extreme kindness and melancholy pass out of 's dark eye . be too much pleased with he own thought to perceive the sadness of the friend who be compliment he . " thank you , , " he say , " thank you for you friendship to I , and -- and what you say about I . I have often think I be a poet . I will be one -- I think I be one , as you say so , though the world may not . be it -- be it the in which you like ( I be only eighteen when I write it ) , or the ? " burst into a roar of laughter . " why , young goose , " he yell out -- " of all the miserable weak rubbish I ever try , in be the most mawkish and disgusting . the be so pompous and feeble , that I be positively surprised , sir , it do not get the medal . you do not suppose that you be a serious poet , do you , and be go to cut out and ? be you set up to be a Pindar , you absurd little tom - tit , and fancy you have the strength and pinion which the eagle bear , sail with supreme dominion through the azure field of air ? no , my boy , I think you can write a magazine article , and turn a pretty copy of verse ; that be what I think of you . " " by ! " say , bounce up and stampe he foot , " I will show you that I be a better man than you think for . " only laugh the more , and blow twenty - four puff rapidly out of he pipe by way of reply to . a opportunity for show he skill present itself before very long . that eminent publisher , ( formerly and ) of Paternoster row , besides be the proprietor of the legal review , in which write , and of other periodical of note and gravity , use to present to the world every year a beautiful gilt volume call the spring annual , edit by the , and number amongst its contributor not only the most eminent , but the most fashionable , poet of we time . yong 's poem first appear in this miscellany -- the , whose chivalrous ballad have obtain he such a reputation -- 's , and many more of the work of we young nobles , be fast give to the world in the , which have since share the fate of other vernal blossom , and perish out of the world . the book be daintily illustrate with picture of reign beauty , or other print of a tender and voluptuous character ; and , as these plate be prepare long beforehand , require much time in engraving , it be the eminent poet who have to write to the plate , and not the painter who illustrate the poem . one day , just when this volume be on the eve of publication , it chance that call in to talk with , 's reader and general manager of publication -- for , not have the least taste in poetry or in literature of any kind , wisely employ the service of a professional gentleman . , then , go into 's room on business of he own , find that gentleman with a bundle of proof plate and sheet of the spring annual before he , and glance at some of they . have write some verse to illustrate one of the picture , which be call the . a spanish damsel be hasten to church with a large prayer - book ; a youth in a cloak be hide in a niche watch this young woman . the picture be pretty : but the great genius of have desert he , for he have make the most execrable verse which ever be perpetrate by a young nobleman . burst out laugh as he read the poem : and laugh too but with rather a rueful face .--" it will not do , " he say , " the public will not stand it . 's people be go to bring out a very good book , and have set up against . we have most title to be sure -- but the verse be too bad . herself own it ; she be busy with she own poem ; what be to be do ? we can not lose the plate . the give sixty pound for it . " " I know a fellow who would do some verse , I think , " say . " let I take the plate home in my pocket : and
and send to my chamber in the morning for the verse . you will pay well , of course . " " of course , " say ; and , have despatch he own business , go home to , plate in hand . " now , boy , here be a chance for you . turn I off a copy of verse to this . " " what be this ? a -- a lady enter it , and a youth out of a wine - shop window ogl she .-- what the deuce be I to do with it ? " " try , " say . " earn you livelihood for once , you who long so to do it . " " well , I will try , " say . " and I will go out to dinner , " say , and leave in a brown study . when come home that night , at a very late hour , the verse be done . " there they be , " say . " I have screw th'ey out at last . I think they will do . " " I think , they will , " say , after read they ; they run as follow :-- the although I enter not , yet round about the spot sometimes I hover , and at the sacred gate , with long eye I wait , of she . the bell toll out above the city 's rout and noise and hum they have stopp ' the chiming bell , I hear the organ 's swell she be come , she be come ! my lady come at last , Timid and step fast , and hasten hither , with modest eye downcast . she come -- she be here -- she be past . may heaven go with she ! undisturb have , fair saint , pour out you praise or plaint Meekly and duly . I will not enter there , to sully you pure prayer with thought unruly . but suffer I to pace Round the forbidden place , linger a minute , like outcast spirit , who wait and see through 's gate Angels within it . " have you get any more , young fellow ? " ask . " we must make they give you a couple of guinea a page ; and if the verse be like , why , you will get a entree into 's magazine , and may turn a decent penny . " examine he portfolio and find another ballad which he think might figure with advantage in the spring annual , and consign these two precious document to , the pair walk from the Temple to the famious haunt of the and they master , Paternoster row . 's shop be a ancient low - browed building , with a few of the book publish by the firm display in the window , under a bust of my of , and the name of in brass on the private door . exactly opposite to 's house be than of , which be newly paint and elaborately decorate in the style of the seventeenth century , so that you might have fancie stately pass over the threshold , or curiious examine the book in the window . go into the shop of , but stay without . it be agree that he ambassador should act for he entirely ; and the young fellow pace up and down the street in a very nervous condition , until he should learn the result of the negotiation . many a poor devil before he have trode those flag , with similar care and anxiety at he heel , he bread and he fame dependent upon the sentence of he magnanimous patron of the row . look at all the wonder of all the shop , and the strange variety of literature which they exhibit . in this be display black - letter volume and book in the clear pale type of and : in the next , you might see the ; the Halfpenny Annal of crime and History of the most celebrate murderer of all country , the 's , the , and other publication of the penny press ; whilst at the next window , portrait of ill - favoured individual , with fac - simile of the venerate signature of the , the , and the work write and the sermon preach by they , show the british Dissenter where he could find mental pabulum . hard by would be a little casement hang with emblem , with medal and rosary with little paltry print of saint gilt and pain , and book of controversial theology , by which the faithful of the opinion might learn a short way to deal with , at a penny apiece , or ninepence the dozen for distribution ; whilst in the very next window you might see ' come out of , ' a sermon preach at the opening of the 's , by of . Scarce a opinion but have its expositor and its place of exhibition in this peaceful old Paternoster row , under the toll of the bell of . look in at all the window and shop , as a gentleman who be go to have a interview with the dentist examine the book on the waiting - room table . he remembe they afterwards . it seem to he that would never come out ; and indeed the latter be engage for some time in pleading he friend 's cause . 's natural conceit would have swoll immensely if he could but have hear the report which give of he . it happen that himself have occasion to descmend to 's room whilst be talk there , and , knowe 's weakness , act upon they with great adroitness in he friend 's
's behalf . in the first place , he put on he hat to speak to , and address he from the table on which he seat himself . like to be treat with rudeness by a gentleman , and use to pass it on to he inferior as boy pass the mark . " what ! not know , ? " say . " you can not live much in the world , or you would know he . a man of property in the west , of one of the most ancient family in , related to half the nobility in the empire -- he be cousin to -- he be one of the most distinguished man at ; he dine at every week . " " law bless I , you do not say so , sir . well -- really -- bless I now , " say . " I have just be show some of he verse , which he sit up last night , at my request , to write ; and hack talk about give he a copy of the book -- the what - '- you -call - 'em . " " law bless I now , do he ? the what - '- you -call - 'em . indeed ! " " ' the ' be its name , -- as payment for those verse . you do not suppose that such a man as give up a dinner at for nothing ? you know as well as anybody , that the man of fashion want to be pay . " " that they do , , sir , " say the publisher . " I tell you he be a star ; he will make a name , sir . he be a new man , sir . " " they have say that of so many of those young swell , , " the publisher interpose , with a sigh . " there be , now ; I give he Lordship a good bit of money for he poem , and only sell eighty copy . 's , sir , fall dead . " " well , then , I will take my man over to , " say , and rise from the table . this threat be too much for , who be instantly ready to accede to any reasonable proposal of 's , and finally ask he manager what those proposal be ? when he hear that the negotiation only related as yet to a couple of ballad , which offer for the , say , " law bless you , give he a check directly ; " and with this paper go out to he friend , and place it , grinn , in Pen's hand . be as elated as if somebody have leave he a fortune . he offer Warrington a dinner at instantly . " what should he go and buy for and he mother ? he must buy something for they . " " they will like the book better than anything else , " say , " with the young one 's name to the verse , print among the swell . " " thank ! thank ! " cry , " I need not be a charge upon the old mother . I can pay off now . I can get my own living . I can make my own way . " " I can marry the grand vizier 's daughter : I can purchase a house in ; I can build a fine castle in the air ! " say , please with the other 's exultation . " well , you may get bread and cheese , : and I own it taste well , the bread which you earn yourself . " they have a magnum of claret at dinner at the club that day , at Pen's charge . it be long since he have indulge in such a luxury , but would not baulk he : and they drank together to the health of the . it never rain but it pour , accord to the proverb ; so very speedily another chance occur , by which be to be help in he scheme of make a livelihood . Warrington one day throw he a letter across the table , which be bring by a printer 's boy , " from , sir " -- the little emissary say : and then go and fall asleep on he accustom bench in the passage . he pay many a subsequent visit there , and bring many a message to . . . " my ,-- will be here to - day , about the . you would be the very man to help we with a genuine west - end article , -- you understand -- dashing , trenchant , and ---- aristocratic . will write ; but she be not much you know , and we have two lord ; but the less they do the better . we must have you . we will give you you own term , and we will make a hit with the Gazette . " shall come and see you , or can you look in upon I here ?-- ever yours , . " " some more opposition , " say , when have read the note . " and be at dagger draw ; each marry the sister of the other , and they be for some time the closest friend and partner . say it be who cause all the mischief between the two ; whereas , who read for a good deal , say do the business ; but I do not know which be right , or . but since they have separate , it be a furious war between the two publisher ; and no sooner do one bring out a
a book of travels , or poem , a magazine or periodical , quarterly , or monthly , or weekly , or annual , but the rival be in the field with something similar . I have hear poor tell with great glee how he make give a grand dinner at Blackwall to all he writers , by say that have invite he corps to a entertainment at . when engage you celebrated friend to edit the ' , ' straightway rush off and secure to give he name to the ' . ' when bring out he comic irish novel of ' , ' off go to , and produce he rollick Hibernian story of ' . ' when brotch out he ' Wanderings in 's under 's auspices , produce 's ' Research in ;' and be publishe he ' ' as a counterpoise to 's ' . ' let we go and hear about the ' . ' there may be a place for you in it , , my boy . we will go and see . we be sure to find he at home . " " where do he live ? " ask . " in the , " say . " and very much at home he be there , too . he be the king of the place . " Pen have never see this scene of life , and walk with no small interest in at the grim gate of that dismal edifice . they go through the anteroom , where the officer and janitor of the place be seat , and pass in at the wicket , enter the prison . the noise and the crowd , the life and the shouting , the shabby bustle of the place , struck and excit . move about ceaselessly and restless , like cage animal in a menagerie . be play at fives . other pace and tramp : this one in colloquy with he lawyer in dingy black -- that one walking sadly , with he wife by he side , and a child on he arm . some be array in tatter dressing - gowns , and have a look of rakish fashion . everybody seem to be busy , hum , and on the move . feel as if he chok in the place , and as if the door be lock upon he they never would let he out . they go through a court up a stone staircase , and through passage full of people , and noise , and cross light , and black door clapping and ban ; -- feel as one do in a feverish morning dream . at last the same little runner who have bring 's note , and have follow they down munch apple , and who show the way to the two gentleman through the prison , say , " this be the 's door , " and 's voice from within bade they enter . the room , though bare , be not uncheerful . the sun be shin in at the window -- near which sate a lady at work , who have be gay and beautiful once , but in whose fad face kindness and tenderness still beam . through all he error and reckless mishap and misfortune , this faithful creature adore she husband , and think he the best and cleverest , as indeed he be one of the kindest of man . nothing ever seem to disturb the sweetness of he temper ; not debt : not dun : not misery : not the bottle , not he wife 's unhappy position , or he child 's ruin chance . he be perfectly fond of wife and child after he fashion : he always have the kindest word and smile for they , and ruin they with the utmost sweetness of temper . he never could refuse himself or any man any enjoyment which he money could purchase ; he would share he last guinea with and , and we may be sure he have a score of such retainer . he would sign he name at the back of any man 's bill , and never pay any debt of he own . he would write on any side , and attack himself or another man with equal indifference . he be one of the wittiest , the most amiable , and the most incorrigible of . nobody could help like who see he once , and those whom he ruin could scarcely be angry with he . when and arrive , the captain ( he have be in a irish militia regiment once , and the title remain with he ) be sit on he bed in a torn dressing - gown , with a desk on he knee , at which he be scribbl as fast as he rapid pen could write . slip after slip of paper fall off the desk wet on to the ground . a picture of he child be hang up over he bed , and the youngest of they be patter about the room . opposite the , a portly man of stolid countenance , with whom the little child have be try a conversation . " be a very clever man , " say she ; " mamma say so . " " oh , very , " say . " and you be a very rich man , , " cry the child , who could hardly speak plain . " ! " say , from she work . " oh , never mind , " roar out with a great laugh ; no harm in say I be rich -- he , he -- I be pretty well off , my little dear . " " if you be rich , why do not you take papa out of piz and ? "
" ask the child . Mamma at this begin to wipe she eye with the work on which she be employ . ( the poor lady have hang curtain up in the room , have bring the child 's picture and place it there , and have make one or two attempt to ornament it . ) begin to cry ; turn red , and look fiercely out of he bloodshot little eye ; 's pen go on , and and arrive with they knock . look up from he work . " how do you do , , " he say . " I will speak to you in a minute . please sit down , gentlemen , if you can find place , " and away go the pen again . pull forward a old portmanteau -- the only available seat -- and sate down on it , with a bow to and a nod to : the child come and look at solemnly and in a couple of minute the swift scribbling cease ; and , turn the desk over on the bed , stoop and pick up the papers . " I think this will do , " say he . " it be the prospectus for the . " " and here be the money for it , " say , lay down a five - pound note . " I be as good as my word , I be . when I say I will pay , I pay . " " faith that be more than some of we can say , " say , and he eagerly clap the note into he pocket . be pass in the of we imprison announce , in smart and emphatic language in he prospectus , that the time have come at last when it be necessary for the gentleman of to band together in defence of they common rights and they glorious order , menace on all side by foreign revolution , by intestine radicalism , by the artful calumny of mill -owner and cotton - lord , and the stupid hostility of the mass whom they gull and lead . " the ancient monarchy be insult , " the say , " by a ferocious republican rabble . the Church be desert by envious dissent , and undermine by stealthy infidelity . the good institution , which have make we country glorious , and the name of the proudest in the world , be leave without defence , and expose to assault and contumely from man to whom no sanctuary be sacr , for they believe in nothing holy ; no history venerable , for they be too ignorant to have heard of the past ; and no law be binding which they be strong enough to break , when they leader give the signal for plunder . it be because the king of mistrust they gentleman , " remark , " that the monarchy of go down : it be because the people of still believe in they gentleman , that this country encounter and overcame the greatest enemy a nation ever meet : it be because we be head by gentleman , that the retreate before we from the to the : it be a gentleman who break the line at , and sweep the plain of . " nod he head in a know manner , and wink he eye when the come to the passage : and burst out laugh . " you see how we venerable friend be affect , " say , slily look up from he papers -- " that be you true sort of test . I have use the of and the battle of a hundred time , and I never know the to fail . " the then go on to confess , with much candour , that up to the present time the gentleman of , confident of they right , and careless of those who question it , have leave the political interest of they order as they do the management of they estate , or the settlement of they legal affair , to person affect to each peculiar service , and have permit they interest to be represent in the press by professional proctor and advocates . that time profess to consider be now go by : the gentleman of must be they own champion : the declare enemy of they order be brave , strong , numerous , and uncompromising . they must meet they foe in the field : they must not be bely and misrepresent by hire advocate : they must not have publish from ; " that be a dig at 's people , , " say , turn round to the publisher . clap he stick on the floor . " hang he , pitch into he , , " he say with exultation : and turn to , wag he dull head more vehemently than ever , and say , " for a slashing article , sir , there be nobody like the Capting -- no - obody like he . " the prospectus -writer go on to say that some gentleman , whose name be , for obvious reason , not bring before the public ( at which begin to laugh again ) , have determined to bring forward a journal , of which the principle be so - and - so . " these man be proud of they order , and anxious to uphold it , " cry out , flourish he paper with a grin . " they be loyal to they , by faithful conviction and ancestral allegiance ; they love they church , where they would have they child worship , and for which they forefather b ; they love they country , and would keep it what the gentleman of -- yes , the gentleman of ( we will
will have that in large cap , , my boy ) have make it -- the greatest and freest in the world : and as the name of some of they be append to the deed which secure we libertie at -- " " what be that ? " ask . " a ancestor of mine seal it with he sword - hilt , " say , with great gravity . " it be the , , " say , on which the publisher answer , " all right , I dare say , " and yawn , though he say , " go on , . " " -- at ; they be ready to defend that freedom to - day with sword and pen , and now , as then , to rally round the old law and libertie of . " " ! " cry . the little child stood wonder ; the lady be work silently , and look with fond admiration . " come here , little , " say , and pat the child 's fair curl with he large hand . but she shrank back from he rough caress , and prefer to go and take refuge at 's knee , and play with he fine watch - chain : and be very much pleased that she come to he ; for he be very soft -hearted and simple , though he conceal he gentleness under a shy and pompous demeanour . so she clamber up on he lap , whilst she father continue to read he programme . " you be laugh , " the say to , " about ' the obvious reason ' which I mention . now , I will show ye what they be , ye unbelieve heathen . ' we have say , ' " he go on , " 'that we can not give the name of the party engage in this undertaking , and that there be obvious reason for that concealment . we number influential friend in both house of the , and have secure ally in every diplomatic circle in . we source of intelligence be such as can not , by any possibility , be make public -- and , indeed , such as no other or could , by any chance , acquire . but this we be free to say , that the very earliest information connect with the movement of and continental politics will be find only in the column of the , the and the Capitalist , the and the divine , will be amongst we reader , because we writer be amongst they . we address ourselves to the higher circle of society : we care not to disow it -- the be write by gentleman for gentleman ; its conductor speak to the class in which they live and be bear . the field -preacher have he journal , the radical free - thinker have he journal : why should the of be unrepresented in the press ? ' " then go on with much modesty to descant upon the literary and fashionable departments of the , which be to be conduct by gentleman of acknowledge reputation ; man famous at the universities ( at which could scarcely help laugh and blush ) , know at the , and of the which they describe . he point out delicately to advertiser that there would be no such medium as the for give publicity to they sale ; and he eloquently call upon the nobility of , the baronetage of , the rever clergy of , the bar of , the matron , the daughter , the home and heart of , to rally round the good old cause ; and at the conclusion of the reading wake up from a second snooze in which he have indulge himself , and again say it be all right . the reading of the prospectus conclude , the gentleman present enter into some detail regard the political and literary management of the paper , and sate by listen and nodd he head , as if he understand what be the subject of they conversation , and approve of they opinion . 's opinion , in truth , be pretty simple . he think the could write the best smashing article in . he want the opposition house of smashed , and it be he opinion that the captain could do that business . if the have write a letter of on a sheet of paper , or copy a part of the , would have be perfectly contente , and have consider that the article be a smashing article . and he pockete the papers with the greatest satisfaction : and he not only pay for the , as we have see , but he call little to he , and give she a penny as he go away . the reading of the manuscript over , the party engage in general conversation , lead with a jaunty fashionable air in compliment to the two guest who sate with he and , and who , by they appearance and manner , he presume to be person of the beau monde . he know very little indeed of the great world , but he have see it , and make the most of what he have see . he speak of the character of the day , and great personage of the fashion , with easy familiarity and jocular allusion , as if it have be he habit to live amongst they . he tell anecdote of they private life , and of conversation he have have , and entertainment at which he have be present , and at which such and such a thing occur . be amused to hear the shabby prisoner in a tatter dressing - gown talk glibly about the great of the land . be always
always deligh when she husband tell these tale , and believe in they fondly every one . she do not want to mingle in the fashionable world herself , she be not clever enough ; but the great society be the very place for she charle : he shine in it : he be respect in it . indeed , have once be ask to dinner by the of ; he wife treasure the invitation - card in she workbox at that very day . presently have enough of this talk and get up to take leave , whereupon and rise to depart with the publisher , though the latter would have like to stay to make a further acquaintance with this family , who interest he and touch he . he say something about hope for permission to repeat he visit , upon which , with a rueful grin , say he be always to be find at home , and should be delighted to see . " I will see you to my park - gate , gentleman , " say , seize he hat , in spite of a deprecatory look and a faint cry of " charle " from . and the , in shabby slipper , shuffle out before he guest , lead the way through the dismal passage of the prison . he hand be already fiddl with he waistcoat pocket , where 's five - pound note be , as he take leave of the three gentleman at the wicket ; one of they , , be greatly relieve when he be out of the horrid place , and again freely tread the flag of . sadly go on with she work at the window look into the court . she see with a couple of man at he heel run rapidly in the direction of the prison tavern . she have hope to have have he to dinner herself that day : there be a piece of meat , and some salad in a basin , on the ledge outside of the window of they room which she have expect that she and little be to share with the child 's father . but there be no chance of that now . he would be in that tavern until the hour for close it ; then he would go and play at card or drink in some other man 's room and come back silent , with glaze eye , reel a little on he walk , that he wife might nurse he . oh , what varietie of pain do we not make we woman suffer ! so go to the cupboard , and , in lieu of a dinner , make herself some tea . and in those varietie of pain of which we speak anon , what a part of confidante have that poor tea - pot play ever since the kindly plant be introduce among we ! what myriad of woman have cry over it , to be sure ! what sick - bed it have smoke by ! what fever lips have receive refreshment from out of it ! mean very gently by woman when she make that tea - plant ; and with a little think what a series of picture and group the fancy may conjure up and assemble round the tea - pot and cup ! and be talk love - secret over it . poor Polly have it and she lover 's letter upon the table ; he letter who be she lover yesterday , and when it be with pleasure , not despair , she weep over they . tripping noiselessly come into she mother 's bedroom , bear a cup of the consoler to the widow who will take no other food , be busy concoct it for she husband , who be come home from the harvest - field -- one could fill a page with hint for such picture ;-- finally , and little sit down and drink they tea together , while the go out and take he pleasure . she care for nothing else but that , when she husband be away . a gentleman with whom we be already slightly acquainted , , a townsman of 's , find the 's wife and little ( for whom always bring a sweetmeat in he pocket ) over this meal . think Shandon the greatest of create geniuse , have have one or two help from the good - natured prodigal , who have always a kind word , and sometimes a guinea for any friend in need ; and never miss a day in see he patron . he be ready to run 's errand and transact he money - business with publisher and newspaper editor , dun , creditor , holder of 's acceptance , gentleman dispose to speculate in those security , and to transact the thousand little affair of a embarrassed irish gentleman . I never know a embarrassed irish gentleman yet , but he have a aide - de - camp of he own nation , likewise in circumstance of pecuniary discomfort . that aide - de - camp have subordinate of he own , who again may have other insolvent dependent -- all through he life we march at the head of a rag staff , who share in the rough fortune of they chieftain . " he will not have that five - pound note very long , I bet a guinea , " say of the , as he and he two companion walk away from the prison ; and the publisher judge rightly , for when . come to empty she husband 's pocket , she find but a couple of shilling , and a few halfpence out of the morning 's remittance . have give a pound to one follower ; have send a leg of mutton and potatoe
potatoe and beer to a acquaintance in the poor side of the prison ; have pay a outstanding bill at the tavern where he have change he five - pound note ; have have a dinner with two friend there , to whom he lose sundry half - crown at card afterwards ; so that the night leave he as poor as the morning have find he . the publisher and the two gentleman have have some talk together after quit , and reiterate to what he have say to he rival , , viz. , that be a high fellow , of great genius , and what be more , well with the great world , and related to " no end " of the peerage . reply that he should be happy to have dealings with , and hope to have the pleasure of see both gent to cut mutton with he before long , and so , with mutual politeness and protestation , they part . " it be hard to see such a man as , " say , muse , and talk that night over the sight which he have witness , " of accomplishment so multifarious , and of such a undoubted talent and humour , a inmate of a gaol for half he time , and a bookseller 's hanger - on when out of prison . " " I be a bookseller 's hanger - on -- you be go to try you pace as a hack , " say with a laugh . " we be all hack upon some road or other . I would rather be myself , than we neighbour in chamber : who have as much enjoyment of he life as a mole . a deuced deal of undeserved compassion have be throw away upon what you call you bookseller 's drudge . " " much solitary pipe and ale make a cynic of you , " say " you be a by a beer - barrel , . no man shall tell I that a man of genius , as be , ought to be drive by such a vulgar slave -driver , as yonder , whom we have just leave , who fatten on the profit of the other 's brain , and enrich himself out of he journeyman 's labour . it make I indignant to see a gentleman the serf of such a creature as that , of a man who can not speak the language that he live by , who be not fit to black 's boot . " " so you have begin already to gird at the publisher , and to take you side amongst we order . , , my be boy ! " answer , laugh still . " what have you get to say against 's relation with ? be it the publisher , think you , who send the author to prison ? be it who be tippl away the five - pound note which we see just now , or ? " " drive a man into bad company , " say . " it be easy to cry ' ! ' against a poor fellow who have no society but such as he find in a prison ; and no resource except forgetfulness and the bottle . we must deal kindly with the eccentricity of genius , and remember that the very ardour and enthusiasm of temperament which make the author delightful often lead the man astray . " " a fiddlestick about man of genius ! " cry out , who be a very severe moralist upon some point , though possibly a very had practitioner . " I deny that there be so many geniuse as people who whimper about the fate of man of letter assert there be . there be thousand of clever fellows in the world who could , if they would , turn verse , write article , read book , and deliver a judgment upon they ; the talk of professional critic and writer be not a whit more brilliant , or profound , or amusing , than that of any other society of educated people . if a lawyer , or a soldier , or a parson , outrund he income , and do not pay he bill , he must go to gaol ; and a author must go , too . if a author fuddle himself , I do not know why he should be let off a headache the next morning , -- if he order a coat from the tailor 's , why he should not pay for it . " " I would give he more money to buy coat , " say , smile . I suppose I should like to belong to a well - dress profession . I protest against that wretch of a middle - man whom I see between and he great landlord , the Public , and who stop more than half of the labourer 's earning and fame . " " I be a prose labourer , " say ; " you , my boy , be a poet in a small way , and so , I suppose , consider you be authorise to be flighty . what be it you want ? do you want a body of capitalist that shall be force to purchase the work of all author , who may present themselves , manuscript in hand ? everybody who write he epic , every driveller who can or can not spell , and produce he novel or he tragedy , -- be they all to come and find a bag of sovereign in exchange for they worthless ream of paper ? who be to settle what be good or bad , saleable or otherwise ? will you give the buyer leave , in fine , to purchase or not
not ? why , sir , when sate behind the screen at 's , and take he dinner apart , because he be too shabby and poor to join the literary bigwig who be regal themselves , round cave 's best table - cloth , the tradesman be do he no wrong . you could not force the publisher to recognise the man of genius in the young man who present himself before he , rag , gaunt , and hungry . Rag be not a proof of genius ; whereas capital be absolute , as time go , and be perforce the bargain - master . it have a right to deal with the literary inventor as with any other ;-- if I produce a novelty in the book trade , I must do the best I can with it ; but I can no more force to purchase my book of travels or sermon , than I can compel to give I a hundred guinea for my horse . I may have my own idea of the value of my , and think he the most wonderful of animal ; but the dealer have a right to he opinion , too , and may want a lady 's horse , or a cob for a heavy timid rider , or a sound hack for the road , and my will not suit he . " " you deal in metaphor , , " say ; " but you rightly say that you be very prosaic . poor ! there be something about the kindness of that man , and the gentleness of that sweet creature of a wife , which touch I profoundly . I like he , I be afraid , better than a better man " " and so do I , " say . " let we give he the benefit of we sympathy , and the pity that be due to he weakness : though I fear that sort of kindness would be resent as contempt by a more high - minded man . you see he take he consolation along with he misfortune , and one generate the other or balance ii , as the way of the world . he be a prisoner , but he be not unhappy . " " he genius sings within he prison bar , " say . " yes , " say , bitterly ; " accommodate himself to a cage pretty well . he ought to be wretch , but he have and to drink with , and that console he : he might have a high place , but , as he can not , why , he can drink with and ; -- he might be provide for he wife and child , but and have get a bottle of brandy which they want he to taste ; -- he might pay poor Snip , the tailor , the twenty pound which the poor devil want for he landlord , but and lay they hand upon he purse ; -- and so he drink whilst he tradesman go to gaol and he family to ruin . let we pity the misfortunes of genius , and conspire against the publishing tyrants who oppress man of letter . " " what ! be you go to have another glass of brandy - and - water ? " say , with a humorous look . it be at the that the above philosophical conversation take place between the two young man . begin to laugh as usual . " video meliora proboque -- I mean , bring it I hot , with sugar , , " he say to waiter . " I would have some more , too , only I do not want it , " say . " it do not seem to I , , that we be much better than we neighbour . " and 's last glass have be despatch , the pair return to they chamber . they find a couple of note in the letter - box , on they return , which have be send by they acquaintance of the morning , . that hospitable gentleman present he compliment to each of the gentleman , and request they pleasure of company at dinner on a early day , to meet a few literary friend . " we shall have a grand spread , . we shall meet all 's corps . " " all except poor , " say , nodd a good - night to he friend , and he go into he own little room . the event and acquaintance of the day have excite he a good deal , and he lay for some time awake think over they , as 's vigorous and regular snore from the neighbour apartment pronounce that that gentleman be engage in deep slumber . be it true , think Pendennis , lie on he bed and gaze at a bright moon without , that light up a corner of he dressing - table , and the frame of a little sketch of Fairoaks draw by , and hang over he drawer -- be it true that I be go to earn my bread at last , and with my pen ? that I shall impoverish the dear mother no longer ; and that I may gain a name and reputation in the world , perhaps ? these be welcome if they come , think the young visionary , laugh and blush to himself , though alone and in the night , as he think how dearly he would relish honour and fame if they could be he . if fortune favour I , I laud she ; if she frown , I resign she . I pray heaven I may be honest if I fail , or if I succeed . I pray heaven I may tell the truth
truth as far as I know it : that I may not swerve from it through flattery , or interest , or personal enmity , or party prejudice . Dearest old mother , what a pride will you have , if I can do anything worthy of we name I and you , , you will not scorn I as the worthless idler and spendthrift , when you see that I -- when I have achieve a -- psha ! what a I be because I have make five pound by my poem , and be engage to write half a dozen article for a newspaper . he go on with these musing , more happy and hopeful , and in a humbler frame of mind , than he have feel to be for many a day . he think over the error and idleness , the passion , extravagance , disappointment , of he wayward youth : he get up from the bed : threw open the window , and look out into the night : and then , by some impulse , which we hope be a good one , he go up and kiss the picture of Fairoaks , and flinge himself down on he knee by the bed , remain for some time in that posture of hope and submission . when he rise , it be with streaming eye . he have find himself repeat , mechanically , some little word which he have be accustom to repeat as a child at he mother 's side , after the saying of which she would softly take he to he bed and close the curtain round he , hush he with a benediction . the next day , , they attendant , bring in a large brown - paper parcel , direct to , , with 's compliment , and a note which read . " Pen , you beggar ! " roar to , who be in he own room . " Hullo ! " sung out . " come here , you be want , " cry the other , and come out . " what be it ? " say he . " catch ! " cry , and fling the parcel at Pen's head , who would have be knock down have he not catch it . " it be book for review for the : pitch into 'em , " say . as for , he never have be so delighted in he life : he hand tremble as he cut the string of the packet , and beheld within a smart set of new neat calico - bound book -- travels , and novel , and poem . " Sport the oak , , " say he . " I be not at home to anybody to - day . " and he fling into he easy - chair , and hardly give himself time to drink he tea , so eager be he to begin to read and to review . in which the history still hover about , urge on by he wife , who seldom meddle in business matter , have stipulate that , , of the , should be appoint sub-editor of forthcoming , and this post be accordingly confer upon by the spirited proprietor of the . indeed he deserve any kindness at the hand of , so fondly attach be he , as we have say , to the and he family , and so eager to do he a service . it be in 's chamber that in former day use to hide when danger be near and bailiff abroad : until at length he hide - place be know , and the heriff 's officer come as regularly to wait for the on 's staircase as at he own door . it be to 's chamber that poor come often and often to explain she trouble and grief , and devise means of rescue for she adore . many a meal do furnish for she and the child there . it be a honour to he little room to be visit by such a lady ; and as she go down the staircase with she veil over she face , would lean over the balustrade look after she , to see that no Temple assail she upon the road , perhaps hope that some rogue might be induce to waylay she , so that he , , might have the pleasure of rushing to she rescue , and break the rascal 's bone . it be a sincere pleasure to . when the arrangement be make by which she kind honest champion be appoint she husband 's aide - de - camp in the newspaper . he would have sate with as late as the prison hour permit , and have indeed many a time witness the putting to bed of little , who occupy a crib in the room ; and to whose evening prayer that might bless papa , , although of the Romish faith himself , have say with a great deal of sympathy -- but he have a appointment with regard the affair of the paper which they be to discuss over a quiet dinner . so he go away at six o'clock from , but make he accustom appearance at the next morning , have array himself in he best clothes and ornament , which , though cheap as to cost , be very brilliant as to colour and appearance , and haive in he pocket four pound two shilling , be the amount of he week 's salary at the , minus two shilling expend by he in the purchase of a pair of glove on he way to the prison . he have cut he mutton with , as the latter gentleman phrase it , and , 's reader and literary man of business , at
at 's coffee - house on the previous day , and enter at large into he view respect the conduct of the . in a masterly manner he have point out what should be the sub-editorial arrangement of the paper : what should be the type for the various article : who should report the market ; who the turf and ring ; who the intelligence ; and who the fashionable chit- chat . he be acquaint with gentleman engage in cultivat these various departments of knowledge , and in communicate they afterwards to the public -- in fine , be , as have say of he , and as he proudly own himself to be , one of the best sub-editor of a paper in . he know the weekly earning of every man connect with the press , and be up to a thousand dodge , or ingenious economic contrivance , by which money could be save to spirite capitalist , who be go to set up a paper . he at once dazzl and mystify , who be slow of comprehension , by the rapidity of the calculation which he exhibit on paper , as they sate in the box . and afterwards own to he subordinate , that that see a clever fellow . and now have succeed in make this impression upon , the faithful fellow work round to the point which he have very near at heart , viz. , the liberation from prison of he admired friend and chief , . he know to a shill the amount of the detainer which be against the at the porter 's lodge of the fleet ; and , indeed , profess to know all he debt , though this be impossible , for no man in , certainly not the himself , be acquaint with they . he point out what 's engagement already be ; and how much better he would work if remove from confinement ( though this deny , for , " when the 's lock up , " he say , " we be sure to find he at home ; whereas , when he be free , you can never catch hold of he " ) ; finally , he so work on 's feeling , by describe pin away in the prison , and the child sicken there , that the publisher be induce to promise that , if would come to he in the morning , he would see what could be do . and the colloquy end at this time with the second round of brandy - and - water , although , who have four guinea in he pocket , would have discharge the tavern reckon with delight , say , " no , sir , -- this be my affair , sir , if you please . , take the bill , and eighteenpence for yourself , " and he hand over the necessary fund to the waiter . thus it be that , who go to be at the Temple after the dinner at 's , find himself actually with he week 's salary intact upon morning . he give a wink so know and joyful , that that kind creature kknow some good news be in store for she , and hasten to get she bonnet and shawl , when ask if he might have the honour of take she a walk , and give she a little fresh air . and little jump for joy at the idea of this holiday , for never neglect to give she a toy , or to take she to a show , and bring newspaper order in he pocket for all sort of diversion to amuse the child . indeed , he love they with all he heart , and would cheerfully have dash out he rambling brain to do they , or he adore , a service . " may I go , ? or shall I stay with you , for you be poorly , dear , this morning ? he be get a headache , . he suffer from headach , and I persuade he to stay in bed , " say . " go along with you , and . Jack , take care of th'ey . hand I over the 's , and leave I to my abominable device , " say , with perfect good - humour . he be write , and not uncommonly take he and latin quotation ( of which he know the use as a public writer ) from that wonderful repertory of learn . so give he arm to , and go skip down the passage of the prison , and through the gate into the free air . from to be not very far . as the three reach 's shop , be also enter at the private door , hold in she hand a paper parcel and a manuscript volume bound in red , and , indeed , contain a account of she transaction with the butcher in the neighbouring market . be in a gorgeous shot - silk dress , which flam with red and purple ; she wear a yellow shawl , and have red flower inside she bonnet , and a brilliant light blue parasol . be in a old black watere silk ; she bonnet have never see very brilliant day of prosperity any more than its owner , but she could not help look like a lady whatever she attire be . the two woman curtsy to each other , each accord to she fashion . " I hope you be pretty well , mum ? " say . " it be a very fine day , " say . " will not you step in , mum ? " say , look so hard at the child as almost to frighten she . " I -- I
I come about business with -- I -- I hope he be pretty well ? " say timid . " if you go to see he in the counting - house , could not you , could not you leave you little gurl with I ? " say , in a deep voice , and with a tragic look , as she hold out one finger towards the child . " I want to stay with mamma , " cry little Mary , bury she face in she mother 's dress . " go with this lady , , my dear , " say the mother . " I will show you some pretty picture , " say , with the voice of a ogress , " and some nice thing besides ; look here , " -- and open she brown - paper parcel , display some choice sweet buscuit , such as she love after he wine . follow after this attraction , the whole party enter at the private entrance , from which a side door lead into 's commercial apartment . here , however , as the child be about to part from she mother , she courage again fail she , and again she run to the maternal petticoat ; upon which the kind and gentle , see the look of disappointment in 's face , good - naturedly say , " if you will let I , I will come up too , and sit for a few minute , " and so the three female ascend the stair together . a second biscuit charme little into perfect confidence , and in a minute or two she prattle away without the least restraint . faithful meanwhile find in a severer mood than he have be on the night previous , when two - third of a bottle of port , and two large glassis of brandy - and - water , have warm he soul into enthusiasm , and make he generous in he promise towards . he impetuous wife have rebuk he on he return home . she have order that he should give no relief to the captain ; he be a good - for - nothing fellow , whom no money would help ; she disapprove of the plan of the , and expect that would only lose he money in it as they be lose over the way ( she always call she brother 's establishment " over the way " ) by the . let stop in prison and do he work ; it be the best place for he . in vain plead and promise and implor , for he friend have have a hour 's lecture in the morning and be inexorable . but what honest Jack fail to do below - stair in the counting - house , the pretty face and manners of the mother and child be effect in the drawing - room , where they be melte the fierce but really soft . there be a artless sweetness in 's voice , and a win frankness of manner , which make most people fond of she , and pity she : and take courage by the rug kindness with which she hostess receive she , the 's lady tell she story , and describe she husband 's goodness and virtue , and she child 's failing health ( she be oblige to part with two of they , she say , and send they to school , for she could not have they in that horrid place ) -- that , though as grim as , melt under the influence of the simple tale , and say she would go down and speak to . now in this household to speak be to command , with ; and with , to hear be to obey . it be just when poor be in despair about he negotiation , that the majestic descend upon she spouse , politely request to step up to he friend in she drawing - room , while she hold a few minute ' conversation with , and when the pair be alone the publisher 's better half inform he of she intention towards the 's lady . " what be in the wind now , my dear ? " Maecenas ask , surprise at he wife 's alte tone . " you would not hear of my do anything for the this morne : I wonder what have be a changing of you . " the be a , " reply ; " and those irish I have always say I could not abide . but he wife be a lady , as any one can see ; and a good woman , and a clergyman 's daughter , and a west of woman , , which I be myself , by my mother 's side -- and , of ! do not you remark the little gurl ? " " yes , , I see the little girl . " " and do not you see how like she be to we angel , , .? " -- and 's thought fly back to a period eighteen year back , when and have just set up in business as small bookseller in a country town , and when she have have a child , name , something like the little who have move she compassion . " well , well , my dear , " say , see the little eye of he wife begin to twinkle and grow red ; " the be not in for much . there be only a hundred and thirty pound against he . half the money will take he out of the fleet , Finucane say , and we will pay he half salary till he have make the account square . when the little 'un say , ' why do not
not you take out of prizn ? ' I do feel it , , upon my honou I do , now . " and the upshot of this conversation be , that and both ascend to the drawing - room , and make a heavy and clumsy speech , in which he announce to , that , hear sixty - five pound would set she husband free , he be ready to advance that sum of money , deduct it from the 's salary , and that he would give it to she on condition that she would personally settle with the creditor regard she husband 's liberation . I think this be the happiest day that and have have for a long time . " , , you be a trump ! " roar out , in a overpowering brogue and emotion . " give we you fist , old boy : and will not we send the up to ten thousand a week , that be all ! " and he jump about the room , and toss up little , with a hundred frantic antic . " if I could drive you anywhere in my carriage , -- I be sure it be quite at you service , " say , look out at a one - horse vehicle which have just drive up , and in which this lady take the air considerably -- and the two lady , with little between they ( whose tiny hand 's wife keep fix in she great grasp ) , with the delighted on the back seat , drive away from , as the owner of the vehicle throw triumphant glance at the opposite window at 's . " it will not do the any good , " think , go back to he desk and account , " but become reglar upset when she think about she misfortune . the child would have be of age yesterday , if she would liv . tell I so : " and he wonder how woman do remember thing . we be happy to say that s with very good success upon she errand . she who have have to mollify creditor when she have no money at all , and only tear and entreaty wherewith to soothe they , find no difficulty in make they relent by means of a bribe of ten shilling in the pound ; and the next be the last , for some time at least , which the spend in prison . dinner in the row upon the appointed day we two friend make they appearance at 's door in row ; not the public entrance through which bookseller 's boy issue with they sack full of 's volume , and around which timid aspirant linger with they virgin manuscript ready for sale to , but at the private door of the house , whence the splendid would come forth to step into she chaise and take she drive , settle herself on the cushion , and cast look of defiance at 's opposite window -- at , who be as yet a chaiseless woman . on such occasion , when very much wroth at she sister - in - law 's splendour would fl up the sash of she draw - room window , and look out with she four child at the chaise , as much as to say , " look at these four darling . ! this be why I can not drive in my carriage ; you would give a coach - and - four to have the same reason . " and it be with these arrow out of she quiver that shoot as she sate in she chariot envious and childless . as and come to 's door , a carriage and a cab drive up to 's . descend heavily from the first ; the Doctor 's equipage be as ponderous as he style , but both have a fine sonorous effect upon the publisher in the row . a couple of dazzling white waistcoat step out of the cab . laugh . " you see have he dinner - party too . that be , author of ' Memoir of the Poisoner . ' you would hardly have recognise we friend in that gallant white waistcoat . be one of 's man , and faith , here he come . " indeed , . and have come from the in the same cab , toss up by the way which should pay the shilling ; and step from the other side of the way , array in black , with a large pair of white glove which be spread out on he hand , and which the owner could not help regard with pleasure . the house porter in a evening coat , and gentleman with glove as large as 's , but of the famous web , be on the passage of 's house to receive the guest 's hat and coat , and bawl they name up the stair . some of the latter have arrive when the three new visitor make they appearance ; but there be only in red satin and a turban to represent she own charming sex . she make curtsy to each new - comer as he enter the drawing - room , but she mind be evidently pre-occupy by extraneous thought . the fact be , 's dinner - party be disturb she , and as soon as she have receive each individual of she own company , fly back to the embrasure of the window , whence she could rake the carriage of 's friend as they come ratt up the row . the sight of 's large carriage , with the gaunt job - horse , crush : none but hack cab have drive up to she own door on that day . they be all literary
literary gentleman , though unknown as yet to . there be , the real editor of the magazine , of which be the nominal chief ; , who , from have break out on the world as a poet of a tragic and suicidial cast , have now subsid into one of 's back shop as reader for that gentleman ; and , a ex-beau reader about town , and related in some indistinct manner to literature and the Peerage . he be say to have write a book once , to have be a friend of , to be related to ; in fact , anecdote of for he staple , and he seldom spoke but with the name of that poet or some of he contemporary in he mouth , as thus : " I remember poor , at school be send up for good for a copy of verse , every line of which I write , by ; " or , " I recollect , when I be at with , offer to bet gamba , " and so forth . this gentleman , remark , be listen to with great attention by ; he anecdote of the aristocracy , of which he be a middle - aged member , delighte the publisher 's lady ; and he be almost a greater man than the great himself in she eye . have he but come in he own carriage , would have make she Bungay purchase any give volume from he pen. go about to he guest as they arrive , and do the honour of he house with much cordiality . " how be you , sir ? day , sir . glad to see you year , sir . , my love , let I ave the honour of introduce to you . , ; , . hope you have bring good appetite with you , gentlemen . you , , I know ave , for you have always ad a deuce of a twist . " " , ! " say . " faith , a man must be hard to please , , who can not eat a good dinner in this house , " say , and he wink and strok he lean chop with he large glove ; and make appeal of friendship to , which that honest woman refuse with scorn from the timid man . " she could not abide that , " she say in confidence to she friend . indeed , all he flattery fail to win she . as they talk , Bungay survey mankind from she window , a magnificent vision of a enormous grey cab - horse appear , and neare rapidly . a pair of white rein , hold by small white glove , be visible behind it ; a face pale , but richly decorate with a ching -tuft , the head of a exiguous groom bobb over the cab - head -- these bright thing be reveal to the delighted . " the 's quite punctual , I declare , " she say , and sail to the door to be in wait at the nobleman 's arrival . " it be , " say , look out of window , and see a individual , in extremely lacquered boot , descmend from the swing cab : and , in fact , it be that young nobleman 's eldest son , as we all very well know , who be come to dine with the publisher -- he publisher of the row . " he be my fag at , " say . " I ought to have lick he a little more . " he and have have some bout at the Union debate , in which have have very much the better of Percy : who presently appear , with he hat under he arm , and a look of indescribable good - humour and fatuity in he round dimple face : upon which have burst out with a ching -tuft , but , exhaust with the effort , have leave the rest of the countenance bare of hair . the temporary groom of the chamber bawl out , " the , " much to that gentleman 's discomposure at hear he title announce . " what do the man want to take away my hat for , ? " he ask of the publisher . " can not do without my hat -- want it to make my bow to . how well you look . , to - day . have not see you carriage in the : why have not you be there ? I miss you ; indeed , I do . " " I be afraid you be a sad quiz , " say . " ! never make a joke in my -- hullo ! who be here ? how would 'ye do , ? how would 'ye do , ? these be old friend of mine , . I say , how the doose do you come here ? " he ask of the two young man , turnip he lacquer heel upon , who respecte she husband 's two young guest , now that she find they be intimate with a lord 's son . " what ! do they know he ? " she ask rapidly of . " high feller , I tell you -- the young one related to all the nobility , " say the publisher ; and both run forward , smile and bow , to greet almost as great personage as the young lord -- no less character , indeed , than the great and the great , who be now announce . enter , wear the usual demure look and stealthy smile with which he commonly survey the tip of he neat little shining boot , and which he but seldom bring to bear
bear upon the person who address he . 's white waistcoat spread out , on the contrary , with profuse brilliancy ; he burly , red face shone resplendent over it , light up with the thought of good joke and a good dinner . he like to make he entree into a drawing - room with a laugh , and , when he go away at night , to leave a joke explode behind he . no personal calamity or distress ( of which that humourist have he share in common with the unjocular part of mankind ) could altogether keep he humour down . whatever he grief might be , the thought of a dinner rally he great soul ; and when he see a lord , he salute he with a pun . go up , then , with a smug smile and whisper , to , and look at she from under he eye , and show she the tip of he shoe . Wagg say she look charming , and push on straight at the young nobleman , whom he call , and to whom he instantly relate a funny story , seaso with what the french call gros sel . he be delighted to see , too , and shake hand with he , and slap he on the back cordially ; for he be full of spirit and good - humour . and he talk in a loud voice about they last place and occasion of meeting at ; and ask how they friend of Clavering , and whether be not come to for the season ; and whether Pen have be to see , who have arrive -- fine old lady , ! these remark Wagg make not for ear so much as for the edification of the company , whom he be glad to inform that he pay visit to gentleman 's country seat , and be on intimate term with the nobility . also shook hand with we young friend -- all of which scene remark with respectful pleasure , and communicate she idea to , afterwards , regard the importance of -- idea by which profit much more than he be aware . , who have read , and rather admire some of she work ( and expect to find in a person somewhat resembl she own description of herself in the ' passion - , ' in which she state that she youth resemble -- " a violet , shrink meanly when blow the wind keenly ; a timid fawn , on wild - wood lawn , where oak - bough rustle greenly , -- " and that she maturer beauty be something very different , certainly , to the artless loveliness of she prime , but still exceedingly captivat and strike ) , beheld , rather to he surprise and amusement , a large and bony woman in a crumple satin dress , who come creak into the room with a step as heavy as a grenadier 's . instantly note the straw which she bring in at the rumple skirt of she dress , and would have stoop to pick it up : but disarm all criticism by observe this ornament herself , and , put she own large foot upon it , so as to separate it from she robe , she stoop and pick up the straw , say to , that she be very sorry to be a little late , but that the omnibus be very slow , and what a comfort it be to get a ride all the way from for sixpence . nobody laugh at the poetess 's speech , it be utter so simply . indeed , the worthy woman have not the least notion of be asham of a action incidental upon she poverty . " be that ' passion - Flowers ? ' " say to , by whom he be stand . " why , she picture in the volume represent she as a very well - look young woman . " " you know passion - flower , like all other , will run to seed , " say ; " 's portrait be probably paint some year ago . " " well , I like she for not be asham of she poverty . " " so do I , " say Wenham , who would have starve rather than have come to dinner in a omnibus , " but I do not think that she need flourish the straw about , do you , ? my dear , how do you do ? I be in a great lady 's drawing - room this morning , and everybody be charme with you new volume . those line on the christening of bring tear into the Duchess 's eye . I say that I think I should have the pleasure of meet you to - day , and she beg I to thank you , and say how greatly she be pleased . " this history , tell in a bland smiling manner , of a Duchess whom have meet that very morning , too , quite put poor 's dowager and baronet out of court , and place beyond as a man of fashion . keep this inestimable advantage , and have the conversation to himself , run on with a number of anecdote regard the aristocracy . he try to bring into the conversation by make appeal to he , and say , " I be tell you father this morning , " or , " I think you be present at house the other night when the say so - and - so , " but would not gratify he by joining in the talk , prefer to fall back into the window recess with , and watch the cab that drive up to the opposite door . at least ,
, if he would not talk , the hostess hope that those odious Bacon would see how she have secure the noble for she party . and now the bell of 's toll half a hour later than that for which have invite he party , and it be complete with the exception of two guest , who at last make they appearance , and in whom be pleased to recognise and . when these two have make they greeting to the master and mistress of the house , and exchange nod of more or less recognition with most of the people present , and go up , and shake hand very warmly with , who , perhaps , be affecte to meet they , and think where it be she have see they but a few day before . be brush up , and look pretty smart , in a red velvet waistcoat , and a frill , into which he wife have stick she best brooch . in spite of 's kindness , perhaps in consequence of it , feel great terror and timidity in approach she : indeed , she be more awful than ever in she red satin and bird of paradise , and it be not until she have ask in she great voice about the dear little gurl , that the latter be somewhat encourage , and venture to speak . " nice - look woman , " whisper to . " do introduce I to captain , . I be tell he be a tremendous clever fellow ; and , dammy , I adore intellect , by I do ! " this be the truth : have not endow young with much intellect of he own , but have give he a generous faculty for admiring , if not for appreciating , the intellect of other . " and introduce I to . I be tell she be very clever too . she be rum to look at , certainly , but that do not matter . Dammy , I consider myself a literary man , and I wish to know all the clever fellows . " so and have the pleasure of become acquainted with one another ; and now the door of the adjoin dining - room be flng open , the party enter and take they seat at table . find himself next to on one side , and to -- the truth be , fle alarme from the vacant place by the poetess , and be compelle to take it . the gifted be do not talk much during dinner , but remark that she eat with a vast appetite , and never refuse any of the supplies of wine which be offer to she by the butler . indeed , have consider for a minute , who give himself rather grand air , and who be attire in a extremely fashionable style , with he very best chain , shirt stud , and cambric front , he be set down , and not without reason , as a prig by the poetess ; who think it be much better to attend to she dinner than to take any notice of he . she tell he as much in after day with she usual candour . " I take you for one of the little Mayfair dandy , " she say to . " you look as solemn as a little undertaker ; and as I dislike , beyond measure , the odious creature who be on the other side of I , I think it be best to eat my dinner and hold my tongue . " " and you do both very well , my dear , " say with a laugh . " well , so I do , but I intend to talk to you the next time a great deal : for you be neither so solemn , nor so stupid , nor so pert as you look . " " ah , , how I pine for that ' next time ' to come , " say with a air of comical gallantry :-- but we must return to the day , and the dinner at Paternoster row . the repast be of the richest description -- " what I call of the florid Gothic style , " whisper to , who sate beside the humourist , in he side - we voice . the man in creaking shoe and Berlin gloves be numerous and solemn , carry on rapid conversation behind the guest , as they move to and for with the dishe . Doolan call out , " , " to one of they , and blush when he think of he blunder . 's footboy be lose amidst those large and black - coate attendant . " look at that very bow-windowed man , " say . " he be a undertaker in , and attend funeral and dinner . cold meat and hot , do not you perceive ? he be the sham butler here , and I observe , my dear , as you will through life , that wherever there be a sham butler at a dinner there be sham wine -- this sherry be filthy . Bungay , my boy , where do you get this delicious brown sherry ? " " I be glad you like it , ; glass with you , " say the publisher . " it be some I get from 's store , and give a good figure for it , I can tell you . , will you join we ? you ' ealth , gentleman . " " the old rogue , where do he expect to go to ? it come from the public - house , " say . " it require two man to carry off that sherry , ' tis so uncommonly strong . I
I wish I have a bottle of old 's wine here , : you uncle and I have have many a one . he send it about to people where he be in the habit of dining . I remember at poor 's , 's brother -- he be of -- 's chef always come in the morning , and the butler arrive win the champagne from , in the ice - pail ready . " " how good this be ! " say , good - naturedly . " you must have a cordon bleu in you kitchen . " " o yes , " say , think he speak of a jack - chain very likely . " I mean a french chef , " say the polite guest . " o yes , you lordship , " again say the lady . " do you artist say he be a , . B.? " call out . " well , I be sure I do not know , " answer the publisher 's lady . " because , if he do , he be a quizzin yer , " cry ; but nobody see the pun , which disconcert somewhat the bashful punster . " the dinner be from , in 's ; so be 's , " he whisper . " write to give half - a - cry a head more than , so do . they would poison each other 's ex if they could get near they ; and as for the make - dish -- they be poison . this -- hum -- ha --this a be delicious , , " he say , help himself to a dish which the undertaker hand to he . " well , I be glad you like it , " answer , blush and not know whether the name of the dish be actually that which give to it , but dimly conscious that that individual be quiz she . accordingly she hate with female ardour ; and would have depose he from he command over 's periodical , but that he name be great in the trade , and he reputation in the land considerable . by the displacement of person , have find himself on the right hand of , who sate in plain black silk and fad ornament by the side of the florid publisher . the sad smile of the lady move he rough heart to pity . nobody seem to interest himself about she : she sate look at she husband , who himself see rather abash in the presence of some of the company . and both know he and he circumstance . he have work with the latter , and be immeasurably he superior in wit , genius , and acquirement ; but 's star be brilliant in the world , and poor be unknown there . he could not speak before the noisy talk of the coarser and more successful man ; but drank he wine in silence , and as much of it as the people would give he . he be under surveillance . have warn the undertaker not to fill the 's glass too often or too full . it be a melancholy precaution that , and the more melancholy that it be necessary . , too , cast alarmed glance across the table to see that she husband do not exceed . Abash by the failure of he first pun , for he be impudent and easily disconcert , keep he conversation pretty much to during the rest of dinner , and of course chiefly speak about they neighbour . " this be one of 's grand field - day , " he say . " we be all here .-- do you read 's novel ? it be a old magazine story write by poor year ago , and forget here until ( that be Trotter with the large shirt collar ) fished it out and bethotch he that it be applicable to the late elopement ; so write a few chapter a propo -- permit the use of he name , and I dare say supply a page here and there -- and ' desperation , or the Fugitive Duchess ' make it be appearance . the great fun be to examine about he own work , of which he do not know a word .-- I say , Popjoy , what a capital passage that be in , -- where the Cardinal in disguise , after be convert by the Bishop of , propose marriage to the Duchess 's daughter . " " you like it , " answer ; " it be a favourite bit of my own . " " there be no such thing in the whole book , " whisper to . " invent it myself . ! it would not be a bad plot for a high - church novel . " " I remember poor , , , and myself , dining with at , " , " and we have some wine for dinner , which like very much . and I remember how the regret that he be a single man . we go to two day afterwards , where 's yacht be -- and , by , the die within three week ; and be very sorry , for he rather like he . " " a devilish interesting story , Sumph , indeed , " say . " you should publish some of those story , , you really should . such a volume would make we friend 's fortune , " say . " why do not you ask to publish them in you new paper -- the what - d 'ye - call - 'em -- hay , ? " bawl out . " why do not you ask he to publish them in you old magazine , the
the Thingumbob ? " reply . " be there go to be a new paper ? " ask , who know perfectly well , but be asham of he connection with the press . " go to bring out a paper ? " cry , who , on the contrary , be proud of he literary reputation and acquaintance . " you must employ I . , use you influence with he , and make he employ I . Prose or verse -- what shall it be ? Novels , poem , travels , or lead article , begad . anything or everything -- only let pay I , and I be ready -- I be now my dear , begad now . " " it be to be call the Small , " grow , " and little Popjoy be to be engage for the infantine department . " " it be to be call the , sir , and we shall be very happy to have you with we , " say . " -- why ? " ask . " because the editor be bear at , the sub-editor at , because the proprietor live in Paternoster row ; -- and the paper be publish in , . will not that reason suffice you , ? " say ; he be get rather angry . " everything must have a name . my dog have get a namee . you have get a name , and a name which you deserve , more or less , indeed . why would 'ye grudge the name to we paper ? " " by any other name it would smell as sweet , " say . " I will have ye remember its name be not what - d 'ye - call - 'em , , " say . " you know its name well enough , and -- and you know mine . " " and I know you address too , " say ; but this be speak in a undertone , and the good - natured be appease almost in a instant after he ebullition of spleen , and ask to drink wine with he in a friendly voice . when the lady retire from the table , the talk grow louder still ; and presently , in a courtly speech , propose that everybody should drink to the health of the new , eulogise highly the talents , wit , and learn of its editor , . it be he maxim never to lose the support of a newspaper man , and in the course of that evening he go round and salute every literary gentleman present with a privy compliment specially address to he ; inform this one how great a impression have be make in by he last article , and tell that one how profoundly he good friend , the of so- and - so , have be strike by the ability of the late number . the evening come to a close , and in spite of all the precaution to the contrary , poor reel in he walk , and go home to he new lodging , with he faithful wife by he side , and the cabman on he box jeer at he . have a chariot of he own , which he put at 's seat ; and the timid see , who be she neighbour , about to , insist upon a seat in he carriage , much to that gentleman 's discomfiture . and walk home together in the moonlight . " and now , " say , " that you have see the man of letter , tell I , be I far wrong in say that there be thousand of people in this town , who do not write book , who be , to the full , as clever and intellectual as people who do ? " be force to confess that the literary personage with whom he have become acquainted have not say much , in the course of the night 's conversation , that be worthy to be remember or quote . in fact not one word about literature have be say during the whole course of the night :-- and it may be whisper to those uninitiated people who be anxious to know the habit and make the acquaintance of man of letter , that there be no race of people who talk about book , or , perhaps , who read book , so little as literary man . the considerable success at first attend the new journal . it be generally state , that a influential political party support the paper ; and great name be cite amongst the contributor to its column . be there any foundation for these rumour ? we be not at liberty to say whether they be ill - foun ; but this much we may divulge , that a article upon foreign policy , which be generally attribute to a noble , whose connexion with the be very well know , be in reality compose by , in the parlour of the and public - house near , whither the printer 's boy have track he , and where a literary ally of he , , have a temporary residence ; and that a series of papers on finance question , which be universally suppose to be write by a great Statesman of the of , be in reality compose by of the . that there may have be some dealings between the and this influential party , be very possible , ( whose father , , be a member of the party ) might be see not unfrequently ascend the stair to 's chamber ; and some information appear in the paper which it give a character , and could only be get from very peculiar source . several poem , feeble in
in thought , but loud and vigorous in expression , appear in the , with the signature of " " ; and it must be own that he novel be praise in the new journal in a very outrageous manner . in the political departament of the paper do not take any share ; but he be a most active literary contributor . the have its office , as we have hear , in , in the , and hither often come with he manuscript in he pocket , and with a great deal of bustle and pleasure ; such as a man feel at the outset of he literary career , when to see himself in print be still a novel sensation , and he yet please himself to think that he writing be create some noise in the world . here it be that , the sub-editor , compile with paste and scissor the of which he be supervisor . with a eagle eye he scan all the paragraph of all the newspaper which have anything to do with the world of fashion over which he preside . he do not let a death or a dinner - party of the aristocracy pass without have the event record in the column of he ; and from the most recondite provincial print , and distant and irish newspaper , he fish out astonishing paragraph and intelligence regard the upper class of society . it be a grand , nay , a touching sight , for a philosopher , to see , , with a plate of meat from the cookshop and glass of porter from the public - house , for he meal , recount the feast of the great as if h have be present at they ; and in tattered trousers and dingy shirt - sleeve , cheerfully describe and arrange the most brilliant fete of the world of fashion . the incongruity of 's avocation , and he manners and appearance amuse he new friend Pen . Since he leave he own native village , where he rank probably be not very , lofy Jack have seldom see any society but such as use the parlour of the tavern which he frequent , whereas from he write you would have suppose that he dine with ambassador , and that he common lounge be the bow - window of 's . error of description , it be true , occasionally slip from he pen ; but the , of which he be own correspondent , suffer by these , not the , in which be not permit to write much , he chiefs think that the scissors and the paste be better wield by he than the pen . take a great deal of pain with the writing of he review , and have a pretty fair share of desultory reading , acquire in the early year of he life a eager fancy and a keen sense of fun , he article please he chief and the public , and he be proud to think that he deserve the money which he earn . we may be sure that the be take in regularly at , and read with delight by the two lady there . it be receive at , too , where we know there be a young lady of great literary taste ; and old himself , to whom the widow send she paper after she have get she son 's article by heart , signify he approval of Pen's production , say that the lad have spirit , taste , and fancy , and wrote , if not like a scholar , at any rate like a gentleman . and what be the astonishment and delight of we friend major Pendennis , on walk into one of he club , the , where , , and some other gentleman of good reputation and fashion be assemble , to hear they one day talk over a number of the , and of a article which appear in its column , make some bitter fun of the book recently publish by the wife of a celebrate member of the opposition party . the book in question be a of in and , by the Countess of , in which it be difficult to say which be the most wonderful , the french or the english , in which language she ladyship write indifferently , and upon the blunders of which the critic pounce with delightful mischief . the critic be no other than : he jump and dance round about he subject with the greatest jocularity and high spirit : he show up the noble lady 's fault with admirable mock gravity and decorum . there be not a word in the article which be not polite and gentlemanlike ; and the unfortunate subject of the criticism be scarify and laugh at during the operation . 's bilious countenance be pucker up with malign pleasure as he read the critique . have not ask he to she party during the last year . giggle and laugh with all he heart ; and he have be rival ever since they begin life ; and these compliment major Pendennis , who until now have scarcely pay any attention to some hints which he Fairoak correspondence throw out of " dear 's constant and severe literary occupations , which I fear may undermine the poor boy 's health , " and have think any notice of and he newspaper connexion quite below he dignity as a major and a gentleman . but when the oracular praise the boy 's production ; when , who have have the news from , approve of the genius of young Pen ; when the great himself , to whom the major refer the article , laugh and snigger over it , swore it be capital , and that the would writhe under it
it , like a whale under a harpoon , the major , as in duty bound , begin to admire he nephew very much , say , " by gad , the young rascal have some stuff in he , and would do something ; he have always say he would do something ; " and with a hand quite tremulous with pleasure , the old gentleman sate down to write to the widow at Fairoaks all that the great folk have say in praise of ; and he write to the young rascal , too , ask when he would come and eat a chop with he old uncle , and say that he be commissioned to take he to dinner at , for like anybody who could entertain he , whether by he folly , wit , or by he dulness , by he oddity , affectation , good spirit , or any other quality . fling he letter across the table to : perhaps he be disappointed that the other do not seem to be much affect by it . the courage of young critic be prodigious : they clamber up to the judgment - seat , and , with scarce a hesitation , give they opinion upon work the most intricate or profound . have 's or 's astronomy be put before Pen at this period , he would have look through the volume , meditate he opinion over a cigar , and signify he august approval of either author , as if the critic have be they bear superior and indulgent master and patron . by the help of the or the , he would be able to take a rapid resume of a historical period , and allude to name , date , and fact , in such a masterly , easy way , as to astonish he mamma at home , who wonder where she boy could have acquire such a prodigious store of reading and himself , too , when he come to read over he article two or three month after they have be compose , and when he have forget the subject and the book which he have consult . at that period of he life , own that he would not have hesitate , at twenty - four hour ' notice , to pass he opinion upon the greatest scholar , or to give a judgment upon the Encyclopaedia . luckily he have to laugh at he and to keep down he impertinence by a constant and wholesome ridicule , or he might have become conceited beyond all sufferance ; for like the dash and flippancy of he young aide - de - camp , and be , indeed , better pleased with Pen's light and brilliant flash , than with the heavier metal which he elder coadjutor bring to bear . but though he might justly be blame on the score of impertinence and a certain prematurity of judgment , be a perfectly honest critic ; a great deal too cando for 's purpose , indeed , who grumble sadly at he impartiality . and he chief , the , have a dispute upon this subject one day . " in the name of common - sense , , " ask , " what have you be do -- praise one of 's book ? have be with I in a fury this morning at see a laudatory article upon one of the work of the odious firm over the way . " 's eye open with wide astonishment . " do you mean to say , " he ask , " that we be to praise no book that publish : or that , if the book be good , we be to say they be bad ? " " my good young friend -- for what do you suppose a benevolent publisher undertake a critical journal , to benefit he rival ? " inquire . " to benefit himself certainly , but to tell the truth too , " say , " ruat coelum , to tell the truth . " " and my prospectus , " say , with a laugh and a sner ; " do you consider that be a work of mathematical accuracy of statement ? " " pardon I , that be not the question , " say " and I do not think you very much care to argue it . I have some qualm of conscience about that same prospectus , and debat the matter with my friend . we agree , however , " say , laugh " that because the prospectus be rather declamatory and poetical , and the giant be pain upon the show - board rather larger than the original , who be inside the caravan ; we need not be too scrupulous about this trifling inaccuracy , but might do we part of the show , without loss of character or remorse of conscience . we be the fiddler , and play we tune only ; you be the showman . " " and leader of the van , " say . " well , I be glad that you conscience give you leave to play for we . " " yes , but , " say , with a fine sense of the dignity of he position , " we be all party man in , and I will stick to my party like a . I will be as good - nature as you like to we own side , he be a fool who quarrel with he own nest ; and I will hit the enemy as hard as you like -- but with fair play , , if you please . one can not tell all the truth , I suppose ; but one can tell nothing but the truth ; and I would rather starve , by , and never
never earn another penny by my pen " ( this redoubt instrument have now be in use for some six week , and spoke of it with vast enthusiasm and respect ) " than strike a opponent a unfair blow , or , if call upon to place he , rank he below he honest desert . " " well , , when we want smashed , we must get some other hammer to do it , " say , with fatal good - nature ; and very likely think within himself , " a few year hence perhaps the young gentleman will not be so squeamish . " the veteran Condottiere himself be no longer so scrupulous . he have fight and kill on so many a side for many a year past , that remorse have long leave he . " , " say he , " you 've a tender conscience , . it be the luxury of all novice , and I may have have one once myself ; but that sort of bloom wear off with the rubbing of the world , and I be not go to the trouble myself of put on a artificial complexion , like we pious friend , or we model of virtue , . " " I do not know whether some people 's hypocrisy be not better , , than other 's cynicism . " " it be more profitable , at any rate , " say the , bite he nail . " that be as dull a quack as ever quack : and you see the carriage in which he drive to dinner . , it will be a long time before . will take a drive in she own chariot . help she , poor thing ! " and go away from he chief , after they little dispute and colloquy , point he own moral to the 's tale , and think to himself , " behold this man , store with genius , wit , learn , and a hundr good natural gift : see how he have wreck they , by palter with he honesty , and forget to respect himself . will thou remember thyself , of ? thou be conceit enough ! will thou sell thy honour for a bottle ? no , by 's , we will be honest , whatever befall , and we mouth shall only speak the truth when they open . " a punishment , or , at least , a trial , be in store for . in the very next number of the , read out , with roar of laughter , a article which by no means amuse , who be himself at work with a criticism for the next week 's number of the same journal ; and in which the be ferociously maltreate by some unknown writer . the person of all most cruelly maule be himself . he verse have not appear with he own name in the spring annual , but under a assume signature . as he have refuse to review the book , have hand it over to , with direction to that author to dispose of it . and he have do so effectually . , who be a man of very considerable talent , and of a race which , I believe , be quite extinct in the press of we time , have a certain notoriety in he profession , and reputation for savage humour . he smashed and trample down the poor spring flower with no more mercy than a bull would have on a parterre ; and have cut up the volume to he heart 's content , go and sell it at a bookstall , and purchase a pint of brandy with the proceed of the volume . appear in town and country let we be allow to pass over a few month of the history of 's lifetime , during the which , many event may have occur which be more interesting and excit to himself , than they would be likely to prove to the reader of he present memoir . we leave he , in he last chapter , regularly enter upon he business as a professional writer , or literary hack , as choose to style himself and he friend ; and we know how the life of any hack , legal or literary , in a curacy , or in a marching regiment , or at a merchant 's desk , be dull of routine , and tedious of description . one day 's labour resemble another much too closely . a literary man have often to work for he bread against time , or against he will , or in spite of he health , or of he indolence , or of he repugnance to the subject on which he be call to exert himself , just like any other daily toiler . when you want to make money by ( as he must , perhaps , who have no other saleable property ) , farewell poetry and aerial flight : only rise now like 's balloon , at period advertise beforehand , and when the spectator 's money have be pay . Pegasus trots in harness , over the stony pavement , and pull a cart or a cab behind he . do he work with panting side and trembl knee , and not seldom get 's a cut of the whip from he driver . do not let we , however , be too prodigal of we pity upon . there be no reason why this animal should be exempt from labour , or illness , or decay , any more than any of the other creature of 's world . if he get the whip , Pegasus often deserve it , and I for one am quite ready to protest my friend
friend , , against the doctrine which poetical sympathiser be inclin to put forward , viz. , that of letter , and what be call genius , be to be exempt from prose duty of this daily , bread - want , tax - pay life , and not to be make to work and pay like they neighbour . well , then , the be duly establish and 's merit recognise as a flippant , witty , and amuse critic , he work away hard every week , prepare review of such work as come into he department , and write he review with flippancy certainly , but with honesty , and to the best of he power . it might be that a historian of threescore , who have spend a quarter of a century in compose a work of which we young gentleman dispose in the course of a couple of day ' read at the , be not altogether fairly treat by such a facile critic ; or that a poet who have be elaborate sublime sonnet and ode until he think they fit for the public and for fame , be annoye by two or three dozen pert line in Pen's review , in which the poet 's claim be settle by the critic , as if the latter be my lord on the bench and the author a miserable little suitor trembl before he . the actor at the theatre complain of he wofully , too , and very likely he be too hard upon they . but there be not much harm do after all . it be different now , as we know ; but there be so few great historian , or great poet , or great actor , in time , that scarce any at all come up for judgment he critical desk . those who get a little whipping , get what in the main be good for they ; not that the judge be any better or wiser than the persons whom he sentence , or indeed ever fancie himself so . have a strong sense of humour and justice , and have not therefore a overweening respect for he own work ; beside , he have he friend at he elbow -- a terrible critic if the young man be dispose to be conceit , and more savage over than ever he be to those whom he try at he literary assize . by these critical labour , and by occasional contribution to lead article of the journal , when , without wounde he paper , this eminent publicist could conscientiously speak he mind , gain the sum of four pound four shilling weekly , and with no small pain and labour . likewise be furnish Magazines and review with article of he composition , and be believe to have be ( though on this score he never choose to speak ) correspondent of the , which at that time contain some very brilliant and eloquent letter from the metropolis . by these labour the fortunate youth be enable to earn a sum very nearly equal to four hundred pound a year ; and on the second after he arrival in , he actually bring a hundred pound to he mother , as a dividend upon the debt which he owed to . that read every word of she son 's work , and consider he to be the profoundest thinker and most elegant writer of the day ; that she think he retribution of the hundred pound a act of angelic virtue ; that she fear he be ruin he health by he labour , and be delighte when he tell she of the society which he meet , and of the great man of letter and fashion whom he see , will be imagine by all reader who have see son -worship amongst mother , and that charme simplicity of love with which woman in the country watch the career of they darling in . if have hold such and such a brief ; if have be invite to such and such a ball ; or have meet this or that great and famous man at dinner ; what a delight there be in the heart of mother and sister at home in ! how young 's letter be read and remember ! what a theme for village talk they give , and friendly congratulation ! in the second winter , come for a very brief space , and cheer the widow 's heart , and lighten up the lonely house at Fairoaks . have she son all to herself ; be away on a visit to old ; the folk of be absent ; the very few old friend of the house , at they head , call upon , and treat he with mark respect ; between mother and son , it be all fondness , confidence , and affection . it be the happiest fortnight of the widow 's whole life ; perhaps in the live of both of they . the holiday be go only too quickly ; and be back in the busy world , and the gentle widow alone again . she send 's money to : I do not know why this young lady take the opportunity of leave home when be come thither , or whether he be the more piqued or relieve by she absence . he be by this time , by he own merits and he uncle 's introduction , pretty well introduce into , and know both in literary and polite circle . amongst the former he fashionable reputation stand he in no little stead ; he be consider to be a gentleman of good present means and better expectation , who write for he pleasure , than which there can not be a greater recommendation to a young literary aspirant . , and
and . be proud to accept he article ; ask he to dinner ; look upon he with a favourable eye ; and they report how they meet he at the house of person of fashion , amongst whom he be pretty welcome , as they do not trouble themselves about he means , present or future ; as he appearance and address be good ; and as he have get a character for be a clever fellow . finally , he be ask to one house , because he be see at another house : and thus no small variety of life be present to the young man : he be make familiar with all sort of people from to , and be as much at home at dining - table as at those tavern board where some of he companion of the pen be accustom to assemble . full of high spirit and curiosity , easily adapt himself to all whom he meet , the young fellow please himself in this strange variety and jumble of man , and make himself welcome , or at ease at least , wherever he go . he would breakfast , for instance , at 's of a morning , in company with a peer , a Bishop , a parliamentary orator , two blue lady of fashion , a popular preacher , the author of the last new novel , and the very latest lion import from or from : and would quit this distinguished society for the back room at the newspaper office , where pens and ink and the wet proof - sheet be await he . here would be , the sub-editor , with the last news from the row : and would come in presently , and give a nod to , would begin scribbling he lead article at the other end of the table , flank by the pint of sherry , which , when the attendant boy beheld he , be always silently bring for the : or 's roaring voice would be hear in the front room , where that truculent critic would impound the book on the counter in spite of the timid remonstrance of , the publisher , and after look through the volume would sell they at he accustomed bookstall , and have drunken and dine upon the produce of the sale in a tavern box , would call for ink and paper , and proceed to " smash " the author of he dinner and the novel . towards evening would stroll in the direction of he club , and take up there for a constitutional walk . this exercise free the lung , and give a appetite for dinner , after which have the privilege to make he bow at some very pleasant house which be open to he ; or the town before he for amusement . there be the ; or the ; or a ball to go to in ; or a quiet night with a cigar and a book and a long talk with ; or a wonderful new song at the ; -- at this time of he life beheld all sort of place and man ; and very likely do not know how much he enjoy himself until long after , when ball give he no pleasure , neither do farces make he laugh ; nor do the tavern joke produce the least excitement in he ; nor do the loveliest dancer that ever show she ankle cause he to stir from he chair after dinner . at he present mature age all these pleasure be over : and the time have pass away too . it be but a very very few year since -- but the time be gone , and most of the man . Bludyer will know more bully authors or cheat landlord of they score . , the learn and thriftless , the witty and unwise , sleep he last sleep . they bury honest the other day : never will he cringe or flatter , never pull long - bow or empty whisky - noggin any more . the season be now bloom in its full vigour , and the fashionable newspapers abound with information regard the grand banquet , rout , and ball which be enliven the polite world . we gracious be hold levee and drawing - room at 's : the bow- window of the club be crowd with the head of respectable red -faced newspaper - reading gentleman : along the trail thousand of carriage : squadron of dandy horseman trample over , everybody be in town , in a word ; and of course major , who be somebody , be not absent . with he head tie up in a smart bandana handkerchief and he meagre carcass envelope in a brilliant Turkish dressing - gown , the worthy gentleman sate on a certain morning by he fireside let he foot gently simmer in a bath , whilst he take he early cup of tea , and peruse he . he could not have face the day without he two hour ' toilet , without he early cup of tea , without he . I suppose nobody in the world except , not even 's master himself , know how feeble and ancient the major be grow , and what numberless little comforts he require . if man sneer , as we habit be , at the artifice of a old beauty , at she paint , perfume , ringlet ; at those innumerable , and to we unknown , stratagem with which she be say to remedy the ravage of time and reconstruct the charms whereor year have bereft she ; the lady , it be to be presume , be not on they side altogether ignorant that man be vain as well as they , and that the toilets of old
old buck be to the full as elaborate as they own . how be it that old keep that constant little rose - tint on he cheek ; and where do old get the preparation which make he silver hair pass for golden ? have you ever see get off he horse when he think nobody be look ? take out of he stirrup , he shiny boot can hardly totter up the step of . he be a dashing young nobleman still as you see the back of he in row ; when you behold he on foot , what a old , old fellow ! do you ever form to yourself any idea of ( have be these sixty year ) in a natural state , and without he stay ? all these man be object whom the observer of human life and manners may contemplate with as much profit as the most elderly , or inveterate . a old reprobate daddy - longleg , who have never say he prayer ( except perhaps in public ) these fifty year : a old buck who still cling to as many of the habits of youth as he feeble grasp of health can hold by : who have give up the bottle , but sit with young fellows over it , and tell naughty story upon toast - and - water -- who have give up beauty , but still talk about it as wickedly as the youngest roue in company -- such a old fellow , I say , if any parson in or . 's be to order the beadle to bring he into the middle aisle , and there set he in a armchair , and make a text of he , and preach about he to the congregation , could be turn to a wholesome use for once in he life , and might be surprised to find that some good thought come out of he . but we be wander from we text , the honest major , who sit all this while with he foot cool in the bath : take they out of that place of purification , and dry they daintily , and proceed to set the old gentleman on he leg , with waistband and wig , starch cravat , and spotless boot and glove . it be during these hour of the toilet that and he employer have they confidential conversation , for they do not meet much at other time of the day -- the major abhorr the society of he own chair and table in he lodging ; and , he master 's toilet over and letter deliver , have he time very much on he own hand . this spare time the active and well - mannered gentleman bestow among the valets and butler of the nobility , he acquaintance ; and , as he be style , for , by such compound name , gentleman 's gentleman be call in they private circle , be a frequent and welcome guest at some of the very highest table in this town . he be a member of two influential club in and ; and he be thus enable to know the whole gossip of the town , and entertain he master very agreeably during the two hour ' toilet conversation . he know a hundred tale and legend regard person of the very highest ton , whose valet canvass they august secret , just , my dear madam , as we own parlour - maid and dependant in the kitchen discuss we character , we stinginess and generosity , we pecuniary means or embarrassment , and we little domestic or connubial tiff and quarrel . if I leave this manuscript open on my table , I have not the slightest doubt will read it , and they will talk it over in the lower region to - night ; and to - morrow she will bring in my breakfast with a face of such entire imperturbable innocence , that no mortal could suppose she guilty of play the spy . if you and the have high word upon any subject , which be just possible , the circumstance of the quarrel , and the character of both of you , will be discuss with impartial eloquence over the kitchen tea - table ; and if 's maid should by chance be take a dish of tea with yours , she presence will not undoubtedly act as a restraint upon the discussion in question ; she opinion will be give with candour ; and the next day she mistress will probably know that and have be a quarrelling as usual . nothing be secret . take it as a rule that know everything : and as in we humble world so in the greatest : a duke be no more a hero to he valet - de - chambre than you or I ; and he 's man at he club , in company doubtless with other man of equal social rank , talk over he master 's character and affair with the ingenuous truthfulness which befit gentleman who be meet together in confidence . who be a niggard and screw up he money - box : who be in the hand of the money - lender , and be put he noble name on the back of bill of exchange : who be intimate with whose wife : who want whom to marry she daughter , and which he will not , no not at any price :-- all these fact gentleman 's confidential gentleman discuss confidentially , and be know and examine by every person who have any claim to rank in genteel society . in a word , if old himself be say to know everything , and be at once admirably scandalous and delightfully discreet ; it be but justice to to say ,
, that a great deal of he master 's information be supply to that worthy man by he valet , who go out and forage knowledge for he . indeed , what more effectual plan be there to get a knowledge of society , than to begin at the foundation -- that be , at the kitchen floor ? so and he employer converse as the latter 's toilet proceed . there have be a drawing - room on the previous day , and the major read among the presentation that of by , and of by she mother , -- and in a further part of the paper they dress be describe , with a precision and in a jargon which will puzzle and amuse the antiquary of future generation . the sight of these name carry back to the country . " how long have the Claverings be in ? " he ask ; " pray , , have you see any of they people ? " " have send away he for man , sir , " reply ; " and have take a friend of mine as own man , sir . indeed he apply on my reckmendation . you may recklect , sir , -- tall red-aired man -- but dye he air . be groom of the chamber in 's family till he Lordship break hup . it be a fall for , sir ; but pore man can not be particklar , " say the valet , with a pathetic voice . " Devilish hard on , by gad ! " say the major , amuse , " and not pleasant for -- he , he ! " " know it be come , sir . I speak to you of it be four year : when she Ladyship put the diamonds in pawn . it be Towler , sir , take th'ey in two cab to 's -- and a good deal of the plate go the same way . do not you remember see of it at , with the Levant arm and coronick , and settn oppsit to it at the of 's dinner ? beg you pardon ; do I cut you , sir ? " be now operate upon the major 's ching -- he continue the theme while strapp the skilful razor . " they have take a house in , and be come out strong , sir . she Ladyship have go to give three party , besides a dinner a week , sir . she fortune will not stand it -- can not stand it . " " , she have a devilish good cook when I be at , " the major say , with very little compassion for the 's fortune . " be he name , sir ; have go away , sir , " say , -- and the major , this time , with hearty sympathy , say , " he be devilish sorry to lose he . " " there be be a tremenjuous row about that , " continue " at a ball at , sir , bless he impadence , he challenge to fight a jewel , sir , which be very near knock he down , and pitching ' he outawinder , and serve he right ; but , sir , come up and stop the shindy -- I beg pardon , the holtercation , sir -- they french cook have as much pride and hinsolence as if they be real gentleman . " " I hear something of that quarrel , " say the major ; " but be not turn off for that ? " " no , sir -- that affair , sir , which forgave it he and beayve most handsome , be hush hup : it be about , sir , that he ad be dismissial . those french feller , they fancy everybody be in love with 'em ; and he climb up the large grape vine to she winder , sir , and be a try to get in , when he be catch , sir ; and come out , and they get the garden - engine and play on he , and there be no end of a row , sir . " " Confound he impudence ! you do not mean to say encourage he , " cry the major , amaze at a peculiar expression in 's countenance . resume he imperturbable demeanour . " know nothing about it , sir . Servant do not know they kind of thing the least . most probbly there be nothing in it -- so many lie be tell about family -- go away , bag and baggage , saucepan , and pianna , and all -- the feller ad a pianna , and write potry in , and he take a lodging at , and he hanker about the primise , and it be say that , the milliner , bring letter to , though I do not believe a word about it ; nor that he try to pison hisself with charcoal , which it be all a humbug betwigst he and ; and he be nearly shoot by the keeper in the park . " in the course of that very day , it chance that the major have station himself in the great window of 's in 's , at the hour in the afternoon when you see a half - score of respectable old buck similarly recreate themselves ( 's be rather a old - fashioned place of resort now , and many of its member more than middle - aged ; but in the time of the , these old fellow occupy the same window , and be some of the very greatest dandy in this empire ) -- be look from the great window , and spy he nephew Arthur walk down
down the street in company with he friend . " look ! " say to , as they pass , " do you ever pass 's at four o'clock , without see that collection of old fogy ? it be a regular museum . they ought to be cast in wax , and set up at 's -- " " -- in a chamber of old horror by themselves , " say , laugh . " -- in the chamber of horror ! , doosid good ! " pop cry . they be old rogue , most of th'ey , and no mistake . there be old ; there be my uncle , the most confound old sinner in ; there be -- hullo ! there be somebody rapp the window and nodd at we . " " it be my uncle , the major , " say . " be he a old sinner too ? " " Notorious old rogue , " say , wag he head . ( " Notowious old wogue , " he pronounce the word , thereby render they much more emphatic . ) --" he be beckon you in ; he want to speak to you . " " come in too , " say . " -- not , " reply the other . " cut uncle . two year ago , about -- , , " and the young sinner take leave of , and the club of the elder criminal , and saunter into 's , a adjacent establishment , frequent by reprobate of he own age . , , and the senior buck have just be converse about the Clavering family , whose appearance in have form the subject of major Pendennis 's morning conversation with he valet . 's house be next to that of , in place : give very good dinner himself , he have remark some activity in he neighbour 's kitchen . , indeed , have a new chef , who have come in more than once and dress 's dinner for he ; that gentleman have only a remarkably expert female artist permanently engage in he establishment , and employ such chiefs of note as happen to be free on the occasion of he grand banquet . " they go to a devilish expense and see devilish bad company as yet , I hear , " say , " they scour the street , by gad , to get people to dine with th'ey . say it break he heart to serve up a dinner to they society . what a shame it be that those low people should have money at all , " cry , whose grandfather have be a reputable leather - breech maker , and whose father have lent money to the Prince . " I wish I have fall in with the widow myself " sigh , " and not be lay up with that confound gout at -- I would have marry the woman myself .-- I be tell she have six hundred thousand pound in the Three . " " not quite so much as that , -- I know she family in ," -- major Pendennis say , " I know she family in ; she father be a enormously rich old indigo - planter , -- know all about she ;-- Clavering have the next estate to ours in the country .-- ! there be my nephew walk with " -- " with mine , -- the infernal young scamp , " say glower at out of he heavy eyebrow ; and he turn away from the window as major tap upon it . the major be in high good - humour . the sun be bright , the air brisk and invigorat . he have determine upon a visit to on that day , and bethotch he that yoArthu would be a good companion for the walk across the to she ladyship 's door . master be not displease to accompany he illustrious relative , who point out a dozen great man in that brief transit through 's , and get bow from a at a crossing , a Bishop ( on a cob ) , and a with a umbrella . the give the elder a finger of a pipe - clay glove to shake , which the major embrace with great veneration ; and all Pen's blood tingle as he find himself in actual communication , as it be , with this famious man ( for have possession of the major 's left arm , whilst the gentleman 's other wing be engage with he 's right ) and he wish all ' , all , all row and the and and he mother at Fairoaks , could be stand on each side of the street , to see the meeting between he and he uncle , and the most famous duke in . " how do , ?-- fine day , " be he 's remarkable word , and with a nod of he august head he pass on -- in a blue frock - coat and spotless white duck trousers , in a white stock , with a shining buckle behind . , whose likeness to he have be remark , begin to imitate he unconsciously , after they have part , speak with curt sentence , after the manner of the great man . we have all of we , no doubt , meet with more than one military officer who have so imitate the manner of a certain great of the ; and have , perhaps , change he own natural character and disposition , because have endow he with a aquiline nose . in like manner have we not see many another man pride himself on have a tall forehead and a suppose likeness to ? many another go through life swell with self - gratification on
on account of a imagine resemblance ( we say " imagine , " because that anybody should be really like that most beautiful and perfect of man be impossible ) to the great and rever Iv.: many third party , who wear low neck to they dress because they fancie that and themselves be similar in appearance : and have not the grave close but lately upon poor tom Bickerstaff , who have no more imagination than , look in the glass and fancie himself like ? shave he forehead so as farther to resemble the immortal bard , write tragedy incessantly , and die perfectly crazy -- actually perish of he forehead ? these or similar freak of vanity most people who have frequent the world must have see in they experience . laugh in he roguish sleeve at the manner in which he uncle begin to imitate the great man from whom they have just part but be as vain in he own way , perhaps , as the elder gentleman , and strut , with a very consequential air of he own , by the major 's side . " yes , my dear boy , " say the old bachelor , as they saunter through the , where many poor child be disport happily , and errand - boy be play at toss - halfpenny , and black sheep be graze in the sunshine , and a actor be learn he part on a bench , and nursery - maid and they charge saunter here and there , and several couple be walk in a leisurely manner ; " yes , depend on it , my boy ; for a poor man , there be nothing like have good acquaintance . who be those man , with whom you see I in the bow - window at 's ? two be Peers of the realm . will be a peer , as soon as he grand - uncle die , and he have have he third seizure ; and of the other four , not one have less than he seven thousand a year . do you see that dark blue brougham , with that tremendous stepping horse , wait at the door of the club ? you will know it again . it be 's ; he be never know to walk in he life ; never appear in the street on foot -- never : and if he be go two door off , to see he mother , the old dowager ( to whom I shall certainly introduce you , for she receive some of the best company in ) , gad , sir -- he mount he horse at no. 23 , and dismount again at no. 25 a . he be now upstairs , at 's , play picquet with count Punter : he be the second - best player in -- as well he may be ; for he play every day of he life , except ( for be a uncommonly religious man ) from half - past three till half - past seven , when he dress for dinner . " a very pious manner of spend he time , " say , laugh and think that he uncle be fall into the twaddling state . " Gad , sir , that be not the question . a man of he estate may employ he time as he choose . when you be a baronet , a county member , with ten thousand acre of the best land in , and such a place as ( though he never go there ) , you may do as you like . " " and so that be he brougham , sir , be it ? " the nephew say with almost a sneer . " he brougham -- of ay , yes !-- and that bring I back to my point -- revenon a no mouton . yes , begad ! revenon a nous mouton . well , that brougham be mine if I choose , between four and seven . just as much mine as if I job it from 's , begad , for thirty pound a month . be the best natured fellow in the world ; and if it have not be so fine a afternoon as it be , you and I would have be in that brougham at this very minute on we way to . that be the benefit of know rich man ;-- I dine for nothing , sir ;-- I go into the country , and I be mount for nothing . other fellow keep hound and gamekeeper for I . Sic vos , non vobis , as we use to say at , hey ? I be of the opinion of my old friend , of the Forty - fourth ; and a devilish good shrewd fellow he be , as most be . , sir , use to say , ' he be so poor that he could not afford to know a poor man . ' " " you do not act up to you principle , uncle , " say good - naturedly . " up to my principles ; how , sir ? " the major ask , rather testily . " you would have cut I in 's , sir , " say , " be you practice not more benevolent than you theory ; you who live with duke and magnate of the land , and would take no notice of a poor devil like I . " by which speech we may see that be get on in the world , and could flatter as well as laugh in he sleeve . major Pendennis be appease instantly , and very much pleased . he tap affectionately he nephew 's arm on which he be lean , and say , --" you , sir
sir , you be my flesh and blood ! hang it , sir , I have be very proud of you and very fond of you , but for you confound folly and extravagance -- and wild oat , sir , which I hope you have sow th'ey . I hope you have sow th'ey ; begad ! my object , , be to make a man of you -- to see you well place in the world , as become one of you name and my own , sir . you have get yourself a little reputation by you literary talents , which I be very far from undervaluing , though in my time , begad , poetry and genius and that sort of thing be devilish disreputable . there be poor , for instance , who ruin himself , and contract the worst habit by live with poet and newspaper- writer , and people of that kind : but the time be change now -- there be a run upon literature -- clever fellow get into the best house in town , begad ! mutantur , sir ; and by , I suppose whatever be be right , as say . " do not think fit to tell he uncle who be the author who have make use of that remarkable phrase , and here descende from the , the pair make they way into , and to the door of the mansion occupy there by and . the dining - room shutter of this handsome mansion be freshly gild ; the knocker shone gorgeous upon the newly paint door ; the balcony before the drawing - room bloom with a portable garden of the most beautiful plant , and with flower , white , and pink , and scarlet ; the window of the upper room ( the sacred chamber and dressing - room of my lady , doubtless ) , and even a pretty little casement of the third story , which kee - sight presume to belong to the virgin bedroom of , be similarly adorn with floral ornament , and the whole exterior face of the house present the most brilliant aspect which fresh new paint , shine plate - glass , newly clean brick , and spotless mortar , could offer to the beholder . " how strong must have rejoice in organising all this splendour , " think . he recognise the 's genius in the magnificence before he . " be go out for she drive , " the major say . " we shall only have to leave we pasteboard , . " he use the word ' pasteboard , ' have hear it from some of the ingenuous youth of the nobility about town , and as a modern phrase sui to Pen's tender year . indeed , as the two gentleman reach the door , a landau drive up , a magnificent yellow carriage , line with brocade or satin of a faint cream colour , draw by wonderful grey horse , with flam ribbon , and harness blaze all over with crest : no less than three of these heraldic emblem surmount the coat - of - arm on the panel , and these shield contain a prodigious number of quartering , betoken the antiquity and splendour of the house of and . a coachman in a tight silver wig surmount the magnificent hammer - cloth ( whereon the same arm be work in bullion ) , and control the prancing grey -- a young man still , but of a solemn countenance , with a laced waistcoat and buckle in he shoe -- little buckle , unlike those which and , the footman , wear , and which we know be large , and spread elegantly over the foot . one of the leave of the hall door be open , and -- one of the largest of he race -- be lean against the door -pillar with he ambrosial hair powder , he leg cross ; beautiful , silk - stockinge ; in he hand he cane , gold - head , dolichoskion . be invisible , but near at hand , wait in the hall , with the gentleman who do not wear livery , and ready to fl down the roll of hair - cloth over which she ladyship be to step to she carriage . these thing and man , the which to tell of demand time , be see in the glance of a practise eye : and , in fact , the major and have scarcely cross the street , when the second battant of the door fly open ; the horse - hair carpet tumble down the door - step to those of the carriage ; be open it on one side of the emblazoned door , and on the other , the two lady , attire in the highest style of fashion , and accompany by a third , who carry a m spaniel , yelp in a light blue ribbon , come forth to ascend the carriage . be the first to enter , which she do with aerial lightness , and take the place which she like best . next follow , but she ladyship be more mature of age and heavy of foot , and one of those foot , attire in a green satin boot , with some part of a stocking , which be very fine , whatever the ankle might be which it encircle , might be see sway on the carriage - step , as she ladyship lean for support on the arm of the unbending , by the enraptured observer of female beauty who happen to be pass at the time of this imposing ceremonial . the Pendennise senior and junior beheld those charms as they come up to the door -- the major look grave and courtly , and somewhat
somewhat abash at the carriage and its owner ; for he think of sundry little passage at , which make he heart beat rather quick . at that moment , look round the pair ,-- she be on the first carriage - step , and would have be in the vehicle in another second , but she give a start backward ( which cause some of the powder to fly from the hair of ambrosial Jeames ) , and cry out , " , if it be not and the old major ! " jump back to terra firma directly , and hold out two fat hand , encase in tight orange - colou glove , the good - natured woman warmly greet the major and he nephew . " come in both of you .-- why have not you be before ?-- get out , Blanche , and come and see you old friend .--o , I be so glad to see you . we have be waitin and waitin for you ever so long . come in , luncheon be not go down , " cry out this hospitable lady , squeeze Pen's hand in both hers ( she have drop the major 's after a brief wrench of recognition ) , and Blanche , cast up she eye towards the chimney , descende from the carriage presently , with a timid , blush , appeal look , and give a little hand to major Pendennis . the companion with the spaniel look about irresolute , and doubt whether she should not take he airing ; but she too turn right about face and enter the house , after , she daughter , and the two gentleman . and the carriage , with the prancing grey , be leave unoccupied , save by the coachman in the silver wig . in which the reappear Better folk than , the valet , be not so well instruct as that gentleman , regard the amount of 's riche ; and the legend in , upon she Ladyship 's arrival in the polite metropolis , be , that she fortune be enormous . factory , opium clipper , bank overflow with rupee , diamonds and jewel of native prince , and vast sum of interest pay by they for loans contract by themselves or they predecessor to 's father , be mention as source of she wealth . she account at she 's be positively know , and the sum embrace so many cypher as to create as many O' of admiration in the wonder hearer . it be a know fact that a envoy from a indian , a , the of 's prime favourite , a extraordinary man , who have , it be say , embrace , and undergo a thousand wild and perilous adventur be at present in this country , try to negotiate with the , the sale of the 's celebrate nose - ring diamond , ' the light of the . ' under the title of the , 's fame begin to spread in before she herself descende upon the Capital , and as it have be the boast of , and , and all panegyrist of the british constitution , that we admit into we aristocracy merit of every kind , and that the lowliest - bear man , if he but deserve it , may wear the rob of a peer , and sit alongside of a Cavendish or a : so it ought to be the boast of we good society , that haughty though it be , naturally jealous of its privileges , and careful who shall be admit into its circle , yet , if a individual be but rich enough , all barrier be instantly remove , and he or she be welcome , as from he wealth he merit to be . this fact show we british independence and honest feel -- we higher order be not such mere haughty aristocrat as the ignorant represent they : on the contrary , if a man have money they will hold out they hand to he , eat he dinner , dance at he ball , marry he daughter , or give they own lovely girl to he son , as affably as you commonest roturier would do . as he have superintend the arrangement of the country mansion , we friend , the , give the benefit of he taste and advice to the fashionable upholsterer , who prepare the town house for the reception of the Clavering family . in the decoration of this elegant abode , honest 's soul rejoice as much as if he have be himself its proprietor . he hang and re-hing the picture , he study the position of sofa , he have interview with wine merchant and purveyor who be to supply the new establishment ; and at the same time the 's factotum and confidential friend take the opportunity of furnish he own chamber , and stock he snug little cellar : he friend compliment he upon the neatness of the former ; and the select guest who come in to share 's cutlet new find a bottle of excellent claret to accompany the meal . the be now , as be say , " in clover :" he have a very comfortable set of room in 's . he be wait on by a former spanish Legionary and comrade of he whom he have leave at a breach of a spanish fort , and find at a crossing in - , and whom he have elevate to the rank of body - servant to himself and to the chum who , at present , share he lodging . this be no other than the favourite of the of , the valiant . no man be less curious , or at any rate , more discreet , than , and he
he do not care to inquire into the mysterious connexion which , very soon after they first meeting at be establish between and the envoy of the . the latter know some secret regard the former , which put Clavering into he power , somehow ; and , who know that he patron 's early life have be rather irregular , and that he career with he regiment in have not be brilliant , suppose that the , who swore he know Claver well at , have some hold upon , to which the latter be force to yield . in truth , have long understood 's character , as that of a man utterly weak in purpose , in principle , and intellect , a moral and physical trifler and poltroon . with poor Clavering , he Excellency have have one or two interview after they Baymouth meeting , the nature of which conversation the do not confide to strong : although he send letter to not by that gentleman , who be he ambassador in all sort of affair . on one of these occasion the 's envoy must have be in a exceed ill humour ; for he crush 's letter in he hand , and say with he own particular manner and emphasis :-- " a hundred , be hang . I will have no more letter nor no more shilly - shally . I will have a thousand , or by I will split , and burst he all to atom . let he give I a thousand and I will go abroad , and I give you my honour as a gentleman , I will not ask he for no more for a year . give he that message from I , strong , my boy ; and tell he if the money be not here next at twelve o'clock , as sure as my name 's what it be , I will have a paragraph in the newspaper on , and next week I will blow up the whole concern . " strong carry back these word to he principal , on whom they effect be such that actually on the day and hour appoint , the make he appearance once more at 's hotel at , with the sum of money require . not be a gentleman , he say , and behave as such ; he pay he bill at the , and the paper announce he departure on a foreign tour . strong see he embark at . " it must be forgery at the very least , " he think , " that have put Clavering into this fellow 's power , and the Colonel have get the bill . " before the year be out , however , this happy country see the once more upon its shore . a confound run on the red have finish he , he say , at : no gentleman could stand against a colour come up fourteen time . he have be oblige to draw upon Clavering for means of return home : and , though press for money ( for he have election expense , have set up he establishment in the country and be engage in furnish he house ) , yet find means to accept 's bill , though evidently very much against he will ; for in 's hearing , wish to heaven , with many curse , that the Colonel could have be lock up in a debtor 's goal in for life , so that he might never be trouble again . these sum for the be oblige to raise without the knowledge of he wife ; for though perfectly liberal , nay , sumptuous in she expenditure , the good lady have inherit a tolerable aptitude for business along with the large fortune of she father , , and give to she husband only such a handsome allowance as she think befit a gentleman of he rank . now and again she would give he a present , or pay a outstanding gambling debt ; but she always exact a pretty accurate account of the money so require ; and respecte the subsidy to the , fairly tell Strong that he could not speak to he wife . part of 's business in life be to procure this money and other sum , for he patron . and in the 's apartment , in 's , many negotiation take place between gentleman of the moneyed world and , and many valuable bank - note and piece of stamped paper be pass between they . when a man have be in the habit of get in debt from he early youth , and of exchange he promise to pay at twelve month against present sum of money , it would seem as if no piece of good fortune ever permanently benefit he : a little while after the advent of prosperity , the money - lender be pretty certain to be in the house again , and the bill with the old signature in the market . Clavering find it more convenient to see these gentry at 's lodging than at he own ; and such be the 's friendship for the Baronet that although he do not possess a shilling of he own , he name might be see as the drawer of almost all the bill of exchange which accept . have draw 's bill , he get they discount " in the City . " when they become due he parley with the bill - holder , and give they instalment of they debt , or get time in exchange for fresh acceptance . regularly or irregularly , gentleman must live somehow : and as we read how , the other day , at , the troops form that garrison be gay and lively , act play , dance at ball , and
and consum they ration ; though menace with a assault from the enemy without the wall , and with a gallow if the be successful , -- so there be hundred of gallant spirit in this town , walk about in good spirit , dine every day in tolerable gaiety and plenty , and go to sleep comfortably ; with a bailiff always more or less near , and a rope of debt round they neck -- the which trifl inconvenience , Ned Strong , the old soldier , bear very easily . but we shall have another opportunity of make acquaintance with these and some other interesting inhabitant of 's , and in the meanwhile be keep and she friend too long waiting on the door - step of . first they go into the gorgeous dining - room , fitte up , could not for goodness gracious tell why , in the middle - aged style , " unless , " say she good - natured ladyship , laugh , " because I and be middle - aged people ; " -- and here they be offer the copious remain of the luncheon of which Clavering and Blanche have just partake . when nobody be near , we little Sylphide , who scarcely eat at dinner more than the six grains of rice of , the friend of the in the , be most active with she knife and fork , and consum a very substantial portion of mutton cutlet : in which piece of hypocrisy it be believe she resemble other young lady of fashion . and he uncle decline the refection , but they admire the dining - room with fitting compliment , and pronounce it " very chaste , " that be the proper phrase . there be , indeed , high - back Dutch chair of the seventeenth century ; there be a sculptured carve buffet of the sixteenth ; there be a sideboard rob out of the carved work of a church in the , and a large brass cathedral lamp over the round oak table ; there be old family portrait from and tapestry from , bit of armour , double - hand sword and battle - ax make of carton -pierre , look - glass , statuette of saint , and -- nothing , in a word , could be chaster . behind the dining - room be the library , fitte with bust and book all of a size , and wonderful easy - chair , and solemn bronz in the severe classic style . here it be that , guard by double door , smoke cigar , and read 's in , and go to sleep after dinner , when he be not smoke over the billiard - table at he club , or punt at the gambling - house in 's . but what could equal the chaste splendour of the drawing - room ?-- the carpet be so magnificently fluffy that you foot make no more noise on they than you shadow : on they white ground bloom rose and tulips as big as warming - pans : about the room be high chair and low chair , bandy - leg chair , chair so attenuate that it be a wonder any but a sylph could sit upon they , marquetterie - table cover with marvellous gimcrack , china ornament of all ag and country , bronz , gild dagger , book of , yataghans , Turkish papoosh and box of parisian bonbon . wherever you sate down there be Dresden shepherd and shepherdess convenient at you elbow ; there be , moreover , light blue poodle and duck and cock and hen in porcelain ; there be nymph by , and shepherdess by , very chaste indeed ; there be muslin curtain and brocade curtain , gild cage with parroquet and love - bird , two squealing cockatoo , each out -squealing and out - chatter the other ; a clock singe tune on a console - table , and another boom the hour like , on the mantelpiece -- there be , in a word , everything that comfort could desire , and the most elegant taste devise . a draw - room , fitte up without regard to expense , be surely one of the noblest and most curiious sight of the present day . the of the , the dear Marchioness and Countess of , could scarcely have have a finer taste than we modern folk exhibit ; and everybody who see 's reception room , be force to confess that they be most elegant ; and that the prettiest room in -- 's , 's , or - 's own ; the great 's wife , be not fit up with a more consummate " chastity . " poor Lady Clavering , meanwhile , know little regard these thing , and have a sad want of respect for the splendour around she . " I only know they cost a precious deal of money , major , " she say to she guest , " and that I do not advise you to try one of they gossamer gilt chair : I come down on one the night we give we second dinner - party . why do not you come and see we before ? we would have ask you to it . " " you would have like to see break a chair , would not you , ? " dear Blanche say with a sneer . she be angry because be talk and laugh with , because have make a number of blunder in describe the house -- for a hundred other good reason . " I should like to have be by to give Claver my arm if she have need of it , " answer , with a bow and a blush . " ! " cry the
the Sylphide , toss up she little head . " I have a fellow - feeling with those who fall , remember , " say . " I suffer myself very much from do so once . " " and you go home to to conseal you , " say . wince . he do not like the remembrance of the consolation which have give to he , nor be he very well pleased to find that he rebuff in that quarter be know to the world ; so as he have nothing to say in reply , he begin to be immensely interested in the furniture round about he , and to praise 's taste with all he might . " no , do not praise I , " say honest , " it be all the upholsterer 's doings and 's , they do it all while we be at the -- and -- and -- have be here and say the salong be very well , " say , with a air and tone of great deference . " my cousin have be stay with she , " say . " it be not the dowager : it be the . " " indeed ! " cry major Pendennis , when he hear this great name of fashion . " if you have she ladyship 's approval , , you can not be far wrong . no , no , you can not be far wrong . , I should say , , be the very centre of the circle of fashion and taste . the room be beautiful indeed ! " and the major 's voice hush as he speak of this great lady , and he look round and survey the apartment awfully and respectfully , as if he have be at church . " yes , have take we up , " say . " take we up , , " cry Blanche , in a shrill voice . " well , take we up , then , " say my lady ; " it be very kind of she , and I dare say we shall like it when we git use to it , only at first one do not fancy be take -- well , take up , at all . she be go to give we ball for we ; and want to invite all we dinner . but I will not stand that . I will have my old friend and I will not let she send all the card out , and sit mum at the head of my own table . you must come to I , Arthur and major -- come , let I see , on the 14th .--It be not one of we grand dinner , Blanche , " she say , look round at she daughter , who bit she lip and frown very savagely for a sylphide . the major , with a smile and a bow , say he would much rather come to a quiet meeting than to a grand dinner . he have have enough of those large entertainment , and prefer the simplicity of the home circle . " I always think a dinner be the best the second day , " say , think to mmend she first speech . " on the 14th we will be quite a snug little party ; " at which second blunder , clasp she hand in despair , and say " o , mamma , vous etes incorrigible . " major Pendennis vow that he like snug dinner of all thing in the world , and confound she ladyship 's impudence for daring to ask such a man as he to a second day 's dinner . but he be a man of a economical turn of mind , and bethink himself that he could throw over these people if anything better should offer , he accept with the blandest air . as for , he be not a diner - out of thirty year ' stand as yet , and the idea of a fine feast in a fine house be still perfectly welcome to he . " what be that pretty little quarrel which engage itself between you worship and ? " the ask of , as they walk away together . " I think you use to au mieux in that quarter . " " use to be , " answer , with a dandified air " be a vague phrase regard a woman . be and be be two very different term , sir , as regard woman be heart especially . " , they change as we do , " cry the elder . " when we take the cape of , I recollect there be a lady who talk poiso herself for you humble servant ; and , begad , in three month she run away from she husband with somebody else . do not get yourself entangle with that , she be forward , affect , and under - breed ; and she character be somewhat -- never mind what . but do not think of she ; ten thousand pound will not do for you . what , my good fellow , be ten thousand pound ? I would scarcely pay that girl 's milliner 's bill with the interest of the money . " " you seem to be a connoisseur in millinery , uncle " say . " I be , sir , I be , " reply the senior ; " and the old war - horse , you know , never hear the sound of a trumpet , but he begin to he , he !-- you understand , " -- and he give a killing and somewhat superannuate leer and bow to a carriage that pass they and enter the . " 's carriage " he say "
" mon 'ous fine girl the daughter , though , gad , I remember they mother a thousand time handsomer . no , , my dear fellow , with you person and expectation , you ought to make a good coup in marriage some day or other ; and though I would not have this repeat at Fairoaks , you rogue , ha ! ha ! a reputation for a little wickedness , and for be a homme dangereux , do not hurt a young fellow with the woman . they like it , sir , they hate a milksop -- young man must be young man , you know . but for marriage , " continue the veteran moralist , " that be a very different matter . marry a woman with money . I have tell you before it be as easy to get a rich wife as a poor one ; and a doosed deal more comfortable to sit down to a well - cook dinner , with you little entree nicly serve , than to have nothing but a damned cold leg of mutton between you and you wife . we shall have a good dinner on the 14th , when we dine with Claver : stick to that , my boy , in you relation with the family . Cultivate th'ey , but keep th'ey for dining . no more of you youthful folly and nonsense about live in a cottage . " " it must be a cottage with a double coach - house , a cottage of gentility , sir , " say , quote the hackney ballad of the 's walk : but he uncle do not know that poem ( though , perhaps , he might be lead upon the very promenade in question ) , and go on with he philosophical remark , very much pleased with the aptness of the pupil to whom he address they . indeed be a clever fellow , who take he colour very readily from he neighbour , and find the adaptation only too easy . , the grumbler , grow out that be become such a puppy that soon there would be no bear he . but the truth be , the young man 's success and dashing manners please he elder companion . he like to see gay and spirit , and brimful of health , and life , and hope ; as a man who have long since leave off be amuse with clown and harlequin , still get 's a pleasure in watch a child at a pantomime . 's former sulkiness disappear with he better fortune : and he bloom as the sun begin to shine upon he . not appear and disappear on the day appoint , major Pendennis , who have form no better engagement , and who desire none , arrive together to dine with . the only tenant of the drawing - room when and he uncle reach it , be and he wife , and we friend , whom be very glad to see , though the major look very sulkily at , be by no means well please to sit down to dinner with 's ----- house - steward , as he irreverently call . but , 's country neighbour and brother member of parliament , speedily arrive , the elder be somewhat appease , for , though perfectly dull , and take no more part in the conversation at dinner than the footman behind he chair , be a respectable country gentleman of ancient family and seven thousand a year : and the major feel always at ease in such society . to these be add other person of note : the , who have she reason for be well with the Clavering family , and the , with she son , we old acquaintance . could not come , he parliamentary duty keep he at the house , duty which sate upon the two other senator very lightly . be the last of the company who make she appearance . she be dress in a kill white silk dress which display she pearly shoulders to the utmost advantage . whisp to , who regard she with eye of evident admiration , that he consider she " a stunner . " she choose to be very gracious to Arthur upon this day , and hold out she hand most cordially , and talk about dear Fairoak , and ask for dear and he mother , and say she be long to go back to the country , and in fact be entirely simple , affectionate , and artless . think he have never see anybody so amiable and delightful not accustom much to the society of lady , and ordinarily be dumb to they presence , he find that he could speak before , and become uncommonly lively and talkative , even before the dinner be announced and the party descende to the lower room . he would have longe to give he arm to the fair Blanche , and conduct she down the broad carpet stair ; but she fall to the lot of upon this occasion , be appoint to escort , in consequence of he superior rank as a earl 's grandson . but though he be separate from the object of he desire during the passage downstairs , the delighted Foker find himself by 's side at the dinner - table , and flatter himself that he have manoeuvr very well in securing that happy place . it may be that the move be not he , but that it be make by another person . Blanche have thus the two young man , one on each side of she , and each try to render himself gallant and agreeable . 's mamma , from she place , survey she darling boy , be surprised at he vivacity .
. talk constantly to he fair neighbour about the topic of the day . " in the , ? bring I that souprame of again if you please ( this be address to the attendant near he ) , very good : can not think where the souprame come from ; what become of the leg of the fowl , I wonder ? she be clipp in the Sylphide , be not she ? " and he begin very kindly to hum the pretty air which pervade that prettiest of all ballet , now fad into the past with that most beautiful and gracious of all dancers . will the young folk ever see anything so charme , anything so classic , anything like ? " be a sylph herself , " say . " what a delightful tenor voice you have , , " say the young lady . " I be sure you have be well teach . I se a little myself . I should like to s with you . " remember that word very similar have be address to himself by the young lady , and that she have like to s with he in former day . and sneer within himself , he wonder with how many other gentleman she have sung duet since he time ? but he do not think fit to put this awkward question aloud : and only say , with the very tenderest air which he could assume , " I should like to hear you s again , . I never hear a voice I like so well as yours , I think . " " I think you like 's , " say . " 's be a contralto : and that voice be very often out , you know , " say , bitterly . " I have hear a great deal of music , in , " he continue . " I be tired of those professional people -- they se too loud -- or I have grow too old or too blase . one grow old very soon , in , . and like all old fellow , I only care for the song I hear in my youth . " " I like English music best . I do not care for foreign song much . get I some saddle of mutton , " say . " I adore ballad , of all thing , " say . " S I one of the old song after dinner , will you ? " say , with a imploring voice . " shall I se you a English song , after dinner ? " ask the Sylphide , turn to . " I will , if you will promise to come up soon : " and she give he a perfect broadside of she eye . " I will come up after dinner , fast enough , " he say , simply . " I do not care about much wine afterwards -- I take my whack at dinner -- I mean my share , you know ; and when I have have as much as I want I toddle up to tea . I be a domestic character , -- my habits be simple -- and when I be pleased I be generally in a good - humour , be not I , ? -- that jelly , if you please -- not that one , the other with the cherry inside . how the doose do they get those cherry inside the jelly ? " in this way the artless youth prattle on : and listen to he with inexhaustible good - humour . when the lady take they departure for the upper region , Blanche make the two young man promise faithfully to quit the table soon , and depart with kind glance to each . she drop she glove on 's side of the table and she handkerchief on Pen's . each have have some little attention pay to he : she politeness to be perhaps a little more encouraging than she kindness to : but the benevolent little creature do she best to make both the gentleman happy . catch she last glance as she rush out of the door ; that bright look pass over 's broad white waistcoat and shot straight at 's . the door close on the charmer : he sate down with a sigh , and swallow a bumper of claret . as the dinner at which and he uncle take they place be not one of we grand party , it have be serve at a considerably earlier hour than those ceremonial banquet of the season , which custom have ordain shall scarcely take place before nine o'clock ; and , the company be small , and anxious to betake herself to she piano in the drawing - room , give constant hint to she mother to retreat , -- make that signal very speedily , so that it be quite daylight yet when the lady reach the upper apartment , from the flower-embroidered balcony of which they could command a view of the two park , of the poor couple and child still saunter in the one , and of the equipage of lady and the horse of dandy pass through the arch of the other . the sun , in a word have not set behind the elm of , and be still gild the statue erect by the ladie of in honour of he the of , when and she female friend leave the gentleman drink wine . the window of the dining - room be open to let in the fresh air , and afforde to the passer - by in the street a pleasant , or perhaps , tantalise view of six gentleman in white waistcoat with a quantity of decanter and a variety of fruit before they --
-- little boy , as they pass and jump up at the area -railing and take a peep , say to one another , " hi hi , , should not you like to be there and have a cut of that there pineapple ? " -- the horse and carriage of the nobility and gentry pass by convey they to Belgravian toilets : the policeman , with clamp foot patrol up and down before the mansion : the shade of evening begin to fall : the gasman come and light the lamps before 's door : the butler enter the dining - room , and illuminate the antique gothic chandelier over the antique carve oak dining - table : so that from outside the house you look inwards upon a night - scene of feasting and wax - candle ; and from within you beheld a vision of a calm summer evening , and the wall of 's , and the sky above , in which a star or two be just begin to twinkle . Jeames , with fold leg , lean against the door -pillar of he master 's abode , look forth musingly upon the latter tranquil sight : whilst a spectator clinging to the railing examine the former scene . policeman X pass , give he attention to neither , but fix it upon the individual hold by the railing , and gaze into 's dining - room , where be laugh and talk away , make the conversation for the party . the man at the railing be very gorgeously attire with chain , jewellery , and waistcoat , which the illumination from the house light up to great advantage ; he boot be shiny ; he have brass button to he coat , and large white wristband over he knuckle ; and indeed look so grand , that imagine he beheld a member of parliament , or a person of consideration before he . whatever he rank , however , the , or person of consideration , be considerably excited by wine ; for he lurch and reel somewhat in he gait , and he hat be cock over he wild and bloodshot eye in a manner which no sober hat ever could assume . he copious black hair be evidently surreptitious , and he whisker of the Tyrian purple . as 's laughter , follow after one of he own gros mot , come ring out of window , this gentleman without laugh and snigger in the queerest way likewise , and he slap he thigh and wink at pensive in the portico , as much as to say , " Plush , my boy , be not that a good story ? " 's attention have be gradually draw from the moon in the heaven to this sublunary scene ; and he be puzzl and alarme by the appearance of the man in shiny boot . " a holtercation , " he remark afterwards , in the servants '- hall -- a " holtercation with a feller in the street be never no good ; and indeed he be not hire for any such purpose . " so , have survey the man for some time , who go on laughing , reel , nodd he head with tipsy knowingness , look out of the portico , and softly call " Pleaceman , " and beckon to that officer . x march up resolute , with one glove stick in he belt - side , and simply point with he index finger to the individual who be laugh against the railing . not one single word more than " " do he say , but stand there in the calm summer evening , point calmly : a grand sight . x advanc to the individual and say , " now , sir , will you have the kindness to move hon ? " the individual , who be in perfect good - humour , do not appear to bear one word which utter , but nod and waggle he grinning head at , until he hat almost fall from he head over the area railing . " now , sir , move on , do you hear ? " cry , in a much more peremptory tone , and he touch the stranger gently with one of the finger enclose in the gauntlet of the woof . he of the many ring instantly start , or rather stagger back , into what be call a attitude of self - defence , and in that position begin the operation which be entitled ' squaring ' at , and show himself brave and warlike , if unsteady . " Hullo ! keep you hand off a gentleman , " he say , with a oath which need not be repeat . " move on out of this , " say , " and do not be a block up the pavement , stare into gentleman 's dining - room . " " not stare -- ho , ho , -- not stare -- that be a good one , " reply the other with a satiric laugh and sneer -- " who be to prevent I from staring , look at my friend , if I like ? not you , old highlow . " " Friends ! I dessay . move on , " answer . " if you touch I , I will pitch into you , I will , " roar the other . " I tell you I know th'ey all -- that be , , . -- I know he , and he know I -- and that be Strong , and that be the young chap that make the row at the ball . I say , Strong , Strong ! " " it be that ----- , " cry within , with a start and a guilty
guilty look ; and also , with a look of annoyance , get up from the table , and run out to the intruder . a gentleman in a white waistcoat , run out from a dining - room barehead , a policeman , and a individual decently attire , engage in almost fisticuff on the pavement , be enough to make a crowd , even in that quiet neighbourhood , at half - past eight o'clock in the evening , and a small mob begin to assemble before 's door . " for 's sake , come in , " Strong say , seize he acquaintance 's arm . " send for a cab , , if you please , " he add in a under voice to that domestic ; and carry the excited gentleman out of the street , the outer door be close upon he , and the small crowd begin to move away . have intend to convey the stranger into 's private sitting - room , where the hat of the male guest be await they , and have there soothe he friend by bland conversation , to have carry he off as soon as the cab arrive -- but the new - comer be in a great state of wrath at the indignity which have be put upon he ; and when strong would have lead he into the second door , say in a tipsy voice , " that be not the door -- that be the dining - room door -- where the drink 's go on -- and I will go and have some , by ; I will go and have some . " at this audacity the butler stand aghast in the hall , and place himself before the door : but it open behind he , and the master of the house make he appearance , with anxious look . " I will have some , -- by --- I will , " the intruder be roar out , as come forward . " Hullo ! Clavering , I say I be come to have some wine with you ; hay ! old boy -- hay , old corkscrew ? get we a bottle of the yellow seal , you old thief -- the very best -- a hundred rupee a dozen , and no mistake . " the host reflect a moment over he company . there be only Welbore , Pendennis , and those two lad , he think -- and with a force laugh and a piteous look , he say ,-- " well , Altamont , come in . I be very glad to see you , I be sure . " , for the intelligent reader have doubtless long ere this discover in the stranger he Excellency the ambassador of the of , reel into the dining - room , with a triumphant look towards , the footman , which seem to say , " there , sir , what do you think of that ? now , be I a gentleman or no ? " and sank down into the first vacant chair . Claver timidly stammer out the 's name to he guest , and he Excellency begin drink wine forthwith and gaze round upon the company , now with the most wonderful frown , and anon with the blandest smile , and hiccup remark encomiastic of the drink which he be imbib . " very singular man . have reside long in a native court in , " Strong say , with great gravity , the 's presence of mind never desert he -- " in those indian court they get very singular habit . " " very , " say major Pendennis , drily , and wonder what in goodness 's name be the company into which he have get . be pleased with the new-comer . " it be the man who would se the song at the , " he whisper to . " try this pine , sir , " he then say to , it be uncommonly fine . " " pine -- I have see them feed pig on pine , " say the . " all the of 's pig be feed on pine , " Strong whisper to major Pendennis . " oh , of course , " the major answer . Clavering be , in the meanwhile , endeavour to make a excuse to he brother - guest for the new - comer 's condition , and mutter something regard , that he be a extraordinary character , very eccentric , very -- have indian habit -- do not understand the rule of English society -- to which old , a shrewd old gentleman , who drank he wine with great regularity , say , " that see pretty clear . " then the Colonel , see Pen's honest face , regard it for a while with as much steadiness as become he condition ; and say , " I know you , too , young fellow . I remember you . Baymouth ball , by . want to fight the . I remember you ; " and he laugh , and he square with he fists , and see hugely amused in the drunken depth of he mind , as these recollection pass , or , rather , reel across it . " , you remember , at ? " strong say : upon which , bow rather stifinitely , say , " he have the pleasure of remember that circumstance perfectly . " " what be he name ? " cry the Colonel . strong name again . " Pendennis !-- Pendennis be hange ! " not roar out to the surprise of every one , and thump with he fist on the table . " my name be also Pendennis , sir , " say the major ,
, whose dignity be exceedingly mortify by the evening 's event -- that he , major Pendennis , should have be ask to such a party , and that a drunken man should have be introduce to it . " my name be , and I will be oblige to you not to curse it too loudly . " the tipsy man turn round to look at he , and as he look , it appear as if not suddenly grow sober . he put he hand across he forehead , and in do so , displace somewhat the black wig which he wear ; and he eye stare fiercely at the major , who , in he turn , like a resolute old warrior as he be , look at he opponent very keenly and steadily . at the end of the mutual inspection , not begin to button up he brass - button coat , and rise up from he chair , suddenly , and to the company 's astonishment , reel towards the door , and issue from it , follow by Strong : all that the latter hear he utter be -- " ! , by jingo ! " there have not pass above a quarter of a hour from he strange appearance to he equally sudden departure . the two young man and the baronet 's other guest wonder at the scene , and could find no explanation for it . Clavering seem exceedingly pale and agitate , and turn with look of almost terror towards major Pendennis . the latter have be eyee he host keenly for a moment or two . " do you know he ? " ask of the major . " I be sure I have see the fellow , " the major reply , look as if he , too , be puzzl . " yes , I have it . he be a deserter from the who get into the 's service . I remember he face quite well . " " oh ! " say , with a sigh which indicate immense relief of mind , and the major look at he with a twinkle of he sharp old eye . the cab which have desire to be call , drive away with the and ; coffee be bring to the remain gentleman , and they go upstairs to the ladie in the drawing - room , declare confidentially to that " this be the rummest go he ever see , " which decision say , laugh , " show great discrimination on 's part . " then , accord to she promise , make music for the young man . Foker be enrapture with she performance , and kindly join in the air which she sang , when he happen to be acquaint with they . affec to talk aside with other of the party , but Blanche bring he quickly to the piano , by singe some of he own word , those which we have give in a previous number , indeed , and which the have herself , she say , set to music . I do not know whether the air be hers , or how much of it be arrange for she by , from whom she take lesson : but good or bad , original or otherwise , it delight , who remaine by she side , and turn the leave now for she most assiduously -- " ! how I wish I could write verse like you , , " sigh afterwards to he companion . " if I could do th'ey , would not I , that be all ? but I never be a dab at writing , you see , and I be sorry I be so idle when I be at school . " no mention be make before the lady of the curiious little scene which have be transact below - stair ; although be just on the point of describe it to , when that young lady inquire for , who she wish should join she in a duet . but chance to look up towards , see a peculiar expression of alarm in the baronet 's ordinarily vacuous face , and discreetly hold he tongue . it be rather a dull evening . go to sleep as he always do at music and after dinner : nor do major Pendennis entertain the lady with copious anecdote and endless little scandalous story , as he will not be , but sate silent for the most part , and appear to be listen to the music , and watch the fair young performer . the hour of departure have arrive the major rose , regret that so delightful a evening should have pass away so quickly , and address a particularly fine compliment to upon she splendid talents as a singer . " you daughter , , " he say to that lady , " be a perfect nightingale -- a perfect nightingale , begad ! I have scarcely ever hear anything equal to she , and she pronunciation of every language -- begad , of every language -- seem to I to be perfect ; and the best house in must open before a young lady who have such talents , and , allow a old fellow to say , , such a face . " Blanche be as much astonished by these compliment as be , to whom he uncle , a little time since , have be speak in very disparaging term of the . the major and the two young man walk home together , after have place he mother in she carriage , and procure a light for a enormous cigar . the young gentleman 's company or he tobacco do not appear to be agreeable to major Pendennis , who eye he askance several time , and with a
a look which plainly indicate that he wish would take he leave ; but hang on resolutely to the uncle and nephew , even until they come to the former 's door in , where the major wish the lad good night . " and I say , , " he say in a confidential whisper , call he nephew back , " mind you make a point of call in to -morrow . they have be uncommonly civil ; mons'ously civil and kind . " promise and wonder , and the major 's door have be close upon he by , take arm , and walk with he for some time silently puffe he cigar . at last , when they have reach on 's way home to the , relieve himself , and break out with that eulogium upon poetry , and those regret regard a misspent youth which have just be mention . and all the way along the , and up to the door of Pen's very staircase , in , , yong do not cease to speak about singing and . to 's affair since that fatal but delightful night in , 's heart have be in such a state of agitation as you would hardly have think so great a philosopher could endure . when we remember what good advice he have give to in former day , how a early wisdom and knowledge of the world have manifest itself in this gift youth ; how a constant course of self - indulgence , such as become a gentleman of he means and expectation , ought by right to have increase he cynicism , and make he , with every succeed day of he life , care less and less for every individual in the world , with the single exception of , one may wonder that he should fall into the mishap to which most of we be subject once or twice in we life , and disquiet he great mind about a woman . but , though early wise , be still a man . he could no more escape the common lot than Achilles , or , or , or we first father , and now , he time be come , young become a victim to , the all - conqueror . when he go to the that night after quit at he staircase - door in , the gin - twist and devill turkey have no charms for he , the joke of he companion fall flatly on he ear ; and when , the singer of ' the , ' have a new chant even more dreadful and humorous than that famous composition , Foker , although he appear he friend , and say " , , " as common politeness and he position as one of the chiefs of the bound he to do , yet never distinctly hear one word of the song , which under it be title of ' the cat in the Cupboard , ' have since render so famous . late and very tired , he slip into he private apartment at home and seek the downy pillow , but he slumber be disturb by the fever of he soul , and the very instant that he wake from he agitate sleep , the image of present itself to he , and say , " here I be , I be you princess and beauty , you have discover I , and shall care for nothing else hereafter . " Heavens , how stale and distasteful he former pursuits and friendship appear to he ! he have not be , up to the present time , much accustom to the society of female of he own rank in life . when he speak of such , he call they " modest woman . " that virtue which , let we hope , they possess , have not hithertoo compensate to for the absence of more lively quality which most of he own relative do not enjoy , and which he find in , the lady of the theatre . he mother , though good and tender , do not amuse she boy ; he cousin , the daughter of he maternal uncle , the respectable of , weary he beyond measure . one be blue , and a geologist ; one be a horsewoman , and smoke cigar ; one be exceedingly , and have the most heterodox view on religious matter ; at least , so the other say , who be herself of the very faction , and make the cupboard in she room into a oratory , and fast on every in the year . they paternal house of , could very seldom be get to visit . he swore he have rather go on the treadmill than stay there . he be not much belove by the inhabitant . , 's heir , consider he cousin a low person , of deplorably vulgar habit and manners ; while Foker , and with equal reason , vote a prig and a dullard , the nightcap of the of , the speaker 's opprobrium , the dreariest of philanthropic spouter . could , of and , ever forget that on one evening when he condescende to play at billiards with he nephew , that young gentleman pok he lordship in the side with he cue , and say , " well , old cock , I have see many a bad stroke in my life , but I never see such a bad one as that there . " he play the game out with angelic sweetness of temper , for be he guest as well as he nephew ; but he be nearly have a fit in the night ; and he keep to he own room until young quit on he return to , where the interesting youth be
be finish he education at the time when the occurrence take place . it be a awful blow to the venerable earl ; the circumstance be never allude to in the family ; he shunn whenever he come to see they in or in the country , and could hardly be bring to gasp out a " how d'ye do ? " to the young blasphemer . but he would not break he sister Agnes 's heart , by banish from the family altogether ; nor , indeed , could he afford to break with , senior , between whom and he lordship there have be many private transaction , produce a exchange of bank - cheque from , and autograph from the earl himself , with the letter I o write over he illustrious signature . besides the four daughter of whose various quality have be enumerate in the former paragraph , he lordship be bless with a fifth girl , the , who , from she earliest year and nursery , have be destin to a peculiar position in life . it be ordain between she parent and she aunt , that when attaine a proper age , should become he wife . the idea have be familiar to she mind when she yet wear pinafore , and when the dirtiest of little boy , use to come back with black eye from school to , or to he father 's house of , where live , much with she aunt . both of the young people coincide with the arrangement propose by the elder , without any protest or difficulty . it no more entered 's mind to question the order of she father , than it would have enter 's to dispute the command of . the heir- apparent of the house of be also obedient , for when the old gentleman say , " Harry , you uncle and I have agree that when you be of a proper age , you will marry . she will not have any money , but she be good blood , and a good one to look at , and I shall make you comfortable . if you refuse , you will have you mother 's jointure , and two hundred a year during my life " -- , who know that he sire , though a man of few word , be yet implicitly to be trust , acquiesce at once in the parental decree , and say , " well , sir , if 's agreeable , I say dittoo . she be not a bad - look girl . " " and she have the best blood in , sir . you mother 's blood , you own blood , sir , " say the Brewer . " there be nothing like it , sir . " " well , sir , as you like it , " reply . " when you want I , please ring the bell . only there be no hurry , and I hope you will give we a long day . I should like to have my fling out before I marry . " " F away , , " answer the benevolent father . " nobody prevent you , do they ? " and so very little more be say upon this subject , and pursue those amusement in life which suit he best ; and hang up a little picture of he cousin in he sitting - room , amidst the french print , the favourite actress and dancer , the racing and coach work of art , which suit he taste and form he gallery . it be a insignificant little picture , represent a simple round face with ringlet ; and it make , as it must be confess , a very poor figure by the side of , dance over a rainbow , or , grinn in red boot and a lancer 's cap . be engage and dispose of , do not go out so much in the world as she sister : and often stay at home in at the parental house in , when she mamma with the other lady go abroad . they talk and they dance with one man after another , and the man come and go , and the story about they be various . but there be only this one story about : she be engage to : she never be to think about anybody else . it be not a very amusing story . well , the instant Foker awoke on the day after 's dinner , there be Blanche 's image glar upon he with its clear grey eye , and win smile . there be she tune ring in he ear , " yet round about the spot , ofttimes I hover , ofttimes I hover , " which poor Foker begin piteously to hum , as he sit up in he bed under the crimson silken coverlet . opposite he be a french print , of a turkish lady and she greek lover , surprise by a venerable , the lady 's husband ; on the other wall be a french print of a gentleman and lady , ride and kiss each other at full gallop ; all round the chaste bedroom be more french print , either portrait of gauzy nymph of the , or lovely illustration of the novel ; or mayhap , a english chef - d'oeuvre or two , in which of . . o . would be represent in tight pantaloon in she favourite page part ; or as ; they value enhance by the signature of these ladie , , or , inscribe underneath the print in a exquisite facsimile . such be the picture in which honest delighte . he be no worse than many of he neighbour ; he be a idle jovial kindly
kindly fast man about town ; and if he room be rather profusely decorate with work of french art , so that simple , he mamma on enter the apartment where she darl sate envelope in fragrant clouds of , be often bewilder by the novelty which she beheld there , why , it must be remember , that he be richer than most young man , and could better afford to gratify he taste . a letter from write in a very degage style of spelling and handwriting , scrawl freely over the filagree paper , and commence by call , she dear Hokey - pokey - fokey , lay on he bed table by he side , amidst key , sovereign , cigar - case , and a bit of verbena , which have give he , and remind he of the arrival of the day when he be 'too stand that dinner at the and , at , which he have promise ;' a card for a private box at 's approaching benefit , a bundle of ticket for ' 's night , the , at 's , the - corner hat , in 's ; where , the , and ( the ) , would put on the glove , and the lover of the good old british sport be invite to attend '-- these and sundry other memoir of 's pursuit and pleasure lay on the table by he side when he wake . ah ! how faint all these pleasure seem now . what do he care for or the ? what for the french print ogl he from all side of the room ; those regular stunning slap - up out - and - outers ? and spell bad , and call he - fokey , confound she impudence ! the idea of be engage to a dinner at the and at with that old woman ( who be seven - and - thirty year old , if she be a day ) fill he mind with dreary disgust now , instead of that pleasure which he have only yesterday expect to find from the entertainment . when he fond mamma beheld she boy that morning , she remark on the pallor of he cheek , and the general gloom of he aspect . " why do you go on play billiards at that wick 's ? " lady Agnes ask . " my dearest child , those billiards will kill you , I be sure they will . " " it be not the billiards , " say , gloomily . " then it be the dreadful , " say the . " I have often think , d' you know , , of writing to the landlady , and begge that she would have the kindness to put only very little wine in the negus which you take , and see that you have you shawl on before you get into you brougham . " " do , ma 'am . be a most kind motley woman , " say . " but it be not the , neither , " he add , with a ghastly sigh . as never deny she son anything , and fall into all he way with the fondest acquiescence , she be reward by a perfect confidence on young 's part , who never think to disguise from she a knowledge of the haunt which he frequent ; and , on the contrary , bring she home choice anecdote from the club and billiard - room , which the simple lady relish , if she do not understand . " my son go to , " she would say to she confidential friend . " all the young man go to 's after they ball . it be rigueur , my dear ; and they play billiards as they use to play macao and hazard in 's time . yes , my dear father often tell I that they sate up always until nine o'clock the next morning with at 's , whom I remember at , when I be a little girl , in a buff waistcoat and black satin small - clothes . my brother never play as a young man , nor sate up late -- he have no health for it ; but my boy must do as everybody do , you know . yes , and then he often go to a place call the , frequent by all the wit and author , you know , whom one do not see in society , but whom it be a great privilege and pleasure for to meet , and there he hear the question of the day discuss ; and my dear father often say that it be we duty to encourage literature , and he have hope to see the late at , only die . yes , and come over , and drank a great deal of wine ,-- everybody drank a great deal of wine in those day , -- and papa 's wine - merchant 's bill be ten time as much as 's be , who get it as he want it from and 's and do not keep any stock at all . " " that be a uncommon good dinner we have yesterday , ma 'am , " the artful break out . " they clear soup 's better than ours . Moufflet will put too much taragon into everything . the supreme de volaille be very good -- uncommon , and the sweet be better than 's sweet . do you taste the plombiere , ma 'am , and the maraschino jelly ? Stunningly good that kmaraschinow jelly ! " lady Agnes express she agreement in these , as in almost all other sentiment of she son , who continue the artful conversation , say -- " very handsome house that of
of the Clavering . furniture , I should say , get up regardless of expense . magnificent display of plate , ma'am . " the lady assent to all these proposition . " very nice people the Claverings . " " h be ! " say . " I know what you mean . be not distangy exactly , but she be very good - natured . " " oh , very , " mamma say , who be herself one of the most good - natured of woman . " and , he do not talk much before lady ; but after dinner he come out uncommon strong , ma 'am -- a highly agreeable , well - inform man . when will you ask they to dinner ? look out for a early day , ma 'am ; " and look into 's pocket - book , he choose a day only a fortnight hence ( a age that fortnight seem to the young gentleman ) , when the Clavering be to be invite to - . the obedient write the require invitation . she be accustom to do so without consult she husband , who have he own society and habit , and who leave he wife to see she own friend alone . look at the card ; but there be a omission in the invitation which do not please he . " you have not ask -- , 's daughter . " " oh , that little creature ! " lady Agnes cry . " no ! I think not , . " " we must ask , " say . " I -- I want to ask Pendennis ; and -- and he be very sweet upon she . do not you think she sings very well , ma 'am ? " " I think she rather forward , and do not listen to she singe . she only sang at you and , it seem to I . but I will ask she if you wish , , " and so 's name be write on the card with she mother 's . this piece of diplomacy be triumphantly execute embrace he fond parent with the utmost affection , and retire to he own apartment where he stretch himself on he ottoman , and lay brooding silently , sigh for the day which be to bring the fair under he paternal roof , and devise a hundred wild scheme for meet she . on he return from make the grand tour , , , have bring with he a polyglot valet , who take the place of , and condescende to wait at dinner , attire in shirt fronts of work muslin , with many gold stud and chain , upon he master and the elder of the family . this man , who be of no particular country , and speak all language indifferently ill , make himself useful to in a variety of way , --read all the artless youth 's correspondence , kknow he favourite haunt and the address of he acquaintance , and officiate at the private dinner which the young gentleman give . as lay upon he sofa after he interview with he mamma , rob in a wonderful dressing - gown , and puffe he pipe in gloomy silence , Anatole , too , must have remark that something affect he master 's spirit ; though he do not betray any ill - breed sympathy with 's agitation of mind . when begin to dress himself in he out - of - door morning costume , he be very hard indeed to please , and particularly severe and snappish about he toilet : he try , and curse , pantaloon of many different stripe , check , and colour : all the boot be villainously varnish ; the shirt too " loud " in pattern . he scent he linen and person with peculiar richness this day ; and what must have be the valet 's astonishment , when , after some blushing and hesitation on 's part , the young gentleman ask , " I say , , when I engage you , do not you -- hey -- do not you say that you could dress -- hey --dress hair ? " the valet say , " yes , he could . " " Cherchy alor une paire de tong , -- et -- curly moi un peu , " say , in a easy manner ; and the valet , wonder whether he master be in love or be go masquerad , go in search of the article ,-- first from the old butler who wait upon , senior , on whose bald pate the tong would have scarcely find a hundred hair to seize , and finally of the lady who have the charge of the meek auburn fronts of the . and the tong be get , twiste he young master 's lock until he have make 's head as curly as a negro 's ; after which the youth dress himself with the utmost care and splendour , and proceed to sally out . " at what dime sall I order drag , sir , to be to 's door , sir ? " the attendant whisper as he master be go forth . " Confound she !-- put the dinner off -- I can not go ! " say . " no , hang it -- I must go . and , and ever so many more be come . the drag at at six o'clock , . " the drag be not one of 's own equipage , but be hire from a livery - stable for festive purpose ; Foker , however , put he own carriage into requisition that morning , and for what purpose do the kind reader suppose ? why , to drive down to ,
, , take place by the way ( which lie in the exact direction of the from , as everybody know ) , where he just have the pleasure of peeping upward at 's pink window - curtain , have achieve which satisfactory feat , he drive off to Pen's chamber . why do he want to see he dear friend Pen so much ? why do he yearn and long after he ; and do it seem necessary to 's very existence that he should see that morne , have part with he in perfect health on the night previous ? have live two year in , and have not pay half a dozen visit to he chamber . what send he thither now in such a hurry ? what ?--if any young lady read this page , I have only to inform they that , when the same mishap befall they , which now have for more than twelve hour befallen , people will grow interesting to they for whom they do not care sixpence on the day before ; as on the other hand person of whom they fancie themselves fond will be find to have become insipid and disagreeable . then you dearest , or of the other day , to whom you write letter and send lock of hair yard long , will on a sudden be as indifferent to you as you stupidest relation whilst , on the contrary , about he relation you will begin to feel such a warm interest ! such a loving desire to ingratiate yourself with he mamma ; such a liking for that dear kind old man he father ! if he be in the habit of visit at any house , what advance you will make in order to visit there too . if he have a married sister you will like to spend long morning with she . you will fatigue you servant by send note to she , for which there will be the most press occasion , twice or thrice in a day . you will cry if you mamma object to you go too often to see he family . the only one of they you will dislike , be perhaps he younger brother , who be at home for the holiday , and who will persist in staying in the room when you come to see you dear new - found friend , he darl second sister . something like this will happen to you , young lady , or , at any rate , let we hope it may . yes , you must go through the hot fit and the cold fit of that pretty fever . you mother , if they would acknowledge it , have pass through it before you be bear , you dear papa be the object of the passion , of course , -- who could it be but he ? and as you suffer it , so will you brother , in they way , -- and after they kind . more selfish than you : more eager and headstrong than you : they will rush on they destiny when the doomed charmer make she appearance . or if they do not , and you do not , help you ! as the gambler say of he dice , to love and win be the best thing , to love and lose be the next best . you do not die of the complaint : or very few do . the generous wounded heart suffer and survive it . and he be not a man , or she a woman , who be not conquer by it , or who do not conquer it in he time .---- now , then , if you ask why , , be in such a hurry to see , and feel such a sudden value and esteem for he , there be no difficulty in say it be because have become really valuable in 's eye : because if be not the rose , he yet have be near that fragrant flower of love . be not he in the habit of go to she house in ? do he not live near she in the country ?-- know all about the enchantress ? what , I wonder , would , 's cousin and pretendue , have say , if she ladyship have know all that be go on in the bosom of that funny little gentleman ? ! when reach , leave he carriage for the admiration of the little clerk who be lounge in the archway that lead thence into which lead into , be in the chamber but be absent . be go to the printing - office to see he proof . " would have a pipe and should the laundress go to the cock and get he some beer ? " ask , remark with a pleased surprise the splendid toilet of this scented and shiny - boot young aristocrat ; but have not the slightest wish for beer or tobacco : he have very important business : he rush away to the office , still bend upon find . have quit that pace . want he that they might go together to call upon . go away disconsolate , and whil away a hour or two vaguly at club : and when it be time to pay a visit , he think it would be but decent and polite to drive to and leave a card upon . he have not the courage to ask to see she when the door be open , he only deliver two card , with engrave upon they , to , in a speechless agony . receive the ticket bow he powder head . the varnished door close upon he . the beloved object be as far as ever from he , though so near .
. he think he hear the tone of a piano and of a sy singe , come from the drawing - room and swee over the balcony - shrubbery of geranium . he would have like to stop and listen , but it might not be . " drive to 's , " he say to the groom , in a voice smother with emotion ,-- " and bring my pony round , " he add , as the man drive rapidly away . as good luck would have it , that splendid barouche of 's , which have be inadequately describe in a former chapter , drive up to she ladyship 's door just as mount the pony which be in waiting for he . he bestrode the fiery animal , and dodge about the arch of the , keep the carriage well in view , until he see enter , and with she -- whose could be that angel form , but the enchantress 's , clad in a sort of gossamer , with a pink bonnet and a light - blue parasol , -- but ? the carriage take its fair owner to 's cap and lace shop , to 's worsted shop , -- who know to what other resorts of female commerce ? then it go and take ex at 's , for be somewhat florid in she taste and amusement , and not only like to go abroad in the most showy carriage in , but that the public should see she in it too . and so , in a white bonnet with a yellow feather , she eat a large pink ice in the sunshine before 's door , till on he pony , and the red jacket who accompany he , be almost tired of dodging . then at last she make she way into the , and the rapid Foker make he dash forward . what to do ? just to get a nod of recognition from and she mother ; to cross they a half - dozen time in the drive ; to watch and ogle they from the other side of the ditch , where the horseman assemble when the band play in . what be the use of look at a woman in a pink bonnet across a ditch ? what be the earthly good to be get out of a nod of the head ? strange that man will be contente with such pleasure , or if not contente , at least that they will be so eager in seek they . not one word do , he so fluent of conversation ordinarily , change with he charmer on that day . Mutely he beheld she return to she carriage , and drive away among rather ironical salute from the young man in the . one say that the indian widow be make the paternal rupee spin rapidly ; another say that she ought to have burn herself alive , and leave the money to she daughter . this one ask who be ?-- and old , who know everybody , and never miss a day in the on he grey cob , kindly say that have come into a estate over head and heel in mortgage : that there be dev'lish ugly story about he when he be a young man , and that it be report of he that he have a share in a gambling - house , and have certainly show the white feather in he regiment . " he play still ; he be in a hell every night almost , " Eales add . " I should think so , since he marriage , " say a wag . " he give devilish good dinner , " say , strike up for the honour of he host of yesterday . " I daresay , and I daresay he do not ask Eales , " the wag say . " I say , , do you dine at 's , -- at the 's ? " " I dine there ? " say Eales , who would have dine with if sure of a good cook , and when he come away , would have paint he host blacker than fate have make he . " you might , you know , although you do abuse he so , " continue the wag . " they say it be very pleasant . Claver go to sleep after dinner ; the get tipsy with cherry - brandy , and the young lady sings song to the young gentleman . she sing well , do not she , ? " " Slap up , " say . " I tell you what , Poyntz , she sing like a whatdyecallum -- you know what i mean -- like a mermaid , you know , but that be not they name . " " I never hear a mermaid se , " , the wag , reply . " whoever hear a mermaid ? Eale , you be a old fellow , do you ? " " do not make a lark of I , hang it , , " say , turn red , and with tear almost in he eye , " you know what i mean : it be those what 's - he - name -- in , you know . I never say I be a good scholar . " " and nobody ever say it of you , my boy , " remark , and strike spur into he pony , canter away down , he mind agitate with various emotion , ambition , mortification . he be sorry that he have not be good at he book in early life -- that he might have cut out all those chap who be about she , and who talk the language , and write poetry , and paint picture
picture in she album , and -- and that --" what be I , " think little Foker , " compare to she ? she be all soul , she be , and can write poetry or compose music , as easy as I could drink a glass of beer . beer ?--damme , that be all I be fit for , be beer . I be a poor , ignorant little beggar , good for nothing but 's . I misspend my youth , and use to get the chap to do my exercise . and what be the consequence now ? oh , , what a confound little fool you have be ! " as he make this dreary soliloquy , he have canter out of into the , and there be on the point of ride down a large old roomy family carriage , of which he take no heed , when a cheery voice cry out , " , ! " and look up , he beheld he aunt , the , and two of she daughter , of whom the one who speak be 's betrothed , the . he start back with a pale , scared look , as a truth about which he have not think during the whole day , come across he . there be he fate , there , in the back seat of that carriage . " what be the matter , ? why be you so pale ? you have be rak and smoke too much , you wick boy , " say . Foker say , " how do , aunt , " " how do , , " in a perturbed manner -- mutter something about a pressing engagement , -- indeed he see by the clock that he must have be keep he party in the drag wait for nearly a hour -- and wave a good - bye . the little man and the little pony be out of sight in a instant -- the great carriage roll away . nobody inside be very much interested about he come or go ; the Countess be occupy with she spaniel , the 's thought and eye be turn upon a volume of sermon , and those of the upon a new novel , which the sister have just procure from the library . carry the reader both to and find the dinner at to be the most dreary entertainment upon which ever mortal man waste he guinea . " I wonder how the deuce I could ever have like these people , " he think in he own mind . " why , I can see the crow 's - foot under 's eye , and the paint on she cheek be laid on as thick as 's in a pantomime ! the way in which that talk slang , be quite disgusting . I hate chaff in a woman . and old ! that old col , come down here in he brougham , with he coronet on it , and sit bodkin between and she mother ! it be too bad . a english peer , and a horse - rider of 's ! -- it will not do ; by , it will not do . I be not proud ; but it will not do ! " " Twopence - halfpenny for you thought , ! " cry out , take she cigar from she truly vermilion lip , as she beheld the young fellow lose in thought , seat at the head of he table , amidst melte ex , and cut pineapple , and bottle full and empty , and cigar - ash scatter on fruit , and the ruin of a dessert which have no pleasure for he . " do ever think ? " draw out . " Foker , here be a considerable sum of money offer by a fair capitalist at this end of the table for the present emanation of you valuable and acute intellect , old boy ! " " what the deuce be that Poyntz can talk about ? " ask of she neighbour . " I hate he . he be a drawlin ' , sneerin ' beast . " " what a droll of a little man be that little Fokare , my lor ' , " say , in she own language , and with the rich twang of that sunny Gascony in which she swarthy cheek and bright black eye have get they fire . " what a droll of a man ! he do not look to have twenty year . " " I wish I be of he age , " say the venerable , with a sigh , as he inclin he purple face towards a large goblet of claret . " . Peuh ! je be 'en fiche " say , 's mamma , take a great pinch out of 's delicate gold snuff - box . " Je m'aime que les homme fait , moi . Comme milor . ! n'est - ce pa que yotu n'aime que les homme fait , ma bichette ? " my lord say , with a grin , " you flatter I , . " " Taisez -vous , Maman , vous n'ete qu'une bete , " cry , with a shrug of she robust shoulders ; upon which , my lord say that she do not flatter at any rate ; and pocket he snuff - box , not desirous that 's dubious finger should plunge too frequently into he Mackabaw . there be no need to give a prolonge detail of the animated conversation which ensue during the rest of the banquet ; a conversation which would not much edify the reader . and it be scarcely necessary to say , that all lady of the corps de dance be not like , any more than
than that all per resemble that illustrious member of they order , the late lament . but there have be such in we memory who have love the society of riotous youth better than the company of man of they own age and rank , and have give the young one the precious benefit of they experience and example ; and there have be very respectable man too who have not object so much to the kind of entertainment as to the publicity of it . I be sure , for instance , that we friend major Pendennis would have make no sort of objection to join the a party of pleasure , provide that it be en comite , and that such man as my and my be of the society . " give the young man they pleasure , " this worthy guardian say to more than once . " I be not one of you strait - lace moralist , but a old man of the world , begad ; and I know that as long as it last 's young man will be young man . " and there be some young man to whom this estimable philosopher accord about seventy year as the proper period for sow they wild oat : but they be man of fashion . drive he lovely guest home to in the drag that night ; but he be quite thoughtful and gloomy during the whole of the little journey from ; neither listen to the joke of the friend behind he and on the box by he side nor enliven they as be he wont , by he own facetious sally . and when the lady whom he have convey alight at the door of they house , and ask they accomplish coachman whether he would not step in and take something to drink , he decline with so melancholy a air , that they suppose that the and he have have a difference or that some calamity have befall he ; and he do not tell these people what the cause of he grief be , but leave and , unheed the cry of the latter , who hang over she balcony like , and call out to he to ask he to give another party soon . he send the drag home under the guidance of one of the grooms , and go on foot himself ; he hand in he pocket , plunge in thought . the star and moon shin tranquilly overhead , look down upon Foker that night , as he in he turn sentimentally regard they . and he go and gaze upward at the house in , and at the window which he suppose to be those of the beloved object ; and he moan and he sigh in a way piteous and surprise to witness , which do , who inform 's people , as they take the refreshment of beer on the coach - box at the neighbour public - house , after bring home they lady from the french play , that there have be another chap hang about the premise that even -- a little chap , dress like a swell . and now with that perspicuity and ingenuity and enterprise which only belong to a certain passion , begin to through , and to appear wherever he could meet she . if go to the french play , where she ladyship have a box , , whose knowledge of the language , as we have hear , be not conspicuous , appear in a stall . he find out where she engagement be ( it be possible that , he man , be acquaint with 's gentleman , and so get a sight of she ladyship 's engagement - book ) , and at many of these evening party make he appearance -- to the surprise of the world , and of he mother especially , whom he order to apply for card to these party , for which until now he have show a supreme contempt . he tell the pleased and unsuspicious lady that he go to party because it be right for he to see the world : he tell she that he go to the french play because he want to perfect himself in the language , and there be no such good lesson as a comedy or vaudeville , -- and when one night the astonished see he stand up and dance , and compliment he upon he elegance and activity , the mendacious little rogue assert that he have learn to dance in , whereas know that he young master use to go off privily to a academy in , and study there for some hour in the morning . the casino of we modern day be not invent , or be in its infancy as yet ; and gentleman of 's time have not the facility of acquire the science of dancing which be enjoy by we present youth . seldom miss go to church . he consider it to be he duty as a gentleman to patronise the institution of public worship and that it be quite a correct thing to be see at church of a . one day it chance that he and yoArthu go thither together : the latter , who be now in high favour , have be to breakfast with he uncle , from whose lod they walk across the park to a church not far from . there be a charity sermon at 's , as the major know by the bill post on the pillars of he parish church , which probably cause he , for he be a thrifty man , to forsake it for that day : besides he have other view for himself and . " we will go to church , sir , across the park ; and then ,
, begad , we will go to the Clavering 's house and ask they for lunch in a friendly way . like to be ask for lunch , and be uncommonly kind , and monstrous hospitable . " " I meet they at dinner last week , at 's , sir , " say , " and the be very kind indeed . so she be in the country : so she be everywhere . but I share you opinion about ; one of you opinion , that be , uncle , for you be change the last time we speak about she . " " and what do you think of she now ? " the elder say . " I think she the most confound little flirt in , " answer , laugh " she make a tremendous assault upon , who sit next to she ; and to whom she give all the talk , though I take she down . " " Bah ! be engage to he cousin all the world know it : not a bad coup of 's , that . I should say , that the young man at he father 's death , and old 's life 's devilish bad : you know he have a fit at 's , last year : I should say , that young Foker will not have less than fourteen thousand a year from the brewery , besides Logwood and Norfolk property . I have no pride about I , . I like a man of birth certainly , but dammy , I like a brewery which bring in a man fourteen thousand a year ; hey , ? , ha , that be the sort of man for I . and I recommend you now that you be lance in the world , to stick to fellow of that sort , to fellow who have a stake in the country , begad . " " Foker stick to I , sir , " yoArthu answer . he have be at we chamber several time lately . he have ask I to dinner . we be almost as great friend , as we use to be in we youth : and he talk be about from morning till night . I be sure he be sweet upon she . " " I be sure he be engage to he cousin , and that they will keep the young man to he bargain , " say the major . " the marriage in these family be affair of state . be make to marry old Foker by the late , although she be notoriously partial to she cousin who be kill at afterwards , and who save she life out of the lake at . I remember Lady Agnes , sir , a exceedingly fine woman . but what do she do ? -- of course she marry she father 's man . why , sate for till the , and pay dev'lish well for he seat , too . and you may depend upon this , sir , that Foker senior , who be a parvenu , and love a great man , as all parvenus do , have ambitious view for he son as well as himself , and that you friend must do as he father bid he . bless you ! I have know a hundred case of love in young man and woman : hey , , do you take I ? they kick , sir , they resist , they make a deuce of a riot and that sort of thing , but they end by listen to reason , begad . " " Blanche be a dangerous girl , sir , " say . " I be smite with she myself once , and very far gone , too , " he add ; " but that be year ago . " " be you ? how far do it go ? do she return it ? " ask the major , look hard at . , with a laugh , say " that at one time he do think he be pretty well in 's good graces . but my mother do not like she , and the affair go off . " do not think it fit to tell he uncle all the particular of that courtship which have pass between himself and the young lady . " a man might go farther and fare worse , , " the major say , still look queerly at he nephew . " she birth , sir ; she father be the mate of a ship , they say : and she have not money enough , " object , in a dandified manner . " what be ten thousand pound and a girl breed up like she ? " " you use my own word , and it be all very well . but , I tell you in confidence , , -- in strict honour , mind , -- that it be my belief she have a devilish deal more than ten thousand pound : and from what I see of she the other day , and -- and have heard of she -- I should say she be a devilish accomplished , clever girl : and would make a good wife with a sensible husband . " " how do you know about she money ? " ask , smile . " you seem to have information about everybody , and to know about all the town . " " I do know a few thing , sir , and I do not tell all I know . Mark that , " the uncle reply . " and as for that charme , -- for charming , begad ! she be , -- if I see she , I should neither be sorry nor surprised , begad
begad ! and if you object to ten thousand pound , what would you say , sir , to thirty , or forty , or fifty ? " and the major look still more knowingly , and still harder at . " well , sir , " he say to he godfather and nameake , " make she . you can do it as well as I . " " Psha ! you be laugh at I , sir , " the other reply rather peevishly , " and you ought not to laugh so near a church gate . here we be at 's . they say be a beautiful preacher . " indeed , the bell be toll , the people be troo into the handsome church , the carriage of the inhabitant of the lordly quarter pour forth they pretty load of devote , in whose company and he uncle , end they edifying conversation , enter the fane . I do not know whether other people carry they worldly affair to the church door . , who , from habitual reverence and feeling , be always more than respectful in a place of worship , think of the incongruity of they talk , perhaps ; whilst the old gentleman at he side be utterly unconscious of any such contrast . he hat be brush : he wig be trim : he neckcloth be perfectly tie . he look at every soul in the congregation , it be true : the bald head and the bonnet , the flower and the feather : but so demurely that he hardly lift up he eye from he book -- from he book which he could not read without glass . as for Pen's gravity , it be sorely put to the test when , upon look by chance towards the seat where the servants be collect , he spy out , by the side of a demure gentleman in plush , , , who have discover this place of devotion . follow the direction of 's eye , which stray a good deal from he book , find that it alight upon a yellow bonnet and a pink one : and that these bonnet be on the head of and . if Pen's uncle be not the only man who have talk about he worldly affairs up to the church door , be poor Foker the only one who have bring he worldly love into the aisle ? when the congregation issue forth at the conclusion of the service , be out amongst the first , but come up with he presently , as he be hanker about the entrance , which he be unwilling to leave , until my lady 's barouche , with the bewig coachman , have borne away its mistress and she daughter from they devotion . when the two lady come out , they find together the Pendennise , uncle and nephew , and , , suck the crook of he stick , stand there in the sunshine . to see and to ask to eat be simultaneous with the good - natured , and she invite the three gentleman to luncheon straightway . Blanche be , too , particularly gracious . " o ! do come , " she say to , " if you be not too great a man . I want so to talk to you about -- but we must not say what , here , you know . what would say ? " and the young devotee jump into the carriage after she mamma .--" I have read every word of it . it be adorable , " she add , still address herself to . " I know who be , " say , make rather a pert bow . " what be the row about ? " ask , rather puzzl . " I suppose Clavering mean ' , ' " say the major , look know , and nodd at . " I suppose so , sir . there be a famous review in the this morning . it be 's do though , and I must not be too proud . " " a review in ?-- ? what the doose do you mean ? " ask . " die of the measle , poor little beggar , when we be at . I remember he mother come up . " " you be not a literary man , , " say , laugh , and hook he arm into he friend 's . " you must know I have be write a novel , and some of the papers have speak very well of it . perhaps you do not read the ? " " I read 's life regular , old boy , " answer : at which laugh again , and the three gentleman proceed in great good - humour to 's house . the subject of the novel be resume after luncheon by , who indeed love poet and man of letter if she love anything , and be sincerely a artist in feeling . " some of the passage in the book make I cry , positively they do , " she say . say , with some fatuity , " I be happy to think I have a part of vos larme , , " -- and the major ( who have not read more than six page of Pen's book ) put on he sanctified look , say , " yes , there be some passage quite affect , mon 'ous affect : " and , -- " oh , if it make you cry ," -- declare she would not read it , " that she would not . " " do not , mamma , " Blanche say , with a french shrug of she shoulders ; and then she fall into a rhapsody about the
the book , about the snatch of poetry intersperse in it about the two heroine , and ; about the two heroe , and he rival the young -- " and what good company you introduce we to , " say the young lady archly " quel ton ! how much of you life have you pass at court , and be you a prime minister 's son , ? " begin to laugh - - " it be as cheap for a novelist to create a as to make a , " he say . " shall I tell you a secret , ? I promote all my character at the request of the publisher . the young be only a young when the novel be first write ; he false friend , the Viscount , be a simple commoner and so on with all the character of the story . " " what a wicked , satirical , pert young man you have become ! Comme vous voila forme ! " say the young lady . " how different from of the country ! ah ! I think I like of the country best , though ! " and she give he the full benefit of she eye , -- both of the fond appeal glance into he own , and of the modest look downward towards the carpet , which show off she dark eyelid and long fringed lash . Pen of course protest that he have not change in the least , to which the young lady replie by a tender sigh ; and think that she have do quite enough to make happy or miserable ( as the case might be ) , she proceed to cajeal he companion , , who during the literary conversation have sate silently imbib the head of he cane , and wish that he be a clever chap like that . if the major think that by tell of 's engagement to he cousin , ( which information the old gentleman neatly convey to the girl as he sate by she side at luncheon below - stair ) , -- if , we say , the major think that the knowledge of this fact would prevent Blanche from pay any further attention to the young heir of 's , he be entirely mistaken . she become only the more gracious to : she praise he , and everything belong to he ; she praise he mamma ; she praise the pony which he ride in the ; she praise the lovely breloque or gimcrack which the young gentleman wore at he watch - chain , and that dear little darling of a cane , and those dear little delicious monkey ' head with ruby eye , which ornament 's shirt , and form the buttons of he waistcoat . and then , have praise and coax the weak youth until he blush and tingle with pleasure , and until think she really have go quite far enough , she take another theme . " I be afraid be a very sad young man , " she say , turn round to . " he do not look so , " answer with a sneer . " I mean we have hear sad story about he . have not we , mamma ? what be say here , the other day , about that party at ? of you naughty creature ! " but here , see that 's countenance assume a great expression of alarm , while wear a look of amusement , she turn to the latter and say , " I believe you be just as bad : I believe you would have like to have be there , -- would not you ? I know you would : yes -- and so should I . " " Lor , Blanche ! " mamma cry . " well , I would . I never see a actress in my life . I would give anything to know one ; for I adore talent . and I adore , that I do ; and I adore , and I say , I should like to go there . " " why should not we three bachelor , " the major here break out , gallantly , and to he nephew 's special surprise , " beg these lady to honour we with they company at ? be Claver to go on for ever be hospitable to we , and may we make no return ? speak for yourselves , young man , -- eh , begad ! here be my nephew , with he pockets full of money -- he pockets full , begad ! and , who , as I have hear say , be pretty well to do in the world , -- how be you lovely cousin , , ?-- here be these two young one , -- and they allow a old fellow like I to speak . , will you do I the favour to be my guest ? and miss Blanche shall be 's , if she will be so good . " " oh , delightful ! " cry Blanche . " I like a bit of fun too , " say ; and we will take some day when ---- " " when dine out , -- yes , mamma , " the daughter say , " it will be charme . " and a charming day it be . the dinner be order at , and , though he do not invite , have some delicious opportunity of conversation with she during the repast , and afterwards on the balcony of they room at the hotel , and again during the drive home in she ladyship 's barouche . come down with he uncle , in 's brougham , which the major borrowed for the occasion . " I be
be a old soldier , begad , " he say , " and I learn in early life to make myself comfortable . " and , be a old soldier , he allow the two young man to pay for the dinner between they , and all the way home in the brougham he rally , about 's evident partiality for he : praise she good look , spirit , and wit : and again tell in the strictest confidence , that she would be a devilish deal richer than people think . contain a novel incident some account have be give , in a former part of this story , how , during he residence at home , after he defeat at , have occupy himself with various literary composition , and amongst other work , have write the greater part of a novel . this book , write under the influence of he youthful embarrassment , amatory and pecuniary , be of a very fierce , gloomy , and passionate sort , -- the Byronic despair , the Wertherian despondency , the mocking bitterness of Mephistophele of , be all reproduce and develop in the character of the hero ; for we youth have just be learn the german language , and imitate , as almost all clever lad do , he favourite poet and writer . Passage in the volume once so love , and now read so seldom , still bear the mark of the pencil with which he note they in those day . Tears fall upon the leaf of the book , perhaps , or blister the page of he manuscript as the passionate young man dash he thought down . if he take up the book afterwards he have no ability or wish to sprinkle the leave with that early dew of former time : he pencil be no longer eager to score it be mark of approval : but as he look over the page of he manuscript , he remember what have be overflow feeling which have cause he to blot it , and the pain which have inspire the line . if the secret history of book could be write , and the author 's private thought and meaning no down alongside of he story , how many insipid volume would become interesting , and dull tale excite the reader ! many a bitter smile pass over face as he read he novel , and recal the time and feeling which give it birth . how pompous some of the grand passage appear ; and how weak be other in which he think he have express he full heart ! this page be imitate from a then favourite author , as he could now clearly see and confess , though he have believe himself to be write originally then . as he muse over certain line he recollect the place and hour where he write they : the ghost of the dead feeling come back as he muse , and he blush to review the faint image . and what mean those blot on the page ? as you come in the desert to a ground where camel ' hoof be mark in the clay , and trace of withered herbage be yet visible , you know that water be there once ; so the place in Pen's mind be no longer green , and the fon lacrymarum be dry up . he use this simile one morning to , as the latter sate over he pipe and book , and , with much gesticulation accord to he will not when excited , and with a bitter laugh , thump he manuscript down on the table , make the tea - thing rattle , and , the blue milk dance in the jug . on the previous night he have take the manuscript out of a long -neglected chest , contain old shoot jacket , old scribbling - book , he old surplice , and batter cap and gown , and other memorial of youth , school , and home . he read in the volume in bed until he fall asleep , for the commencement of the tale be somewhat dull , and he have come home tired from a evening party . " by ! " say , thump down he papers , " when I think that these be write but very few year ago , I be asham of my memory . I write this when I believe myself be eternally in love with that little coquette , . I use to carry down verse to she , and put they into the hollow of a tree , and dedicate they ' . ' " " that be a sweet little play upon word , " remark , with a puff " Amory -- . it show proof of scholarship . let we hear a bit of the rubbish . " and he stretch over from he easy - chair , and catch hold of Pen' manuscript with the fire - tong , which he be just use in order to put a coal into he pipe . thus , in possession of the volume , he begin to read out from the ' leaves from the life - book of . ' " ' false as thou be beautiful ! heartless as thou be fair ! mockery of passion ! ' cry , address ; ' what evil spirit hath send thee to torture I so ? of .----' " " cut that part , " cry out , make a dash at the book , which , however , he comrade would not release . " well ! do not read it out at any rate . that be about my other flame , my first -- Lady Mirabel that be now . I see she last night at 's . she ask I to
to a party at she house , and say that , as old friend , we ought to meet oftener . she have be see I any time these two year in town , and never think of invite I before ; but see talk to I , and , the french literary man , who have a dozen order on , and might have pass for a of , she condescende to invite I . the Clavering be to be there on the same evening . will not it be exciting to meet one 's two flame at the same table ? " " two flame !-- two heap of burnt - out cinder , " say . " be both the beauty in this book ? " " both , or something like they , " say . " , who marry the , be the Fotheringay . I draw the from , with whom I be at ; it be a little like he ; and be . by gad , that first woman ! I think of she as I walk home from 's in the moonlight ; and the whole early scene come back to I as if they have be yesterday . and when I get home , I pull out the story which I write about she and the other three year ago : do you know , outrageous as it be , it have some good stuff in it , and if will not publish it , I think . " " that be the way of poets , " say . " they fall in love , jilt , or be jilt ; they suffer and they cry out that they suffer more than any other mortal : and when they have experience feeling enough they note they down in a book , and take the book to market . all poets be humbug , all literary man be humbug ; directly a man begin to sell he feeling for money he be a humbug . if a poet get 's a pain in he side from too good a dinner , he bellow louder than . " " I suppose a poet have a greater sensibility than another man , " say , with some spirit . " that be what make he a poet . I suppose that he see and feel more keenly : it be that which make he speak , of what he feel and see . you speak eagerly enough in you lead article when you espy a false argument in a opponent , or detect a quack in the house . , who do not care for anything else in the world , will talk for a hour about a question of law . give another the privilege which you take yourself , and the free use of he faculty , and let he be what nature have make he . why should not a man sell he sentimental thought as well as you you political idea , or he legal knowledge ? each alike be a matter of experience and practice . it be not money which cause you to perceive a fallacy , or to argue a point ; but a natural or acquire aptitude for that kind of truth : and a poet set down he thought and experience upon paper as a painter do a landscape or a face upon canva , to the best of he ability , and accord to he particular gift . if ever I think I have the stuff in I to write a epic , by I will try if I only feel that I be good enough to crack a joke or tell a story , I will do that . " " not a bad speech , young one , " say , but that do not prevent all poet from be humbug . " " what -- , , and all ? " " they name be not to be breath in the same sense with you pigmy , " say : " there be man and man , sir . " " well , be a man who write for money , just as you and I do , " answer , at which confound he impudence , and resume he pipe and he manuscript . there be not the slightest doubt then that this document contain a great deal of Pen's personal experience , and that ' from the life - book of ' would never have be write but for 's own private grief , passion , and folly . as we have become acquainted with these in the first volume of he biography , it will not be necessary to make large extract from the novel of ' , ' in which the young gentleman have depict such of they as he think be likely to interest the reader , or be suitable for the purpose of he story . now , though he have keep it in he box for nearly half of the period during which , accord to the Horatian maxim , a work of art ought to lie ripening ( a maxim , the truth of which may , by the way , be question altogether ) , have not bury he novel for this time , in order that the work might improve , but because he do not know where else to bestow it , or have no particular desire to see it . a man who think of put away a composition for ten year before he shall give it to the world , or exercise he own maturer judgment upon it , have best be very sure of the original strength and durability of the work ; otherwise on withdraw it from its crypt he may find , that like small wine it have lose what flaavor it once have
have , and be only tasteless when open . there be work of all taste and smack , the small and the strong , those that improve by age , and those that will not bear keep at all , but be pleasant at the first dratch , when they refresh and sparkle . now have never any notion , even in the time of he youthful inexperience and fervour of imagination , that the story he be write be a masterpiece of composition , or that he be the equal of the great author whom he admire ; and when he now review he little performance , he be keenly enough alive to its fault , and pretty modest regard its merit . it be not very good , he think ; but it be as good as most book of the kind that have the run of circulating library and the career of the season . he have critically examine more than one fashionable novel by the author of the day then popular , and he think that he intellect be as good as theirs and that he could write the english language as well as those ladie or gentleman ; and as he now run over he early performance , he be pleased to find here and there passage exhibit both fancy and vigour , and trait , if not of genius , of genuine passion and feel . this , too , be 's verdict , when that severe crintic , after half a hour 's perusal of the manuscript , and the consumption of a couple of pipe of tobacco , laid 's book down , yawn portentously . " I can not read any more of that balderdash now , " he say ; " but it seem to I there be some good stuff in it , , my boy . there be a certain greenness and freshness in it which I like somehow . the bloom disappear off the face of poetry after you begin to shave . you can not get up that naturalness and artless rosy tint in after day . you cheek be pale , and have get fade by exposure to even party , and you be obliged to take curling - iron , and macassar , and the deuce - know - what to you whisker ; they curl ambrosially , and you be very grand and genteel , and so forth ; but , ah ! , the spring - time be the best . " " what the deuce have my whisker to do with the subject in hand ? " say ( who , perhaps , may have be nettle by 's allusion to those ornament , which , to say the truth , the young man coax , and curl , and oil , and perfume , and pet , in rather a absurd manner ) . " do you think we can do anything with ' ' ? shall we take he to the publisher , or make a auto - day - fe of he ? " " I do not see what be the good of incremation , " say , " though I have a great mind to put he into the fire , to punish you atrocious humbug and hypocrisy . shall I burn he indeed ? you have much too great a value for he to hurt a hair of he head . " " have I ? here go , " say , and ' ' go off the table , and be flung on to the coal . but the fire have do its duty of boil the young man 's breakfast - kettle , have give up work for the day , and have go out , as know very well ; with a scornful mile , once more take up the manuscript with the tong from out of the harmless cinder . " oh , , what a humbug you be ! " say ; " and what be worst of all , sir , a clumsy humbug . I see you look to see that the fire be out before you send ' ' behind the bar . no , we will not burn he : we will carry he to the , and sell he . we will exchange he away for money , yea , for silver and gold , and for beef and for liquor , and for tobacco and for raiment . this youth will fetch some price in the market ; for he be a comely lad , though not over strong ; but we will fate he up and give he the bath , and curl he hair , and we will sell he for a hundred piaster to or to . the rubbish be saleable enough , sir ; and my advice to you be this : the next time you go home for a holiday , take ' ' in you carpet - bag -- give he a more modern air , prune away , though sparingly , some of the green passage , and add a little comedy , and cheerfulness , and satire , and that sort of thing , and then we will take he to market , and sell he . the book be not a wonder of wonder , but it will do very well . " " do you think so , ? " say , delight , for this be great praise from he cynical friend . " you silly young fool ! I think it be uncommonly clever , " say in a kind voice . " so do you , sir . " and with the manuscript which he hold in he hand he playfully strike on the cheek . that part of countenance turn as red as it have ever do in the earliest day
day of he blush : he grasp the other 's hand and say , " thank you , , " with all he might : and then he retire to he own room with he book , and pass the greater part of the day upon he bed re-read it ; and he do as have advise , and alte not a little , and add a great deal , until at length he have fashio ' ' pretty much into the shape in which , as the respect novel - reader know , it subsequently appear . whilst he be at work upon this performance , the good - nature artfully inspire the two gentleman who " read " for Messrs . and with the greatest curiosity regard ' , ' and point out the peculiar merit of its distinguished author . it be at the period when the novel , call ' the Fashionable , ' be in vogue among we ; and do not fail to point out , as before , how be a man of the very first fashion himself , and receive at the house of some of the greatest personage in the land . the simple and kind - hear be bring to bear upon , whom he inform that he friend be occupy upon a work of the most exciting nature ; a work that the whole town would run after , full of wit , genius , satire , patho , and every conceivable good quality . we have say before , that know no more about novel than he do about or , and neither read nor understand any of the book which he publish and pay for ; but he take he opinion from he professional adviser and from , and , evidently with a view to a commercial transaction , ask and to dinner again . , when he find that be about to treat , of course , begin to be anxious and curiious , and desire to outbid he rival . be anything settle between and the odious house " over the way " about the new book ? , the confidential reader , be tell to make inquiry , and see if any thing be to be do , and the result of the inquirie of that diplomatist be , that one morning , himself toil up the staircase of and to the door on which the name of , and , be pain . for a gentleman of fashion as poor be represent to be , it must be confess , that the apartment he and he friend occupy be not very suitable . the ragged carpet have grow only more rag during the two year of not occupancy : a constant odour of tobacco perfume the sitting - room : tumble over the laundress 's bucket in the passage through which he have to pass ; 's shooting - jacket be as tatter at the elbow as usual ; and the chair which be request to take on entering , break down with the publisher . burst out laugh , say that have get the game chair , and bawl out to to fetch a sound one from he bedroom . and see the publisher look round the dingy room with a air of profound pity and wonder , ask he whether he do not think the apartment be elegant , and if he would like , for 's draw - room , any of the article of furniture ? 's character as a humourist be know to : " I never can make that chap out , " the publisher be hear to say , " or tell whether he be in earnest or only chaff . " it be very possible that would have set the two gentleman down as impostor altogether , but that there chance to be on the breakfast - table certain card of invitation which the post of the morning have bring in for , and which happen to come from some very exalted personage of the beau - monde , into which we young man have he introduction . look down upon these , see that the Marchioness of would be at home to upon a give day , and that another lady of distinction propose to have dancing at she house upon a certain future evening . see the admiring publisher eyee these document . " ah , " say he , with a air of simplicity , " be one of the most affable young man I ever know , . here be a young fellow that dine with all the man in , and yet he will take he mutton - chop with you and I quite contentedly . there be nothing like the affability of the old English gentleman . " " oh no , nothing , " say . " and you wonder why he should go on live up three pair of stair with I , do not you now ? well , it be a queer taste . but we be fond of each other ; and as I can not afford to live in a great house , he come and stay in these rickety old chamber with I . he be a man that can afford to live anywhere . " " I fancy it do not cost he much here , " think , and the object of these praise presently enter the room from he adjacent sleeping apartment . then begin to speak upon the subject of he visit ; say he hear that have a manuscript novel ; profess himself anxious to have a sight of that work , and have no doubt that they could come to term respect it . what would be he price for it ? would he give the refusal of it ? he would find we house a liberal
liberal house , and so forth . the delighted assume a air of indifference , and say that he be already in treaty with , and could give no definite answer . this pique the other into such liberal , though vague offer , that begin to fancy be opening to he , and that he fortune be make from that day . I shall not mention what be the sum of money which finally receive for the first edition of he novel of ' , ' lest other young literary aspirant should expect to be as lucky as he be , and unprofessional person forsake they own calling , whatever they may be , for the sake of supplye the world with novel , whereor there be already a sufficiency . let no young people be misl and rush fatally into romance - write : for one book which succeed let they remember the many that fail , I do not say deservedly or otherwise , and wholesomely abstain or if they venture , at least let they do so at they own peril . as for those who have already write novel , this warning be not address , of course , to they . let they take they ware to market ; let they apply to and , and all the publisher in the row , or the metropolis , and may they be happy in they venture . this world be so wide , and the taste of mankind happily so various , that there be always a chance for every man , and he may win the prize by he genius or by he good fortune . but what be the chance of success or failure ; of obtain popularity , or of hold it when achieve ? one man go over the ice , which bear he , and a score who follow flounder in . in fine , 's be a exceptional case , and apply to himself only and I assert solemnly , and will to the last maintain , that it be one thing to write a novel , and another to get money for it . by merit , then , or good fortune , or the skilful play off of against which perform ( and which a amateur novelist be quite welcome to try upon any two publisher in the trade ) , be actually sell for a certain sum of money to one of the two eminent patron of letter whom we have introduce to we reader . the sum be so considerable that think of open a account at a banker 's , or of keep a cab and horse , or of descending into the first floor of into newly furnished apartment , or of migrating to the fashionable end of the town . major Pendennis advise the latter move strongly ; he open he eye with wonder when he hear of the good luck that have befall ; and which the latter , as soon as it occur , haste eagerly to communicate to he uncle . the major be almost angry that should have earn so much money . " who the doose read this kind of thing ? " he think to himself when he hear of the bargain which have make . " I never read you novel and rubbish . , who certainly make I laugh , I do not think I have look into a book of the sort these thirty year . ! Pen's a lucky fellow . I should think he might write one of these in a month now , -- say a month , -- that be twelve in a year . , he may go on spinn this nonsense for the next four to five year , and make a fortune . in the meantime I should wish he to live properly , take respectable apartment , and keep a brougham . " and on this simple calculation it be that the major counsell , laugh , tell what he uncle 's advice have be but he luckily have a much more reasonable counsellor than the old gentleman in the person of he friend , and in he own conscience , which say to he , " be grateful for this piece of good fortune ; do not plunge into any extravagancy . pay back ! " and he write a letter to she , in which he tell she he thanks and he regard ; and enclose to she such a instalment of he debt as nearly wip it off . the widow and herself might well be affect by the letter . it be write with genuine tenderness and modesty ; and old when he read a passage in the letter , in which , with a honest heart full of gratitude , humbly thank for he present prosperity , and for send he such dear and kind friend to support he in he ill fortune , -- when read this portion of the letter , he voice falter , and he eye twinkle behind he spectacle , and when he have quite finish read the same , and have take he glass off he nose , and have fold up the paper and give it back to the widow , I be constrain to say , that after hold 's hand for a minute , the draw that lady towards he and fairly kiss she : at which salute , of course , Helen burst out cry on the Doctor 's shoulder , for she heart be too full to give any other reply : and the Doctor blush at great deal after he feat , lead the lady , with a bow , to the sofa , on which he seat himself by she ; and he mumble out , in a low voice , some word of a great poet whom
whom he love very much , and who describe how in the day of he prosperity he have make " the widow 's heart to s for joy . " " the letter do the boy very great honour , very great honour , my dear , " he say , pat it as it lay on 's knee -- " and I think we have all reason to be thankful for it -- very thankful . I need not tell you in what quarter , my dear , for you be a sainted woman : yes , , my love , you mother be a sainted woman . and , ma'am , I shall order a copy of the book for myself , and another at the . " we may be sure that the widow and walk out to meet the mail which bring they they copy of Pen's precious novel , as soon as that work be print and ready for delivery to the public and that they read it to each other : and that they also read it privately and separately , for when the widow come out of she room in she dressing - gown at one o'clock in the morning with volume two , which she have finish , she find devour volume three in bed . do not say much about the book , but pronounce that it be a happy mixture of , and , and , and be quite certain that she son be the greatest genius , as he be the best son , in the world . do not think about the book and the author , although she say so little ? at least she think about . kind as he tone be , it vex she . she do not like he eagerness to repay that money . she would rather that she brother have take she gift as she intend it : and be pain that there should be money calculation between they . he letter from , write with the good - natured wish to amuse he mother , be full of description of the famious people and the entertainment and magnificence of the great city . everybody be flatter he and spoil he , she be sure . be he not look to some great marriage , with that cunning uncle for a Mentor ( between whom and there be always a antipathy ) , that inveterate worldling , whose whole thought be bend upon pleasure and rank and fortune ? he never allude to -- to old time , when he speak of she . he have forget they and she , perhaps have he not forget other thing and people ? these thought may have pass in 's mind , though she do not , she could not , confide they to . she have one more secret , too , from that lady , which she could not divulge , perhaps because she know how the widow would have rejoice to know it . this regard a event which have occur during that visit to , which have pay in the last holiday : when be at home with he mother , and when , suppose to be so cold and so ambitious , have formally offer he hand to . no one except herself and she admirer knew of this proposal : or that have be reject by she , and probably the reason she give to the mortified young man himself be not those which actuate she refusal , or those which she choose to acknowledge to herself . " I never , " she tell , " can accept such a offer as that which you make I , which you own be unknown to you family as I be sure it would be unwelcome to they . the difference of rank between we be too great . you be very kind to I here -- too good and kind , dear -- but I be little better than a dependant . " " a dependant ! who ever so thing of you ? you be the equal of all the world , " Pynsent break out . " I be a dependent at home , too , " say , sweetly , and indeed I would not be otherwise . leave early a poor orphan , I have find the kindest and tenderest of mother , and I have vow never to leave she -- never . pray do not speak of this again -- here , under you relative 's roof , or elsewhere . it be impossible . " " if ask you herself , will you listen to she ? " Pynsent cry eagerly . " no , " say . " I beg you never to speak of this any more . I must go away if you do " -- and with this she leave he . never ask for 's intercession ; he know how vain it be to look for that : and he never speak again on that subject to or to any person . when at length the famous novel appear it not only meet with applause from more impartial critic than , but , luckily for it suit the taste of the public , and obtain a quick and considerable popularity before two month were over , have the satisfaction and surprise of see the second edition of ' ' advertise in the newspaper ; and enjoy the pleasure of read and send home the critique of various literary journal and reviewer upon he book . they censure do not much affect he ; for the good - natured young man be dispose to accept with considerable humility the dispraise of other . do they praise elate he over much ; for , like most honest person he have he own opinion about he own performance ,
, and when a critic praise he in the wrong place he be rather hurt than pleas by the compliment . but if a review of he work be very laudatory , it be a great pleasure to he to send it home to he mother at Fairoaks , and to think of the joy which it would give there . there be some nature , and perhaps , as we have say , 's be one , which be improve and soften by prosperity and kindness , as there be man of other disposition , who become arrogant and graceless under good fortune . happy he , who can endure one or the other with modesty and good - humour ! lucky he who have be educate to bear he fate , whatsoever it may be , by a early example of uprightness , and a childish training in honour ! breed up , like a bailiff or a shabby attorney , about the purlieus of the of , 's be always to be find in the close neighbourhood of 's - , and the Temple . some where behind the black gable and smutty chimney - stack of , , , the quadrangle lie , hide from the outer world ; and it be approach by curiious passage and ambiguous smoky alley , on which the sun have forget to shine . Slop - seller , brandy - ball and hard - bake vendor , purveyor of theatrical print for youth , dealer in dingy furniture and bedding suggestive of anything but sleep , line the narrow wall and dark casement with they ware . the door be many - bell : and crowd of dirty child from endless group about the step : or around the shell - fish dealer ' tray in these court ; whereor the damp pavement resound with patten , and be drabble with a never - fail mud . ballad - singer come and chant here , in deadly guttural tone , satirical song against the administration , against the bishop and dignify clergy , against the german relative of a august royal family : punch set up he theatre , sure of a audience , and occasionally of a halfpenny from the swarm occupant of the house : woman scream after they child for loitering in the gutter , or , worse still , against the husband who come reel from the gin - shop ; -- there be a ceaseless din and life in these court out of which you pass into the tranquil , old - fashioned quadrangle of 's . in a mangy little grass - plat in the centre rise up the statue of shepherd , defend by iron railing from the assault of boy . the hall of the , on which the founder 's arm be paint , occupy one side of the square , the tall and ancient chamber be carry round other two side , and over the central archway , which lead into , and so into the great thoroughfare . the may have be occupy by lawyer once : but the laity have long since be admit into its precinct , and I do not know that any of the principal legal firm have they chamber here . the office of the and occupy one set of the ground - floor chamber ; the Registry of patent Inventions and Union of and , another ; -- the only gentleman whose name figure here , and in the " law list , " be , who wear mustachio , and who come in he cab twice or thrice in a week ; and whose West end office be in , , where entertain the nobility and gentry to whom she husband lend money . there , and on he glazed card , he be ; here he be and ; and the same tuft which ornament he ching , sprout from the under lip of the rest of the firm . it be splendid to see he cab - horse harness blaze with heraldic bearing , as the vehicle stop at the door lead to he chamber : the horse fling froth off he nostril as he chafe and toss under the shining bit . the rein and the breech of the groom be glitter white , -- the lustre of that equipage make a sunshine in that shady place . we old friend , , have examine 's cab and horse many a afternoon , as he traile about the court in he carpet slipper and dressing - gown , with he old hat cock over he eye . he sun himself there after he breakfast when the day be suitable ; and go and pay a visit to the porter 's lodge , where he pat the head of the child , and talk to about the thayatre and I daughther . be herself in the profession once , and dance at the Wells in early day as the thirteenth of 's forty pupil . Costigan live in the third floor at no. 4 , in the room which be 's , and whose name be still on the door --( somebody else 's name , by the way , be on almost all the door in 's ) . when ( the pleasing tenor singer , , and at the ) marry , and go to live at , he ced he chamber to and , who occupy they in common now , and you may often hear the tone of 's piano of fine day when the window be open , acid when he be practise for amusement , or for the instruction of a theatrical pupil , of whom he have one or two . be one , the porteress 's daughter , who have hear tell of she mother 's theatrical glory , which she long to
to emulate . she have a good voice and a pretty face and figure for the stage ; and she prepare the room and make the bed and breakfast for Messrs . and , in return for which the latter instruct she in music and singe . but for he unfortunate propensity to liquor ( and in that excess she suppose that all man of fashion indulge ) , she think the the finest gentleman in the world , and believe in all the version of all he story , and she be very fond of too , and very grateful to he , and this shy queer old gentleman have a fatherly fondness for she too , for in truth he heart be full of kindness , and he be never easy unless he love somebody . have have the carriage of visitor of distinction before he humble door in 's : and to hear he talk of a morning ( for he evening song be of a much more melancholy nature ) you would fancy that and be in the constant habit of call at he chamber , and bring with they the select nobility to visit the " old man , the honest old half - pay , poor old , " as call himself . the truth be , that have leave she husband 's card ( which have be stick in the little look - glass over the mantelpiece of the sitting - room at no. 4 , for these many month past ) , and have come in person to see she father , but not of late day . a kind person , dispose to discharge she duty gravely , upon she marriage with she settle a little pension upon she father , who occasionally be admit to the table of he daughter and son - in - law . at first poor 's behaviour " in the hoight of poloit societee , " as he denominate 's drawing - room table , be harmless , if it be absurd . as he clothed he person in he best attire , so he selecte the longest and richest word in he vocabulary to deck he conversation , and adopt a solemnity of demeanour which strike with astonishment all those person in whose company he happen to be .-- " be you Leedyship in the pork to dee ? " he would demand of he daughter . " I look for you equipage in veen :-- the poor old man be not gratify by the soight of he daughther 's choriot . , I see you neem at the ; many be the at the Castle at that poor old have attend in he time . do the look pretty well ? , I will call at and lave I cyard upon 'um . I thank ye , , a little dthrop more champeane . " indeed , he be magnificent in he courtesy to all , and address he observation not only to the master and the guest , but to the domestic who wait at the table , and who have some difficulty in maintain they professional gravity while they wait on . on the first two or three visit to he son - in - law , maintain a strict sobriety , content to make up for he lose time when he get to the , where he brag about he son - in - law 's dart and burgundee , until he own utterance begin to fail he , over he sixth tumbler of whisky - punch . but with familiarity he caution vanish , and poor cos lamentably disgrace himself at 's table , by premature inebriation . a carriage be call for he : the hospitable door be shut upon he . often and sadly do he speak to he friend at the of he resemblance to in the plee -- of he have a thankless choild , bedad -- of he be a pore worn - out lonely old man , dthrive to dthrink by ingratitude , and seek to dthrow he sorrow in punch . it be painful to be oblige to record the weakness of fathers , but it must be furthermore tell of , that when he credit be exhaust and he money go , he would not unfrequently beg money from he daughter , and make statement to she not altogether consistent with strict truth . on one day a bailiff be about to lead he to prison , he write , " unless the -- to you insignificant -- sum of three pound five can be forthcome to liberate a poor man 's grey hair from gaol . " and the good -natured despatch the money necessary for she father 's liberation , with a caution to he to be more economical for the future . on a second occasion the meet with a frightful accident , and break a plate - glass window in the , for which the proprietor of the shop hold he liable . the money be forthcome on this time too , to repair she papa 's disaster , and be carry down by 's servant to the slipshod messenger and aide - de - camp of the , who bring the letter announce he mishap . if the servant have follow the 's aide - de - camp who carry the remittance , he would have see that gentleman , a person of 's country too ( for have we not say , that however poor a irish gentleman be , he always have a poorer irish gentleman to run on he errand and transact he pecuniary affair ? ) , call a cab from the nearest stand , and rattle down to the , , , where the be indeed in pawn , and for several glassis contain rum -and - water , or other spirituous
spirituous refreshment , of which he and he staff have partake . on a third melancholy occasion he write that he be attack by illness , and want money to pay the physician whom he be compelle to call in ; and this time , alarme about she father 's safety , and perhaps reproach herself that she have of late lose sight of she father , call for she carriage and drive to 's , at the gate of which she alight , whence she find the way to she father 's chamber , " no. 4 , third floor , name of over the door , " the porteress say , with many curtsy , point towards the door of the house , into which the affectionate daughter enter and mount the dingy stair . ! the door , surmount by the name of , be open to she by poor cos in he shirt -sleeve , and prepare with the gridiron to receive the mutton - chop which have go to purchase . also , it be not pleasant for to have letter constantly address to he at 's , with the information that be in the hall , wait for a answer ; or when he go to play he rubber at the traveller ' , to be oblige to shoot out of he brougham and run up the step rapidly , lest he father - in -law should seize upon he ; and to think that while he read he paper or play he whist , the be walk on the opposite side of , with that dreadful cock hat , and the eye beneath it fix steadily upon the window of the club . be a weak man ; he be old , and have many infirmity : he cry about he father - in - law to he wife , whom he adore with senile infatuation : he say he must go abroad , -- he must go and live in the country -- he should die or have another fit if he see that man again -- he know he should . and it be only by pay a second visit to , and represent to he , that if he plague Charles by letter or address he in the street , or make any further application for loans , he allowance would be withdraw altogether , that be enable to keep she papa in order , and to restore tranquillity to she husband . and on occasion of this visit , she sternly rebuk for not keep a better watch over the captain ; desire that he should not be allow to drink in that shameful way ; and that the people at the horrid tavern which he frequent should be tell , upon no account to give he credit . " 's conduct be bring I to the grave , " she say ( though she look perfectly healthy ) , " and you , as a old man , , and one that pretend to have a regard for we , ink to be asham of abett he in it . " those be the thanks which honest get for he friendship and he life 's devotion . and I do not suppose that the old philosopher be much worse off than many other man , or have greater reason to grumble . on the second floor of the next house to 's , in 's , at no. 3 , live two other acquaintance of ours : , agent to the of , and . no name at all be over they door . the captain do not choose to let all the world know where he live and he card bear the address of a hotel ; and as for the of the indian potentate , he be not a envoy accredit to the court of 's or but be here on a confidential mission quite independent of the or the board of . " in fact , " strong say , " 's object be financial , and to effectuate a sale of some of the principal diamonds and ruby of the crown , he wish be not to report himself at the or in , but rather to negotiate with private capitalist -- with whom he have have important transaction both in this country and on the continent . " we have say that these anonymous chamber of 's have be very comfortably furnish since the arrival of in , and the might boast with reason to the friend who visit he , that few retire Captains be more snugly quarter than he , in he crib in 's . there be three room below : the office where strong transact he business -- whatever that might be -- and where still remain the desk and railing of the departed official who have proceed he , and the 's own bedroom and sitting - room ; and a private stair lead out of the office to two upper apartment , the one occupy by , and the other serving as the kitchen of the establishment , and the bedroom of , the attendant . these room be on a level with the apartment of we friend and next door at no. 4 ; and by reach over the communicating lead , Grady could command the mignonette - box which bloom in 's window . from 's kitchen casement often come odours still more fragrant . the three old soldier who form the garrison of no. 3 be all skill in the culinary art . be great at a irish stew ; the be famous for pillaus and curry ; and as for he could cake anything . he make french dish and spanish dish , stew , fricassee , and omelette , to perfection ; nor be there any man in more hospitable than he when
when he purse be full or he credit be good . at those happy period , he could give a friend , as he say , a good dinner , a good glass of wine , and a good song afterwards ; and poor often hear with envy the roar of 's choruse , and the musical clinking of the glassis , as he sate in he own room , so far remove and yet so near to those festivity . it be not expedient to invite always : he practice of inebriation be lamentable ; and he bore 's guest with he story when sober , and with he maudlin tear when drink . a strange and motley set they be , these friend of the ; and though major Pendennis would not much have relish they company , and like it not a little , and think it as amusing as the society of the finest gentleman in the finest house which he have the honour to frequent . there be a history about every man of the set : they see all to have have they tide of luck and bad fortune . most of they have wonderful scheme and speculation in they pocket , and plenty for make rapid and extraordinary fortune . Holt have be in 's army , when Ned strong have fight on the other side ; and be now organise a little scheme for smuggle tobacco into , which must bring thirty thousand a year to any man who would advance fifteen hundred , just to bribe the last officer of the who hold out , and have wind of the scheme . , who have be in the mexican navy , knew of a specie - ship which have be sunk in the first year of the war , with three hundred and eighty thousand dollar on board , and a hundred and eighty thousand pound in bar and doubloon . " give I eighteen hundred pound , " say , " and I be off tomorrow . I take out four man , and a diving - bell with I ; and I return in ten month to take my seat in parliament , by ! and to buy back my family estate . " , the manager of the and ( which be as yet under water ) , besides singe as good a second as any professional man , and besides the , have a , and a little quicksilver operation in view , which would set he straight with the world yet . have be everything a corporal of dragoon , a field - preacher , and missionary - agent for convert the irish ; a actor at a fair - booth , in front of which he father 's attorney find he when the old gentleman die and leave he that famous property , from which he get no rent now , and of which nobody exactly know the situation . add to these be , . , who like they society , though he do not much add to its amusement by he convivial power . but he be make much of by the company now , on account of he wealth and position in the world . he tell he little story and sang he little song or two with great affability ; and he have have he own history , too , before he accession to good fortune ; and have see the inside of more prison than one , and write he name on many a stampe paper . when not first return from , and after he have communicate with Claver from the hotel at which he have take up he quarter ( and which he have reach in a very denuded state , consider the wealth of diamonds and ruby with which this honest man be entrust ) , be send to he patron by the Baronet ; pay he little bill at the inn , and invite he to come and sleep for a night or two at the chamber , where he subsequently take up he residence . to negotiate with this man be very well , but to have such a person settle in he room , and to be constantly burthen with such society , do not suit the 's taste much ; and he grumble not a little to he principal . " I wish you would put this bear into somebody else 's cage , " he say to . " the fellow be no gentleman . I do not like walk with he . he dress himself like a nigger on a holiday . I take he to the play the other night ; and , by , sir , he abuse the actor who be do the part of villain in the play , and swore at he so , that the people in the box want to turn he out . the after - piece be the ' , ' where come in wounded , you know , and die . when he die , not begin to cry like a child , and say it be a d ---- d shame , and cry and swore so , that there be another row , and everybody laugh . then I have to take he away , because he want to take he coat off to one fellow who laugh at he ; and bellow to he to stand up like a man .-- who be he ? where the deuce do he come from ? you have best tell I the whole story . ; you must one day . you and he have rob a church together , that be my belief . you have better get it off you mind at once , Clavering , and tell I what this Altamont be , and what hold he have over
over you . " " hang he ! I wish he be dead ! " be the Baronet 's only reply ; and he countenance become so gloomy , that do not think fit to question he patron any further at that time ; but resolve , if need were , to try and discover for himself what be the secret tie between and . in which the narrate some of he Adventure Early in the forenoon of the day after the dinner in , at which not have choose to appear , the emerge from he chamber in the upper story at 's , and enter into 's sitting - room , where the sate in he easy - chair with the newspaper and he cigar . he be a man who make he tent comfortable wherever he pitch it , and long before 's arrival , have do justice to a copious breakfast of fry egg and broil rasher , which have prepare secundum artem . good -humoured and talkative , he prefer any company rather than none ; and though he have not the least liking for he fellow - lodger , and would not have grieve to hear that the accident have befall he which Claver desire so fervently , yet keep on fair term with he . he have see not to be with great friendliness on the night previous , and take away he candle for fear of accident ; and find a spirit - bottle empty , upon which he have count for he nocturnal refreshment , have drink a glass of water with perfect contentment over he pipe , before he turn into he own crib and to sleep . that enjoyment never fail he : he have always a easy temper , a faultless digestion , and a rosy cheek ; and whether he be go into action the next morning or to prison ( and both have be he lot ) , in the camp or the , the worthy snor healthfully through the night , and wake with a good heart and appetite , for the struggle or difficulty or pleasur of the day . the first act of not be to bellow to for a pint of pale ale , the which he first pour into a pewter flagon , whence he transfer it to he own lip . he put down the tankard empty , draw a great breath , wip he mouth in he dressing - gown ( the difference of the colour of he beard from he dyed whisker have long struck , who have see too that he hair be fair under he black wig , but make no remark upon these circumstance ) -- the draw a great breath , and profess himself immensly refresh by he dratch . " nothing like that beer , " he remark , " when the copper be hot . many a day I have drink a dozen of at , and -- and ---- " " and at , I suppose , " say with a laugh . " I get the beer for you on purpose : kknow you would want it after last night . " and the begin to talk about he adventur of the preceding evening . " I can not help myself , " the say , beat he head with he big hand . " I be a madman when I get the liquor on board I ; and be not fit to be trust with a spirit - bottle . when I once begin I can not stop till I have empty it ; and when I have swallow it , know what I say or what I do not say . I dine at home here quite quiet . give I just my two tumbler , and I intend to pass the evening at the and as sober as a parson . why do you leave that confound sample - bottle of Hollands out of the cupboard , Strong ? Grady must go out too , and leave I the kettle a - boiling for tea . it be of no use , I could not keep away from it . washed it all down , sir , by . and it be my belief I have some more , too , afterwards at that infernal little thief ' den . " " what , be you there too ? " strong ask , " and before you come to ? that be begin betimes . " " Early hour to be drink and clear out before nine o'clock , eh ? but so it be . yes , like a great big fool , I must go there ; and find the fellows dining , and young , and two or three more of the thief . if we would go to , I must have win . but we do not try the black and red . no , hang th'ey , they know' I would have beat th'ey at that -- I must have beat 'em -- I can not help beat 'em , I tell you . but they be too cunnin for I . that rascal get the bone out , and we play hazard on the dining - table . and I drop all the money I have from you in the morning , be hang to my luck . it be that that set I wild , and I suppose I must have be very hot about the head , for I go off think to get some more money from , I recollect ; and then -- and then I do not much remember what happen till I wake this morning , and hear old at . 4 play on he pianner . " strong muse for a while as he light he cigar with a coal , " I should
should like to know how you always draw money from , , " he say . the burst out with a laugh -- " , ha ! he owe it I , " he say . " I do not know that that be a reason with for pay , " Strong answer . " he owe plenty besides you . " " well , he give it I because he be so fond of I , " the other say with the same grinning sneer . " he love I like a brother ; you know he do , .-- no ?--he do not ?-- well , perhaps he do not ; and if you ask I no question , perhaps I will tell you no lie , -- put that in you pipe and smoke it , my boy . " " but I will give up that confound brandy - bottle , " the continue , after a pause . " I must give it up , or it will be the ruin of I . " " it make you say queer thing , " say the , look not hard in the face . " remember what you say last night , at 's table . " " ? what do I say ? " ask the other hastily . " do I split anything ? , , do I split anything ? " " ask I no question , and I will tell you no lie , " the reply on he part . strong thought of the word not have use , and he abrupt departure from the 's dining - table and house as soon as he recognise major Pendennis , or , as he call the major . but strong resolve to seek a explanation of these word otherwise than from , and do not choose to recall they to the other 's memory . " no , " he say then , " you do not split as you call it , ; it be only a trap of mine to see if I could make you speak ; but you do not say a word that anybody could comprehend -- you be too far gone for that . " so much the better , not think ; and heav a great sigh , as if relieve . strong remark the emotion , but take no notice , and the other be in a communicative mood , go on speaking . " yes , I own to my fault , " continue the Colonel . " there be some thing I can not , do what I will , resist : a bottle of brandy , a box of dice , and a beautiful woman . no man of pluck and spirit , no man as be worth he salt ever could , as I know of . there be hardly p'raps a country in the world in which they three be not get I into trouble . " " indeed ? " say . " yes , from the age of fifteen , when I run away from home , and go cabin - boy on board a , till now , when I be fifty year old , pretty nigh , they woman have always be my ruin . why , it be one of 'em , and with such black eye and jewel on she neck , and and ermine like a duchess , I tell you -- it be one of th'ey at that swept off the best part of the thousand pound as I go off with . do not I ever tell you of it ? well , I do not mind . at first I be very cautious and have such a lot of money keep it close and live like a gentleman -- , 's hotel , and that sort of thing -- never play , except at the public table , and win more than I lose . well , sir , there be a chap that I see at the hotel and the too , a regular swell fellow , with white kid glove and a tuft to he ching , - he name be , as i make acquaintance with somehow , and he ask I to dinner , and take I to Madame the 's soiree --such a woman , Strong !--such a eye ! such a hand at the pianner . bless you , she would sit down and s to you , and gaze at you , until she warble you soul out of you body a'most . she ask I to go to she evening party every Toosday ; and do not I take opera - box and give she dinner at the restauranteur 's , that be all ? but I have a run of luck at the table , and it be not in the dinner and opera - box that poor Clavering 's money go . no , be hang to it , it be sweep off in another way . one night , at the Countess 's , there be several of we at supper -- - , the Honourable Deuceace , the de la Tour de Force -- all tip - top nob , sir , and the height of fashion , when we have supper , and champagne you may be sure in plenty , and then some of that confound brandy . I would have it -- I would it go on at it -- the Countess mix the tumbler of punch for I , and we have card as well as grog after supper , and I play and drank until I do not know what I do . I be like I be last night . I be take away and put to bed somehow , and never wake until the next day , to a roaring
roaring headache , and to see my servant , who say the want to see I , and be wait in the sitting - room . ' how be you , ? ' say he , a come into my bedroom . ' how long do you stay last night after I go away ? the play be get too high for I , and I would lose enough to you for one night . ' " " 'to I , ' say I , ' how be that , my dear feller ? ( for though he be a 's son , we be as familiar as you and I ) . how be that , my dear feller ? ' say I , and he tell I , that he have borrowed thirty louis of I at vingt - et - un , that he give I a I.O.U. for it the night before , which I put into my pocket - book before he leave the room . I take out my card - case -- it be the Countess as work it for I -- and there be the sure enough , and he pay I thirty louis in gold down upon the table at my bedside . so I say he be a gentleman , and ask he if he would like to take anything , when my servant should get it for he ; but the Honourable Deuceace do not drink of a morning , and he go away to some business which he say he have . " presently there be another ring at my outer door ; and this time it be - and the Marky that come in . ' Bong jour , , ' say I . ' good morning -- no headache ? ' say he . so I say I have one ; and how I must have be uncommon queer the night afore ; but they both declare I do not show no sign of have have too much , but take my liquor as grave as a judge . " 'So , ' say the , ' Deuceace have be with you ; we meet he in the as we be come from breakfast . have he settle with you ? get it while you can : he be a slippery card ; and as he win three pony of , I recommend you to get you money while he have some . ' " ' he have pay I , ' say I ; ' but I know no more than the dead that he owe I anything , and do not remember a bit about lend he thirty louis . ' " the and look and smile at each other at this ; and say , ' Colonel , you be a queer feller . no man could have suppose , from you manners , that you have taste anything stronger than tea all night , and yet you forget thing in the morning . come , come ,-- tell that to the marine , my friend , -- we will not have it at any price . ' " 'En efet , ' say the , twiddl he little black mustachio in the chimney - glass , and make a lunge or two as he use to do at the fencing - school . ( he be a wonder at the fencing - school , and I have see he knock down the image fourteen time run , at 's . ) ' let we speak of affair . , you understand that affair of honou be best settle at once : perhaps it will not be inconvenient to you to arrange we little matters of last night . ' " ' what little matter ? ' say I . ' do you owe I any money , ? ' " ' ! ' say he ; 'do not let we have any more jesting . I have you note of hand for three hundred and forty louis . ! ' say he , take out a paper from he pocket - book . " ' and mine for two hundred and ten , ' say - , and he pull out he bit of paper . " I be in such a rage of wonder at this , that I spring out of bed , and wrap my dressing - gow round I . ' be you come here to make a fool of I ? ' say I . 'I do not owe you two hundr , or two thousand , or two louis ; and I will not pay you a farthing . do you suppose you can catch I with you note of hand ? I laugh at 'em and at you ; and I believe you to be a couple ----. ' " 'A couple of what ? ' say . ' you , of course , be aware that we be a couple of man of honour , , and not come here to trifle or to listen to abuse from you . you will either pay we or we will expose you as a cheat , and chastise you as a cheat , too , ' say . " ' Oui , parbleu , ' say the , -- but I do not mind he , for I could have throw the little fellow out of the window ; but it be different with , -- he be a large man , that weigh three stone more than I , and stand six inch higher , and I think he could have do for I . " ' yoMonsieu will pay , or yoMonsieu will give I the reason why . I believe you be little better than a polisson , , ' -- that be the phrase he use -- not say with a grin --
-- and I get plenty more of this language from the two fellow , and be in the thick of the row with they , when another of we party come in . this be a friend of mine -- a gent I have meet at , and have take to the Countess 's myself . and as he have not play at all on the previous night , and have actually warn I against and the other , I tell the story to he , and so do the other two . " 'I be very sorry , ' say he . ' you would go on play : the Countess entreate you to discontinue . these gentleman offer repeatedly to stop . it be you that insist on the large stake , not they . ' in fact he charge dead against I : and when the two other go away , he tell I how the would shoot I as sure as my name be -- be what it be . 'I leave the Countess cry , too , ' say he . ' she hate these two man ; she have warn you repeatedly against they '( which she actually have do , and often tell I never to play with they ) , ' and now , , I have leave she in hysteric almost , lest there should be any quarrel between you , and that confound should put a bullet through you head . it be my belief , ' say my friend , ' that that woman be distractedly in love with you . ' " ' do you think so ? ' say I ; upon which my friend tell I how she have actually go down on she knee to he and ' ! ' " as soon as I be dress , I go and call upon that lovely woman . she give a shriek and pretty near faint when she see I . she call I , -- I be blest if she do not . " " I think you name be , " say strong , with a laugh ; at which the blush very much behind he dyed whisker . " a man may have more name than one , may not he , strong ? " not ask . " when I be with a lady , I like to take a good one . she call I by my Christian name . she cry fit to break you heart . I can not stand see a woman cry -- never could -- not whilst I be fond of she . she say she could bear not to think of my losing so much money in she house . would not I take she diamonds and necklace , and pay part ? " I swore I would not touch a farthing 's worth of she jewellery , which perhaps I do not think be worth a great deal , -- but what can a woman do more than give you she all ? that be the sort I like , and I know there 's plenty of 'em . and I tell she to be easy about the money , for I would not pay one single farthing . " ' then they will shoot you , ' say she ; ' they will kill my . ' " " they will kill my jack would not have sound well in , " Strong say , laugh . " never mind about name , " say the other , sulkily ; " a man of honou may take any name he choose , I suppose . " " well , go on with you story , " say . " she say they would kill you . " " ' no , ' say I , ' they will not : for I will not let that scamp of a send I out of the world ; and if he lay a hand on I , I will brain he , as he be . ' " at this the Countess shrank back from I as if I have say something very shocking . ' do I understand not aright ? ' say she : ' and that a british officer refuse to meet any person who provoke he to the field of honou ? ' " ' of honou be hang , Countess , ' say I . ' you would not have I be a target for that little scoundrel 's pistol practice . ' " ' , ' say the Countess , 'I think you be a man of honour -- I think , I -- but no matter . good - bye , sir .' -- and she be swee out of the room , she voice regular choking in she pocket -handkerchief . " ' Countess ! ' say I , rush after she and seize she hand . " ' leave I , Monsieur le , ' say she , shak I off , 'my father be a General of the . a soldier should know how to pay all he debt of honou . ' " what could I do ? everybody be against I . say I have lose the money : though I do not remember a syllable about the business . I have take 's money too ; but then it be because he offer it to I you know , and that be a different thing . every one of these chap be a man of fashion and honour ; and the and the Countess of the first family in . and , by , sir , rather than offend she , I pay the money up five hundred and sixty gold Napoleons , by : besides three hundred which I lose when I have my revenge . " and I can not tell
tell you at this minute whether I be do or not , " conclude the Colonel , musing . " sometimes I think I be : but then be so fond of I . that woman would never have see I do : never , I be sure she would not : at least , if she would , I be deceive in woman . " any further revelation of he past life which not might have be dispose to confide to he honest comrade the , be interrupt by a knocking at the outer door of they chamber ; which , when open by the servant , admit no less a person than Claver into the presence of the two worthy . " the , by , " cry strong , regard the arrival of he patron with surprise . " what be bring you here ? " grow , look sternly from under he heavy eyebrow at the Baronet . " it be no good , I warrant . " and indeed , good very seldom bring Clavering into that or any other place . whenever he come into 's inn it be money that bring the unlucky baronet into those precinct ; and there be commonly a gentleman of the money - deal world in waiting for he at 's chamber , or at 's below ; and a question of bill to negotiate or to renew . be a man who have never look he debt fairly in the face , familiar as he have be with they all he life ; as long as he could renew a bill , he mind be easy regard it ; and he would sign almost anything for to - morrow , provide to - day could be leave unmolested . he be a man whom scarcely any amount of fortune could have benefit permanently , and who be make to be ruin to cheat small tradesman , to be the victim of astuter sharper : to be niggardly and reckless , and as destitute of honesty as the people who cheat he , and a dupe , chiefly because he be too mean to be a successful knave . he have tell more lie in he time , and undergone more baseness of stratagem in order to stave off a small debt , or to swindle a poor creditor , than would have suffice to make a fortune for a braver rogue . he be abject and a shuffler in the very height of he prosperity . have he be a -- he could not have be more weak , useless , dissolute or ungrateful . he could not move through life except lean on the arm of somebody : and yet he never have a agent but he mistrust he ; and mar any plan which might be arrange for he benefit , and secretly act against the people whom he employ . strong know Clavering and judge he quite correctly . it be not as friend that this pair meet : but the work for he principal , as he would when in the army have pursue a harassing march , or undergone he part in the danger and privation of a siege ; because it be he duty , and because he have agree to it . " what be it he want ? " think the officer of the Shepherd 's garrison when the come among they . he pale face expresse extreme anger and irritation . " so sir , " he say , address , " you have be at you old trick . " " which of 'um ? " ask , with a sneer . " you have be at the et Noir : you be there last night , " cry the Baronet . " how do you know , -- be you there ? " the other say . " I be at the club but it be not on the colours I play , -- ask the captain ,-- I have be tell he of it . it be with the bone . it be at hazard , , upon my word and honour it be ; " and he look at the Baronet with a know humorous mock humility , which only seem to make the other more angry . " what the deuce do I care , sir , how a man like you lose he money , and whether it be at hazard or roulette ? " scream the Baronet , with a multiplicity of oath , and at the top of he voice . " what I will not have , sir , be that you should use my name , or couple it with yours . -- he , strong , why do not you keep he in better order ? I tell you he have go and use my name again , sir , -- draw a bill upon I , and lose the money on the table -- I can not stand it -- I will not stand it . flesh and blood will not bear it -- do you know how much I have pay for you , sir ? " " this be only a very little 'un , -- only fifteen pound , , they would not stand another : and it ought not to anger you , . why , it be so trifling I do not even mention it to , -- do I now , ? I protest it have quite slipp my memory , and all on account of that confound liquor I take . " " liquor or no liquor , sir , it be no business of mine . I do not care what you drink , or where you drink it -- only it sha not be in my house . and I will not have you break into my house
house of a night , and a fellow like you intrud himself on my company : how da you show yourself in place last night , sir , -- and -- and what do you suppose my friend must think of I when they see a man of you sort walk into my dining - room uninvited , and drink , and call for liquor as if you be the master of the house ? " " they will think you know some very queer sort of people , I dare say , " not say with impenetrable good - humour . " look here , , I apologise ; on my honou I do , and be not a apology enough between two gentleman ? it be a strong measure I own , walk into you cuddy , and call for drink as if I be the captain : but I have have too much before , you see , that be why I want some more ; nothing can be more simple -- and it be because they would not give I no more money upon you name at the and , that I think I would come down and speak to you about it . to refuse I be nothing : but to refuse a bill draw on you that have be such a friend to the shop , and be a baronet and a member of parliament , and a gentleman and no mistake -- , its ungrateful . " " by heaven , if ever you do it again -- if ever you dare show to yourself in my house ; or give my name at a gambling - house or at any other house , by -- at any other house -- or give any reference at all to I , or speak to I in the street , by , or anywhere else until I speak to you -- I disclaim you altogether -- I will not give you another shilling . " " , do not be provoke , " not say surlily . " do not talk to I about da to do this thing or t'other , or when my dander be up it be the very thing to urge I on . I ought not to have come last night , I know I ought not : but i tell you I be drink , and that ought to be sufficient between gentleman and gentleman . " " you a gentleman ! dammy , sir , " say the , " how dare a fellow like you to call himself a gentleman ? " " I be not a baronet , I know , " grow the other ; and I have forget how to be a gentleman almost now , but -- but I be one , once , and my father be one , and I will not have this sort of talk from you , , that be flat . I want to go abroad again . why do not you come down with the money , and let I go ? why the be you to be roll in riche , and I to have none ? why should have a house and a table cover with plate , and I be in a garret here in this beggarly 's ? we be partner , be not we ? I would as good a right to be rich as you have , have not I ? tell the story to here , if you like ; and ask he to be umpire between we . I do not mind let my secret out to a man that will not split . look here , strong -- perhaps you guess the story already -- the fact be , I and the ---- " " d ---, hold you tongue , " shriek out the in a fury . " you shall have the money as soon as I can get it . I be not make of money . I be so press and badger , I do not know where to turn . I shall go mad ; by , I shall . I wish I be dead , for I be the most miserable brute alive . I say , , do not mind I . when I be out of health -- and I be devilish bilious this morning -- hang I , I abuse everybody , and do not know what i say . excuse I if I have offend you . I -- I will try and get that little business do . strong shall try . upon my word he shall . and I say , Strong , my boy , I want to speak to you . come into the office for a minute . " almost all Clavering 's assaults end in this ignominious way , and in a shameful retreat . not sneer after the Baronet as he leave the room , and enter into the office , to talk privately with he factotum . " what be the matter now ? " the latter ask of he . " it be the old story , I suppose . " " d --- it , yes , " the say . " I drop two hundred in ready money at the last night , and give a cheque for three hundred more . on she ladyship 's banker , too , for to - morrow ; and I must meet it , for there will be the deuce to pay else . the last time she pay my play - debt , I swore I would not touch a dice - box again , and she will keep she word , Strong , and dissolve partnership , if I go on . I wish I have three hundred a year , and be away . at a german
german watering - place you can do devilish well with three hundr a year . but my habits be so d ----- reckless : I wish I be in the Serpentine . I wish I be dead , by I wish I be . I wish I have never touch those confound bone . I have such a run of luck last night , with five for the main , and seven to five all night , until those ruffian want to pay I with 's bill upon I . the luck turn from that minute . never hold the box again for three main , and come away clear out , leave that infernal cheque behind I . how shall I pay it ? will not hold it over . and will write about it directly to she ladyship . by , , I be the most miserable brute in all . " it be necessary for to devise some plan to conseal the under this pressure of grief ; and no doubt he find the means of procure a loan for he patron , for he be close at 's office that day for some time . not have once more a guinea or two in he pocket , with a promise of a further settlement ; and the have no need to wish himself dead for the next two or three month at least . and strong , put together what he have learn from the and , begin to form in he own mind a pretty accurate opinion as to the nature of the tie which bound the two man together . of every day , after the entertainment at and , of which we have see Major partake , the worthy gentleman 's friendship and cordiality for the family seem to increase . he call be frequent ; he attention to the lady of the house unremitting . a old man about town , he have the good fortune to be receive in many house , at which a lady of 's distinction ought to be see . would she ladyship not like to be present at the grand entertainment at ? there be to be a very pretty breakfast ball at 's , at . everybody be to be there ( include august personage of the highest rank ) , and there be to be a quadrille , in which would surely look charming . to these and other amusement the obsequious old gentleman kindly offer to conduct , and be also ready to make himself useful to the Baronet in any way agreeable to the latter . in spite of he present station and fortune , the world persist in look rather coldly upon , and strange suspicious rumour follow he about . he be blackball at two club in succession . in the House of Commons , he only converse with a few of the most disreputable member of that famous body , have a happy knack of choose bad society , and adapt himself naturally to it , as other people do to the company of they better . the name all the senator with whom Claver consort , would be invidious . we may mention only a few . there be , the honourable member for , who retire after the last Goodwood races , have accept , as , the whip of the party , say , a mission to the ; there be , the patriotic member for , whose voice be never hear now denunciat corruption , since he appointment to the Governorship of ; there be , of the , who be a dead shot , and of whom we therefore wish to speak with every respect ; and of all these gentleman , with whom in the course of he professional duty have to confer , there be none for whom he have a more thorough contempt and dislike than for , the representative of a ancient race , who have sit for they own borough of Clavering time out of mind in the house . " if that man be want for a division , " yoHotspu say , " ten to one he be to be find in a hell . he be educate in the fleet , and he have not hear the end of yet , take my word for it . he will muddle away the 's fortune at thimble - rig , be catch pick pocket , and finish on board the hulk . " and if the high - bear , with such a opinion of , could yet from professional reason be civil to he , why should not Major also have reasons of he own for be attentive to this unlucky gentleman ? " he have a very good cellar and a very good cook , " the major say ; " as long as he be silent he be not offensive , and he very seldom speak . if he choose to frequent gambling - table , and lose he money to blackleg , what matter to I ? do not look too curiously into any man 's affair , , my boy ; every fellow have some cupboard in he house , begad , which he would not like you and I to peep into . why should we try , when the rest of the house be open to we ? and a devilish good house , too , as you and I know . and if the man of the family be not all one could wish , the woman be excellent . the be not over-refined , but as kind a woman as ever liv , and devilish clever too ; and as for the little Blanche , you know my opinion about she , you rogue ; you know my belief be that she be sweet on you , and would
would have you for the asking . but you be grow such a great man , that I suppose you will not be contend under a 's daughter -- hey , sir ? I recommend you to ask one of they , and try . " perhaps be somewhat intoxicate by he success in the world ; and it may also have enter into the young man 's mind ( he uncle 's perpetual hint serve not a little to encourage the notion ) that be tolerably well dispose to renew the little flirtation which have be carry on in the early day of both of they , by the bank of the rural . but he be little dispose to marriage , he say , at that moment , and , adopt some of he uncle 's worldly tone , speak rather contemptuously of the institution , and in favour of a bachelor life . " you be very happy , sir , " say he , " and you get on very well alone , and so do I . with a wife at my side , I should lose my place in society ; and I do not , for my part , much fancy retire into the country with a ; or take my wife into lodging to be wait upon by the servant - of - all -work . the period of my little illusion be over . you cure I of my first love who , certainly be a fool , and would have have a fool for she husband , and a very sulky discontented husband too if she have take I . we young fellow live fast , sir ; and I feel as old at five - and - twenty as many of the old fo -- the old bachelor -- whom I see in the bow - window at 's . do not look offended , I only mean that I be blase about love matter , and that I could no more fan myself into a flame for now , than I could adore over again . I wish I could ; I rather like old for he infatuation about she , and think he passion be the most respectable part of he life . " " be always a theatrical man , sir , " the major say , annoye that he nephew should speak flippantly of any person of 's rank and station . " he have be occupy with theatrical since he early day . he act at when he be page to the ; he have be mix up with that sort of thing : he could afford to marry whom he choose ; and be a most respectable woman , receive everywhere -- everywhere , mind . the Duchess of receive she , receive she -- it do not become young fellow to speak lightly of people in that station . there be not a more respectable woman in than :-- and the old fogy , as you call they , at 's , be some of the first gentleman in , of whom you youngster have best learn a little manners , and a little breeding , and a little modesty . " and the major begin to think that be grow exceedingly pert and conceit , and that the world make a great deal too much of he . the major 's anger amuse . he study he uncle 's peculiarity with a constant relish , and be always in a good humour with he worldly old . " I be a youngster of fifteen year ' standing , sir , " he say , adroitly , " and if you think that we be disrespectful , you should see those of the present generation . a protege of yours come to breakfast with I the other day . you tell I to ask he , and I do it to please you . we have a day 's sight together , and dine at the club , and go to the play . he say the wine at the be not so good as 's wine at , smoke 's cavendish after breakfast , and when I give he a sovereign as a farewell token , say he have plenty of they , but would take it to show he be not proud . " " do he ?--do you ask young Clavering ? " cry the major , appease at once -- " fine boy , rather wild , but a fine boy -- parent like that sort of attention , and you can not do better than pay it to we worthy friend of . and so you take he to the play and tip he ? that be right , sir , that be right : " with which quit , think that the young man be not so very bad , and that he should make something of that fellow yet . as grow into year and stature , he become too strong for the authority of he fond parent and governess ; and rather govern they than permit himself to be lead by they order . with he papa he be silent and sulky , seldom make he appearance , however , in the neighbourhood of that gentleman ; with he mamma be roar and fight when any contest between they arise as to the gratification of he appetite , or other wish of he heart ; and in he dispute with he governess over he book , he kick that quiet creature 's shin so fiercely , that she be entirely overmaster and subdue by he . and he would have so treat he sister , too , and do on one or two occasion attempt to prevail over she ; but she show a immense resolution and spirit on she part , and box he
he ear so soundly , that he forbore from molesting , as he do the governess and he mamma , and he mamma 's maid . at length , when the family come to , give forth he opinion , that " the little beggar have best be send to school . " accordingly the young son and heir of the house of be despatch to the 's establishment at , where young nobleman and gentleman be receive preparatory to they introduction to the great English public school . it be not we intention to follow master Clavering in he scholastic career ; the path to the Temple of learning be make more easy to he than they be to some of we of earlier generation . he advanc towards that fane in a carriage - and - four , so to speak , and might hal and take refreshment almost whenever he please . he wear varnished boot from the earliest period of youth , and have cambric handkerchief and lemon - coloured kid glove , of the smallest size ever manufacture by . they dress regularly at 's to come down to dinner ; the young gentleman have shawl dressing - gowns , fire in they bedroom , horse and carriage exercise occasionally , and oil for they hair . Corporal punishment be altogether dispense with by the principal , who think that moral discipline be entirely sufficient to lead youth ; and the boy be so rapidly advanced in many branch of learning , that they acquire the art of drinking spirit and smoke cigar , even before they be old enough to enter a public school . yong steal he father 's Havanna , and convey they to school , or smoke they in the stable , at a surprisingly early period of life , and at ten year old drank he champagne almost as stoutly as any whiskered cornet of dragoon could do . when this interesting youth come home for he vacation major be as laboriously civil and gracious to he as he be to the rest of the family ; although the boy have rather a contempt for old , as the major be denominate , mimick he behind he back , as the polite major bow and smirk with or ; and draw rude caricature , such as be design by ingenious youth , in which the major 's wig , he nose , he tie , etc. , be represent with artless exaggeration . Untir in he effort to be agreeable , the major wish that , too , should take particular notice of this child ; incite to invite he to he chamber , to give he a dinner at the club , to take he to Madame 's , the , the play , and so forth , and to tip he , as the phrase be , at the end of the day 's pleastre . , who be good - natured and fond of child , go through all these ceremony one day ; have the boy to breakfast at the Temple , where he make the most contemptuous remark regard the furniture , the crockery , and the tatter state of 's dressing - gown ; and smoke a short pipe , and recount the history of a fight between and , at 's , greatly to the edification of the two gentleman he host . as the major rightly predict , be very grateful for 's attention to the boy ; more grateful than the lad himself , who take attention as a matter of course , and very likely have more sovereign in he pocket than poor , who generously give he one of he own slender stock of those coin . the major , with the sharp eye with which endow he , and with the glassis of age and experience , watch this boy , and survey he position in the family without seem to be rudely curious about they affair . but , as a country neighbour , one who have many family obligation to the , a old man of the world , he take occasion to find out what 's means be , how she capital be dispose , and what the boy be to inherit . and set himself to work , -- for what purpose will appear , no doubt , ulteriorly , -- he soon have get a pretty accurate knowledge of 's affair and fortune , and of the prospect of she daughter and son . the daughter be to have but a slender provision ; the bulk of the property be , as before have be say , to go to the son , -- he father do not care for he or anybody else , -- he mother be dotingly fond of he as the child of she latter day , -- he sister dislike he . may be state in round number , to be the result of the information which major Pendennis get . " ah ! my dear madam , " he would say , pat the head of the boy , " this boy may wear a baron 's coronet on he head on some future coronation , if matter be but manage rightly , and if would but play he card well , " at this the widow heav a deep sigh . " he play only much of he card , major , I be afraid , " she say . the major own that he know as much ; do not disguise that he have hear of 's unfortunate propensity to play ; pitie Claver sincerely ; but speak with such genuine sentiment and sense , that she ladyship , glad to find a person of experience to whom she could confide she grief and she condition , talk about they pretty unreservedly to , and be
be eager to have he advice and consolation . major Pendennis become the 's confidante and house - friend , and as a mother , a wife , and a capitalist , she consult he . he give she to understand ( show at the same time a great deal of respectful sympathy ) that he be acquainted with some of the circumstance of she first unfortunate marriage , and with even the person of she late husband , whom he remember in -- when she be live in seclusion with she father . the poor lady , with tear of shame more than of grief in she eyes , tell she version of she story . go back a child to after two year at a school , she have meet , and foolishly marry he . " oh , you do not know how miserable that man , make I , " she say , " or what a life I pass betwixt he and my father . before I see he I have never see a man except my father 's clerk and native servants . you know we do not go into society in on account of ---- " ( " I know , " say major Pendennis , with a bow ) " I be a wild romantic child , my head be full of novel which I would read at school -- I listen to he wild story and adventure , for he be a daring fellow , and I think he talk beautifully of those calm night on the passage out , when he use to ---- . well , I marry he , and I be wretch from that day --wretch with my father , whose character you know , major Pendennis , and I will not speak of : but he be not a good man , sir , -- neither to my poor mother , nor to I , except that he leave I he money , -- nor to no one else that I ever hear of : and he do not do many kind action in he lifetime , I be afraid . and as for , he be almost worse ; he be a spendthrift when my father be close : he drank dreadfully , and be furious when in that way . he be not in any way a good or a faithful husband to I , major Pendennis , and if he would die in the gaol before this trial , instead of afterwards he would have save I a deal of shame and of unhappiness since , sir . " add : " for perhaps I should not have marry at all if I have not be so anxious to change he horrid name , and I have not be happy in my second husband , as I suppose you know , sir . ah , major Pendennis , I have get money to be sure , and I be a lady , and people fancy I be very happy , but I be not . we all have we car , and grief , and trouble : and many be the day that I sit down to one of my grand dinner with a aching heart , and many a night do I lay awake on my fine be a great deal more unhappy than the maid that make for it . I be not a happy woman , major , for all the world say ; and envy the she diamonds , and carriage , and the great company that come to my house . I be not happy in my husband ; I be not in my daughter . she be not a good girl like that dear at . she be cost I many a tear though you do not see 'em ; and she sneer at she mother because I have not have learning and that . how wshould I ? I be brotch up amongst native till I be twelve , and go back to when I be fourteen . ah , major , I should have be a good woman if I have have a good husband . and now I must go upstairs and wipe my eye , for they be red with cryin . and be a comin , and we be goin to ave a drive in the . and when make she appearance , there be not a trace of tear or vexation on 's face , but she be full of spirit , and bounce out with she blunder and talk , and murder the king 's with the utmost liveliness and good - humour . " , she be not such a bad woman ! " the major thought within himself . " she be not refin , certainly , and call ' ' ' ;' but she have some heart , and I like that sort of thing , and a devilish deal of money , too . three star in stock to she name , begad ! which that young cub be to have -- be he ? " and he think how he should like to see a little of the money transfer to , and , better still , one of those star shin in the name of . still bend upon pursue he scheme , whatsoever they might be , the old negotiator take the privilege of he intimacy and age , to talk in a kindly and fatherly manner to Blanche , when he find occasion to see she alone . he come in so frequently at luncheon - time , and become so familiar with the ladie , that they do not even hesitate to quarrel before he ; and , whose tongue be loud , and temper brusque , have many a battle with the Sylphide in the family friend 's presence . Blanche
Blanche be wit seldom fail to have the mastery in these encounter , and the keen barb of she arrow drive she adversary discomfit away . " I be a old fellow , " the major say ; " I have nothing to do in life . I have my eye open . I keep good counsel . I be the friend of both of you ; and if you choose to quarrel before I , why , I sha not tell any one . but you be two good people , and I intend to make it up between you . I have between lot of people -- husband and wife , fathers and son , daughter and mamma , before this . I like it ; I have nothing else to do . " one day , then , the old diplomatist enter 's drawing - room , just as the latter quit it , evidently in a high state of indignation , and run past he up the stair to she own apartment . " she could not speak to he now , " she say ; " she be a great deal too angry with that -- that -- that little , wick " -- anger chok the rest of the word , or prevent they utterance until have pass out of hearing . " my dear , good , " the major say , enter the drawing - room , " I see what be happen . you and have be disagree . mother and daughter disagree in the best family . it be but last week that I heal up a quarrel between and she daughter . and she eldest daughter have not speak for fourteen year . and more worthy people than these I never know in the whole course of my life ; for everybody but each other admirable . but they can not live together : they ought not to live together : and I wish , my dear creature , with all my soul , that I could see you with a establishment of you own -- for there be no woman in who could conduct one better -- with you own establishment , make you own home happy . " " I be not very happy in this one , " say the ; " and the stupidity of mamma be enough to provoke a saint . " " precisely so ; you be not suite to one another . you mother commit one fault in early life -- or be it , my dear , in you case ?-- she ought not to have educate you . you ought not to have be breed up to become the refined and intellectual be you be , surround , as I own you be , by those who have not you genius or you refinement . you place would be to lead in the most brilliant circle , not to follow , and take a second place in any society . I have watch you , : you be ambitious ; and you proper sphere be command . you ought to shine ; and you never can in this house , I know it . I hope I shall see you in another and a happier one , some day , and the mistress of it . " the shrug she lily shoulders with a look of scorn . " where be the , and where be the palace , major Pendennis ? " she say . " I be ready . but there be no romance in the world now , no real affection . " " no , indeed , " say the major , with the most sentimental and simple air which he could muster . " not that I know anything about it , " say Blanco , cast she eye down " except what I have read in novel . " " of course not , " major Pendennis cry ; " how should you , my dear young lady ? and novel be not true , as you remark admirably , and there be no romance leave in the world . , I wish I be a young fellow like my nephew . " " and what , " continue , muse , " what be the man whom we see about at the ball every night -- dancing guardsman , penniless treasury clerk -- booby ! if I have my brother 's fortune , I might have such a establishment as you promise I -- but with my name , and with my little mean , what be I to look to ! a country parson , or a barrister in a street near , or a captain in a dragoon regiment , who will take lodging for I , and come home from the mess tipsy and smell of smoke like . that be how we girl be destin to end life . of major Pendennis , I be sick of , and of ball , and of young dandy with they ching -tip , and of the insolent great lady who know we one day and cut we the next -- and of the world altogether . I should like to leave it and to go into a convent , that I should . I shall never find anybody to understand I . and I live here as much alone in my family and in the world , as if I be in a cell lock up for ever . I wish there be sister of Charity here , and that I could be one and catch the plague , and die of it -- I wish to quit the world . I be not very old : but I be tired , I have suffer so much -- I have be so disillusionate -- I be weary , I be weary
weary -- of that the angel of death would come and beckon I away ! " this speech may be interpret as follow . a few night since a great lady , , have cut and . she be quite mad because she could not get a invitation to 's ball : it be the end of the season and nobody have propose to she : she have make no sensation at all , she who be so much cleverer than any girl of the year , and of the young lady form she special circle . who have but five thousand pound , who have nothing , and who have red hair , be go to be married , and nobody have come for Blanche Amory ! " you judge wisely about the world , and about you position , my dear , " the major say . " the do not marry nowadays , as you say : unless the princess have a doosid deal of money in the fund , or be a lady of he own rank .-- the young folk of the great family marry into the great family : if they have not fortune they have each other 's shoulder , to push on in the world , which be pretty nearly as good .-- a girl with you fortune can scarcely hope for a great match : but a girl with you genius and you admirable tact and fine manners , with a clever husband by she side , may make any place for herself in the world . -- we be grow doosid . talent rank with birth and wealth now , begad : and a clever man with a clever wife , may take any place they please . " do not of course in the least understand what major Pendennis mean .-- perhaps she think over circumstance in she mind and ask herself , could he be a negotiator for a former suitor of hers , and could he mean ? no , it be impossible -- he have be civil , but nothing more . -- so she say laugh , " who be the clever man , and when will you bring he to I , major Pendennis ? I be die to see he . " at this moment a servant throw open the door , and announce : at which name , and at the appearance of we friend , both the lady and the gentleman burst out laugh . " that be not the man , " major Pendennis say . " he be engage to he cousin , 's daughter .-- good - bye , my dear . " * * * * * be grow worldly , and should a man not get the experience of the world and lay it to he account ? " he feel , for he part , " as he say , " that he be grow very old very soon . " " how this town form and change we , " he say once to . each have come in from he night 's amusement ; and be smoke he pipe , and recount , as he habit be , to he friend the observation and adventure of the evening just past . " how I be change , " he say , " from the simpleton boy at , who be fit to break he heart about he first love ! have a reception to - night , and be as grave and collect as if she have be bear a Duchess , and have never see a trap - door in she life . she give I the honour of a conversation , and patronise I about ' , ' quite kindly . " " what condescension ! " break in . " be not it ? " say , simply -- at which the other burst out laugh accord to he wont . " be it possible , " he say , " that anybody should think of patronise the eminent author of ' ? ' " " you laugh at both of we , " say , blush a little -- " I be come to that myself . she tell I that she have not read the book ( as indeed I believe she never read a book in she life ) , but that have , and that the Duchess of pronounce it to be very clever . in that case , I say , I should die happy , for that to please those two lady be in fact the great aim of my existence , and have they approbation , of course I need look for no other . look at I solemnly out of she fine eye , and say , 'Oh , indeed , ' as if she understand I , and then she ask I whether I go to the 's , and when I say no , hope she should see I there , and that I must try and get there , everybody go there -- everybody who be in society : and then we talk of the new ambassador from , and how he be better than the old one ; and how Lady be go to marry a clergyman quite below she in rank ; and how and have fall out three month after they marriage about of the , 's cousin -- and so forth . from the gravity of that woman you would have fancie she have be bear in a palace , and live all the season of she life in . " " and you , I suppose you take you part in the conversation pretty well , as the descendant of the you father , and the heir of ? " say . " yes , I remember reading of the festivity which occur when you
you come of age . the Countess give a brilliant tea soiree to the neighbour nobility ; and the tenantry be regal in the kitchen with a leg of mutton and a quart of ale . the remain of the banquet be distribute amongst the poor of the village , and the entrance to the park be illuminate until old put the candle out on retire to rest at he usual hour . " " my mother be not a countess , " say , " though she have very good blood in she vein too -- but commoner as she be , I have never meet a peeress who be more than she peer , ; and if you will come to Fairoaks you shall judge for yourself of she and of my cousin too . they be not so witty as the woman , but they certainly be as well breed . the thought of woman in the country be turn to other object than those which occupy you lady . in the country a woman have she household and she poor , she long calm day and long calm evening . " " Devilish long , " say , " and a great deal too calm ; I have try th'ey . " " the monotony of that existence must be to a certain degree melancholy -- like the tune of a long ballad ; and it be harmony grave and gentle , sad and tender : it would be unendurable else . the loneliness of woman in the country make they of necessity soft and sentimental . lead a life of calm duty , constant routine , mystic reverie , -- a sort of nun at large -- too much gaiety or laughter would jar upon they almost sacr quiet , and would be as out of place there as in a church . " " where you go to sleep over the sermon , " say . " you be a professed misogynist , and hate the sex because , I suspect , you know very little about they , " continue , with a air of considerable self - complacency . " if you dislike the woman in the country for be too slow , surely the woman ought to be fast enough for you . the pace of life be enormous : how do people last at it , I wonder , -- male and female ? take a woman of the world : follow she course through the season ; one ask how she can survive it ? or if she tumble into a sleep at the end of , and lie torpid until the spring ? she go into the world every night , and sits watch she marriageable daughter dancing till long after dawn . she have a nursery of little one , very likely , at home , to whom she administer example and affection ; have a eye likewise to bread - and - milk , catechism , music and french , and roast leg of mutton at one o'clock ; she have to call upon lady of she own station , either domestically or in she public character , in which she sit upon , or Ball Committees , or , or 's College Committees , and discharge I do not know what more duty of british stateswomanship . she very likely keep a poor-visiting list ; have conversation with the clergyman about soup or flannel , or proper religious teaching for the parish ; and ( if she live in certain district ) probably attend early church . she have the newspaper to read , and , at least , must know what she husband 's party be about , so as to be able to talk to she neighbour at dinner ; and it be a fact that she read every new book that come out ; for she can talk , and very smartly and well , about they all , and you see they all upon she drawing - room table . she have the car of she household besides -- to make both end meet ; to make the girl ' milliner 's bill appear not too dreadful to the father and paymaster of the family ; to snip off , in secret , a little extra article of expenditure here and there , and convey it , in the shape of a bank - note , to the boy at college or at sea ; to check the encroachment of tradesman and housekeeper ' financial fallacy ; to keep upper and lower servants from jangling with one another , and the household in order . add to this , that she have a secret taste for some art or science , model in clay , make experiment in chemistry , or play in private on the violoncello , -- and I say , without exaggeration , many lady be do this , -- and you have a character before you such as we ancestor never hear of , and such as belong entirely to we era and period of civilisation . ye gods ! how rapidly we live and grow ! in nine month , grow you a pineapple as large as a portmanteau , whereas a little one , no bigger than a cheese , take three year to attain he majority in old time ; and as the race of pineapple so be the race of man . --what's the for a pineapple , ? " " stop , for mercy 's sake , stop with the and before you come to the , " cry out , laugh . " I never hear you make such a long speech , or be aware that you have penetrat so deeply into the female mystery . who teach you all this , and into whose boudoir and nursery have you be
be pee , whilst I be smoke my pipe , and read my book , lie on my straw bed ? " " you be on the bank ; old boy , contend to watch the wave toss in the wind , and the struggle of other at sea , " say . " I be in the stream now , and by I like it . how rapidly we go down it , hey ? strong and feeble , old and young -- the metal pitcher and the earthe pitcher -- the pretty little china boat swims gaily till the big bruise brazen one bump he and send he down -- eh , vogue la galere !-- you see a man sink in the race , and say good - bye to he -- look , he have only div under the other fellow 's leg , and come up shak he pole , and strike out ever so far ahead . Eh , vogue la galere , I say . it be good sport , -- not win merely , but play . " " well , go in and win , young 'un . I will sit and mark the game , " say , survey the ardent young fellow with a almost fatherly pleasure . " a generous fellow play for the play , a sordid one for the stake ; a old fogy sit by and smoke the pipe of tranquillity , while and be pummell each other in the ring . " " why do not you come in , , and have a turn with the glove ? you be big enough and strong enough , " say . " dear old boy , you be worth ten of I . " " you be not quite as tall as , certainly , " the other answer , with a laugh that be rough and yet tender . " as for I , I be disable . I have a fatal hit in early life . I will tell you about it some day . you may , too , meet with you master . do not be too eager , or too confident , or too worldly , my boy . " be Pendennis become worldly , or only see the worldly , or both ? and be a man very wrong for be after all only a man ? which be the most reasonable , and do he duty best : he who stand aloon from the struggle of life , calmly contemplate , or he who descend to the ground , and take he part in the contest ? " that philosopher , " say , " have hold a great place amongst the leader of the world , and enjoy to the full what it have to give of rank and riche , renown and pleasure , who come , weary - hear , out of it , and say that all be vanity and vexation of spirit . many a teacher of those whom we reverence , and who step out of he carriage up to he carve cathedral place , shake he lawn ruffle over the velvet cushion , and cry out , that the whole struggle be a accursed one , and the work of the world be evil . many a conscience - stricken mystic fly from it altogether , and shut be himself out from it within convent walls ( real or spiritual ) , whence he can only look up to the sky , and contemplate the heaven out of which there be no rest , and no good . " but the earth , where we foot be , be the work of the same power as the immeasurable blue yonder , in which the future lie into which we would peer . who order toil as the condition of life , order weariness , order sickness , order poverty , failure , success -- to this man a foremost place , to the other a nameless struggle with the crowd -- to that a shameful fall , or paralyse limb , or sudden accident -- to each some work upon the ground he stand on , until he be laid beneath it . " while they be talk , the dawn come shine through the window of the room , and throw they open to receive the fresh morning air . " look , , " say he ; " look and see the sun rise : he see the labourer on he way a - field ; the work - girl ply she poor needle ; the lawyer at he desk , perhaps ; the beauty smile asleep upon she pillow of down ; or the jaded reveller reel to be ; or the fevered patient toss on it ; or the doctor watch by it , over the throe of the mother for the child that be to be bear into the world ; -- to be bear and to take he part in the suffering and struggle , the tear and laughter , the crime , remorse , love , folly , sorrow , rest . " 's partner the noble , of whom we have lose sight for a few page , have be in the meanwhile occupi , as we might suppose a man of he constancy would be , in the pursuit and indulgence of he all - absorb passion of love . I wish that a few of my youthful reader who be inclin to that amusement would take the trouble to calculate the time which be spend in the pursuit , when they would find it to be one of the most costly occupations in which a man can possibly indulge . what do not you sacrifice to it , indeed , young gentleman and young lady of ill - regulate mind ? many
many hour of you precious sleep in the first place , in which you lie tossing and think about the adored object , whence you come down late to breakfast , when noon be advancing and all the family be long since away to its daily occupations . then when you at length get to these occupations you pay no attention to they , and engage in they with no ardour -- all you thought and power of mind be fix elsewhere . then the day 's work be slur over , you neglect you friend and relative , you natural companion and usual associate in life , that you may go and have a glance at the dear personage , or a look up at she window , or a peep at she carriage in the . then at night the artless blandishment of home bear you ; mamma 's conversation pall upon you ; the dish which that good soul prepare for the dinner of she favourite be send away untasted , -- the whole meal of life , indeed , except one particular plat , have no relish . life , business , family tie , home , all thing useful and dear once , become intolerable , and you be never easy except when you be in pursuit of you flame . such I believe to be not unfrequently the state of mind amongst ill - regulate young gentleman , and such indeed be . 's condition , who , have be breed up to indulge in every propensity towards which he be inclin , abandon himself to this one with he usual selfish enthusiasm . nor because he have give he friend a great deal of good advice on a former occasion , need man of the world wonder that become passion 's slave in he turn . who among we have not give a plenty of the very best advice to he friend ? who have not preach , and who have practise ? to be sure , you , madam , be perhaps a perfect being , and never have a wrong thought in the whole course of you frigid and irreproachable existence : or sir , you be a great deal too strong - minded to allow any foolish passion to interfere with you equanimity in chamber or you attendance on ' change ; you be so strong that you do not want any sympathy . we do not give you any , then ; we keep ours for the humble and weak , that struggle and stumble and get up again , and so march with the rest of mortal . what need have you of a hand who never fall ? you serene virtue be never shade by passion , or ruffle by temptation , or darken by remorse ; compassion would be impertinence for such a angel : but then with such a one companionship become intolerable ; you be , from the elevation of you very virtue and high attribute , of necessity lonely ; we can not reach up and talk familiarly with such potentatess good - bye , then ; we way lie with humble folk , and not with serene highness like you ; and we give notice that there be no perfect character in this history , except , perhaps , one little one , and that one be not perfect either , for she never know to this day that she be perfect , and with a deplorable misapprehension and perverseness of humility , believe herself to be as great a sinner as need be . this young person do not happen to be in at the present period of we story , and it be by no means for the like of she that 's mind be agitate . but what matter a few failings ? need we be angels , male or female , in order to be worship as such ? let we admire the diversity of the taste of mankind ; and the oldest , the ugliest , the stupidest and most pompous , the silliest and most vapid , the greatest criminal , tyrant booby , , , , amongst we , we need never despair . I have read of the passion of a transport pickpocket for a female convict ( each of they advanced in age , be repulsive in person , ignorant , quarrelsome , and give to drink ) , that be as magnificent as the love of and , or and . the passion which , the polish dwarf , inspire in the bosom of the most beautiful Baroness at the of , be a matter with which we be all of we acquaint : the flame which burn in the heart of young but the other day , and cause he to run off and espouse , who be old enough to be he mamma ,-- all these instance be tell in the page of history or the newspaper column . be we to be asham or pleas to think that we heart be form so that the biggest and highest - place Ajax among we may some day find himself prostrate before the patten of he kitchen - maid ; as that there be no poverty or shame or crime , which will not be support , hug even with delight , and cherish more closely than virtue would be , by the perverse fidelity and admirable constant folly of a woman ? so then , , longe after he love , and curse the fate which separate he from she . when 's family retire to the country ( he lordship leave he proxy with the venerable ) , still remain linger on in , certainly not much to the sorrow of , to whom he be affiance , and who do not in the least miss he . wherever go
go , this infatuate young fellow continue to follow she ; and be aware that he engagement to he cousin be know in the world , he be force to make a mystery of he passion , and confine it to he own breast , so that it be so pent in there and presse down , that it be a wonder he do not explode some day with the stormy secret , and perish collapse after the outburst . there have be a grand entertainment at on one beautiful evening in , and the next day 's journal contain almost two column of the name of the most closely print nobility and gentry who have be honoure with invitation to the ball . among the guest be and and , for whom the indefatigable major Pendennis have procure a invitation , and we two young friend and . each exert himself , and dance a great deal with . as for the worthy major , he assume the charge of , and take care to introduce she to that department of the mansion where she ladyship specially distinguished herself , namely , the refreshment - room , where , amongst picture of and , and regal portrait of and , and enormous salver of gold and silver , and pyramid of large flowers , and constellation of wax candles -- in a manner perfectly regardless of expense , in a word -- a supper be go on all night . of how many creams , jelly , salad , peach , white soup , grape , pate , galantine , cup of tea , champagne , and so forth , Clavering partook , it do not become we to say . how much the suffer as he follow the honest woman about , call to the solemn male attendant and lovely servant - maid , and administer to 's various wants with admirable patience , nobody know ; -- he never confess . he never allow he agony to appear on he countenance in the least ; but with a constant kindness bring plate after plate to the . count up all the dish of which partake as long as he could count ( but as he partake very freely himself of champagne during the evening , he power of calculation be not to be trust at the close of the entertainment ) , and he recommend , 's medical man , to look carefully after the , and to call and get news of she ladyship the next day . Claver make he appearance , and skulk for a while about the magnificent room ; but the company and the splendour which he meet there be not to the 's taste , and after toss off a tumbler of wine or two at the buffet , he quit for the neighbourhood of , where he friend , , little , and be assemble at the familiar green table . in the rattle of the box , and of they agreeable conversation , 's spirit rise to they accustomed point of feeble hilarity . , who have ask to dance , come up on one occasion to claim she hand , but scowl of recognition have already pass between he and in the dancing - room , suddenly rise up and claim as he partner for the present dance , on which , bite he lip and scowl yet more savagely , withdraw with a profound bow , say that he give up he claim . there be some man who be always fall in one 's way in life . and have this view of each other ; and each regard other accordingly . " what a confound conceited provincial fool that be ! " think the one . " because he have write a twopenny novel , he absurd head be turn , and a kicking would take he conceit out of he . " " what a impertinent idiot that man be ! " remark the other to he partner . " he soul be in ; he neckcloth be foolscap ; he hair be sand ; he leg be ruler ; he vitals be tape and sealing - wax ; he be a prig in he cradle ; and never laugh since he be bear , except three time at the same joke of he chief . I have the same liking for that man , , I have for that cold boiled veal . " upon which Blanche of course remark , that be wicked , mechant , perfectly abominable , and wonder what he would say when she back be turn . " ! -- say that you have the most beautiful figure , and the slimmest waist in the world , -- , I mean . I beg you pardon . another turn ; this music would make a alderman dance . " " and you have leave off tumbling when you waltz now ? " Blanco ask , archly look up at she partner 's face . " one fall and one get up again in life , Blanche ; you know I use to call you so in old time , and it be the prettiest name in the world . besides , I have practise since then . " " and with a great number of partner , I be afraid , " Blanche say , with a little sham sigh , and a shrug of the shoulders . and so in truth have practise a good deal in this life ; and have undoubtedly arrive at be able to dance better . if be impertinent in he talk , , on the other hand , so bland and communicative on most occasion , be entirely mum and melancholy when he dance with . to clasp she slender waist be a rapture , to whirl round the room with she
she be a delirium ; but to speak to she , what could he say that be worthy of she ? what pearl of conversation could he bring that be fit for the acceptance of such a Queen of love and wit as ? it be she who make the talk when she be in the company of this love - stricken partner . it be she who ask he bow that dear little pony be , and look at he and thanke he with such a tender kindness and regret , and refuse the dear little pony with such a delicate sigh when he offer it . " I have nobody to ride with in , " she say . " be timid , and she figure be not pretty on horseback . never go out with I . he love I like -- like a stepdaughter . oh , how delightful it must be to have a father -- a father , ! " " oh , uncommon , " say , who enjoy that bless very calmly , upon which , and forget the sentimental air which she have just before assume , 's grey eye gaze at with such a arch twinkle that both of they burst out laugh , and enrapture and at he ease begin to entertain she with a variety of innocent prattle -- good kind simple Foker talk , flavoure with many expression by no means to be discover in dictionary , and relate to the personal history of himself or horse , or other thing dear and important to he , or to person in the ballroom then pass before they , and about whose appearance or character speak with artless freedom , and a considerable dash of humour . and it be who , when the conversation flag , and the youth 's modesty come rush back and overpower he , know how to reanimate she companion : ask he question about , and whether it be a pretty place ? whether he be a hunt man , and whether he like woman to hunt ? ( in which case she be prepared to say that she adore hunting ) -- but express he opinion against sporting female , and point out , who happen to pass by , as a horse - godmother , whom he have see at cover with a cigar in she face , Blanche too express she detestation of the sport of the field , and say it would make she shudder to think of a dear sweet little fox be kill , on which Foker laugh and waltze with renew vigour and grace . and at the end of the waltz , -- the last waltz they have on that night ,-- Blanche ask he about , and whether it be a fine house . he cousin , she have hear , be very accomplished : she have meet , and which of he cousin be he favourite ? be it not ? yes , she be sure it be she ; sure by he look and he blush . she be tired of dancing ; it be get very late ; she must go to mamma ; -- and , without another word , she spring away from 's arm , and seize upon , who be swagger about the dancing - room , and again say , " Mamma , mamma !-- take I to mamma , dear , ! " transfix with a Parthian shot , as she fle from he . my , with garter and ribbon , with a bald head and shin eye , and a collar of red whisker round he face , always look grand upon a occasion of state ; and make a great effect upon , when he introduce himself to she at the request of the obsequious major Pendennis . with he own white and royal hand , he hand to she ladyship a glass of wine , say he have hear of she charming daughter , and beg to be present to she ; and , at this very juncture , come up with the young lady on he arm . the peer make a profound bow , and Blanco the deepest curtesy that ever be see . he lordship give he hand to shake ; say he have read he book , which be very wicked and clever ; ask if she have read it , -- at which blush and wince . why , Blanche be one of the heroine of the novel . Blanche , in black ringlet and a little altered , be the of ' . ' Blanche have read it : the language of the eye express she admiration and rapture at the performance . this little play be achieve , the of make other two profound bow to and she daughter , and pass on to some other of he guest at the splendid entertainment . and daughter be loud in they expressions of admiration of the noble so soon as he broad back be turn upon they . " he say they make a very nice couple , " whisper major Pendennis to . do he now , really ? think they would ; be so flustered with the honour which have just be show to she , and with other intoxicating event of the evening , that she good - humwe know no bounds . she laugh , she wink , and nod knowingly at ; she tap he on the arm with she fan ; she tap Blanche ; she tap the major ; -- she contentment be boundless , and she method of show she joy equally expansive . as the party go down the great staircase of , the morning have risen stark and clear over the black tree of the square ; the sky be tinge with pink ; and
and the cheek of some of the people at the ball , -- ah , how ghastly they look ! that admirable and devote major above all , -- who have be for hour by 's side , ministere to she and feed she body with everything that be nice , and she ear with everything that be sweet and flatter , -- oh ! what a object he be ! the ring round he eyes be of the colour of bistre ; those orb themselves be like the plover 's egg whereon and Blanche have each taste ; the wrinkle in he old face be furrow in deep gash ; and a silver stubble , like a elderly morning dew be glitter on he ching , and alongside the dyed whisker now limp and out of curl . there he stand , with admirable patience , endure , uncomplainingly , a silent agony ; know that people could see the state of he face ( for could he not himself perceive the condition of other , male and female , of he own age ?) --longe to go to rest for hour past ; aware that supper disagree with he , and yet have eat a little so as to keep he friend , , in good - humour ; with twinge of rheumatism in the back and knee ; with weary foot burn in he varnished boot , -- so tired , oh , so tired and longe for bed ! if a man , struggle with hardship and bravely overcome it , be a object of admiration for the gods , that power in whose chapel the old be a faithful worshipper must have look upwards approvingly upon the constancy of 's martyrdom . there be sufferer in that cause as in the other : the negroe in the service of tattoo and drill themselves will burn skewer with great fortitude ; and we read that the priest in the service of gash themselves and b freely . you who can smash the idol , do so with a good courage ; but do not be too fierce with the idolater , -- they worship the best thing they know . the Pendennise , the elder and the younger , wait with and she daughter until she ladyship 's carriage be announce , when the elder 's martyrdom may be say to have come to a end , for the good -natured Begum insist upon leave he at he door in ; so he take the back seat of the carriage after a feeble bow or two , and speech of thanks , polite to the last , and resolute in do he duty . the wav she dumpy little hand by way of farewell to and , and Blanche smile languidly out upon the young man , think whether she look very wan and green under she rose -coloured hood , and whether it be the mirror at , or the fatigue and fever of she own eye , which make she fancy herself so pale . , perhaps , see quite well how yellow Blanco look , but do not attribute that peculiarity of she complexion to the effect of the look - glass , or to any error in he sight or she own . we young man of the world could use he eye very keenly , and could see 's face pretty much as nature have make it . but for poor Foker it have a radiance which dazzl and blind he : he could see no more fault in it than in the sun , which be now flar over the house - tops . amongst other wicked habit which have acquire , the moralist will remark that he have get to keep very bad hour ; and often be go to be at the time when sober country - people be think of leave it . get use to one hour as to another . Editor of newspaper , market - people , night cabman and coffee - seller , chimney - sweep , and gentleman and lady of fashion who frequent ball , be often quite lively at three or four o'clock of a morning , when ordinary mortal be snor . we have show in the last chapter how be in a brisk condition of mind at this period , inclin to smoke he cigar at ease , and to speak freely . and walk away from , then , indulge in both the above amusement : or rather talk , and look as if he want to say something . be sarcastic and dandify when he have be in the company of great folk ; he could not help imitat some of they air and tone , and have a most lively imagination , mistake himself for a person of importance very easily . he rattle away , and attack this person and that ; sneer at 's bad , which she ladyship will introduce into all conversation in spite of the sneer of everybody ; at 's extraordinary costume and sham jewel ; at the old dandy and the young one ; -- at whom do not he sneer and laugh ? " you fire at everybody , Pen-- you be grow awful , that you be , " say . " now you have pull about 's yellow wig , and 's black one , why do not you have a shy at a brown one , hay ? you know whose i mean . it get into 's carriage . " " under my uncle 's hat ? my uncle be a martyr , , my boy . my uncle have be do excruciat duty all night . he like to go to bed rather early . he have a dreadful headache if he sit up and touch supper . he always have the gout
gout if he walk or stand much at a ball . he have be sit up , and stand up , and supp . he have go home to the gout and the headache , and for my sake . shall I make fun of the old boy ? no , not for ! " " how do you mean that he have be do it for you sake ? " ask , look rather alarmed . " ! canst thou keep a secret if I impart it to thee ? " cry out , in high spirit . " Art thout of good counsel ? will thou swear ? will thou be mum , or will thou preach ? will thou be silent and hear , or will thou speak and die ? " and as he speak , flinge himself into a absurd theatrical attitude , the man in the cabstand in wonder and grin at the antic of the two young swell . " what the doose be you drive at ? " ask , look very much agitate . , however , do not remark this agitation much , but continue in the same bantering and excited vein . " Henry , friend of my youth , " he say , " and witness of my early folly , though dull at thy book , yet thou be not altogether deprive of sense , -- nay , blush not , Henrico , thou hast a good portion of that , and of courage and kindness too , at the service of thy friend . be I in a strait of poverty , I would come to my Foker 's purse . be I in grief , I would discharge my grief upon he sympathising bosom ---- " " , -- go on , " say . " I would , , upon thy stud , and upon thy cambric work by the hand of beauty , to adorn the breast of valour ! know then , friend of my boyhood 's day , that of the , student - at - law , feel that he be grow lonely and old care be furrow he temple , and baldness be busy with he crown . shall we stop and have a drop of coffee at this stall , it look very hot and nice ? look how that cabman be blow at he saucer . no , you will not ? ! I resume my tale . I be get on in life . I have get devilish little money . I want some . I be think of get some , and settle in life . I be think of settling . I be think of marrying , old boy . I be think of become a moral man ; a steady port and sherry character : with a good reputation in my quartier , and a moderate establishment of two maid and a man -- with a occasional brougham to drive out , and a house near the Park for the accommodation of the child . ! what sayest thou ? answer thy friend , thou worthy child of beer . , I adjure thee by all thy vat . " but you be not get any money , , " say the other , still look alarmed . " I be not ? no , but she ave . I tell thee there be gold in store for I -- not what you call money , nurse in the lap of luxury , and cradle on grain , and drink in wealth from a thousand mash -tub . what do you know about money ? what be poverty to you , be splendou to the hardy son of the humble apothecary . you can not live without a establishment , and you house in town and country . a snug little house somewhere off , a brougham for my wife , a decent cook , and a fair bottle of wine for my friend at home sometimes ; these simple necessaries suffice for I , my . " and here begin to look more serious . without banter further , continue , " I have rather serious thought of settling and marry . no man can get on in the world without some money at he back . you must have a certain stake to begin with , before you can go in and play the great game . who know that I be not go to try , old fellow ? worse man than I have win at it . and as I have not get enough capital from my father , I must get some by my wife -- that be all . " they be walk down , as they talk , or rather as talk , in the selfish fulness of he heart ; and must have be too much occupy with he own affair to remark the concern and agitation of he neighbour , for he continue : " we be no longer child , you know , you and I , . Bah ! the time of we romance have pass away . we do not marry for passion , but for prudence and for establishment . what do you take you cousin for ? because she be a nice girl , and a 's daughter , and the old folk wish it , and that sort of thing . " " and you , , " ask , " you be not very fond of the girl -- you be go to marry ? " shrug he shoulders . " Comme ca , " say he ; " I like she well enough . she be pretty enough ; she be clever enough . I think she will do very well . and she have get money enough -- that be the great point . ! you
you know who she be , do not you ? I think you be sweet on she yourself one night when we din with she mamma . it be little . " " I -- I think so , " say ; " and have she accept you ! " " not quite , " yoArthu reply , with a confident smile , which seem to say , I have but to ask , and she come to I that instant . " oh , not quite , " say ; and he break out with such a dreadful laugh , that , for the first time , turn he thought from himself towards he companion , and be strike by the other 's ghastly pale face . " my dear fellow , ! what be the matter ? you be ill , " say , in a tone of real concern . " you think it be the champagne at , do not you ? it be not that . come in ; let I talk to you for a minute . I will tell you what it be . --- it , let I tell somebody , " say . they be at 's door by this time , and , open it , walk with he friend into he apartment , which be situate in the back part of the house , and behind the family dining - room where the elder receive he guest , surround by picture of himself , he wife , he infant son on a donkey , and the late of in he rob as a peer . and pass by this chamber , now close with death - like shutter , and enter into the young man 's own quarter . Dusky stream of sunbeam be play into that room , and light up poor 's gallery of dancing - girl and opera nymph with flickering illumination . " look here ! I can not help tell you , , " he say . ever since the night we dine there , I be so fond of that girl , that I think I shall die if I do not get she . I feel as if I should go mad sometimes . I can not stand it , . I could not bear to hear you talk about she , just now , about marry she only because she be money . ah , ! that be not the question in marrying . I would bet anything it be not . talk about money and such a girl as that , it be -- it be -- what - d'ye - call - 'em -- you know what i mean -- I be not good at talk -- sacrilege , then . if she would have I , I would take and sweep a crossing , that I would ! " " poor fo ! I do not think that would tempt she , " say , eye he friend with a great deal of real good - nature and pity . " she be not a girl for love and a cottage . " " she ought to be a duchess , I know that very well , and I know she would not take I unless I could make she a great place in the world -- for I be not good for anything myself much -- I be not clever and that sort of thing , " say sadly . " if I have all the diamonds that all the duchess and marchioness have on to - night , would not I put th'ey in she lap ? but what be the use of talk ? I be book for another race . it be that kill I , . I can not get out of it ; though I die , I can not get out of it . and though my cousin be a nice girl , and I like she very well , and that , yet I have not see this one when we Governor settle that matter between we . and when you talk , just now , about she do very well , and about she have money enough for both of you , I think to myself it be not money or mere like a girl , that ought to be enough to make a fellow marry . he may marry , and find he like somebody else better . all the money in the world will not make you happy then . look at I ; I have plenty of money , or shall have out of the mash - tubs , as you call th'ey . my think he would make it all right for I in settle my marriage with my cousin . I tell you it will not do ; and when have get she husband , it will not be happy for either of we , and she will have the most miserable beggar in town . " " poor old fellow ! " say , with rather a cheap magnanimity , " I wish I could help you . I have no idea of this , and that you be so wild about the girl . do you think she would have you without you money ? no . do you think you father would agree to break off you engagement with you cousin ? you know he very well , and that he would cast you off rather than do so . " the unhappy Foker only groane a reply , flinge himself prostrate on a sofa , face forward , he head in he hand . " as for my affair , " go on , " my dear fellow , if I have think matter be so critical with you , at least I would not have pain you by choose you
you as my confident . and my business be not serious , at least not as yet . I have not speak a word about it to . very likely she would not have I if I ask she . only I have have a great deal of talk about it with my uncle , who say that the match might be a eligible one for I . I be ambitious and I be poor . and it appear will give she a good deal of money , and might be get to never mind the rest . nothing be settled , . they be go out of town directly . I promise you I will not ask she before she go . there be no hurry : there be time for everybody . but , suppose you get she , . remember what you say about marriage just now , and the misery of a man who do not care for he wife ; and what sort of a wife would you have who do not care for she husband ? " " but she would care for I , " say , from he sofa --" that be , I think she would . last night only , as we be dance , she say ---- " " what do she say ? " cry , start up in great wrath . but he see he own meaning more clearly than , and break off with a laugh -- " well , never mind what she say , . be a clever girl , and say number of civil thing -- to you -- to I , perhaps -- and who the deuce know to whom besides ? nothing be settled , old boy . at least , my heart will not break if I do not get she . win she if you can , and I wish you joy of she . good - bye ! do not think about what I say to you . I be excite , and confoundedly thirsty in those hot room , and do not , I suppose , put enough Seltzer - water into the champagne . good night ! I will keep you counsel too . ' ' be the word between we ; and ' let there be a fair fight , and let the best man win , ' as say . " so say , , give a very queer and rather dangerous look at he companion , shook he by the hand , with something of that sort of cordiality which befit he just repeat simile of the boxing - match , and which display when he shake hand with before they fight each other for the champion 's belt and two hundred pound a side . return he friend 's salute with a imploring look , and a piteous squeeze of the hand , sank back on he cushion again , and , put on he hat , strode forth into the air , and almost over the body of the matutinal housemaid , who be rub the step at the door . " and so he want she too , do be ? " think as he march along -- and note within himself with a fatal keenness of perception and almost a infernal mischief , that the very pain and torture which that honest heart of 's be suffer give a zest and a impetus to he own pursuit of Blanche : if pursuit might be call which have be no pursuin as yet , but mere sport and idle dallying . " she say something to he , do she ? perhaps she give he the fellow flower to this ; " and he take out of he coat and twiddle in he thumb and finger a poor little shrivell crumple bud that have fad and blacken with the heat and flare of the night -- " I wonder to how many more she have give she artless token of affection -- the little flirt " -- and he fling he into the gutter , where the water may have refresh it , and where any amateur of rosebud may have pick it up . and then bethink he that the day be quite bright , and that the passer - by by might be star at he beard and white neckcloth , we modest young gentleman take a cab and drive to the Temple . ah ! be this the boy that pray at he mother 's knee but a few year since , and for whom very likely at this hour of morning she be pray ? be this jad and selfish worldl the lad who , a short while back , be ready to fl away he worldly all , he hope , he ambition , he chance of life , for he love ? this be the man you be proud of , old Pendennis . you boast of have form he : and of have reaso he out of he absurd romance and folly -- and groan in you bed over you pain and rheumatism , satisfy yourself still by thinking , that , at last , that lad will do something to better himself in life , and that the Pendennise will take a good place in the world . and be he the only one , who in he progress through this dark life go wilfully or fatally astray , whilst the natural truth and love which should illumine he grow dim in the poisoned air , and suffice to light he no more ? when be go away , poor get up from the sofa , and take out from he waistcoat -- the splendidly button , but the gorgeously embroider , the work of he mamma -- a little white rosebud , he draw from he dressing - case , also the
the maternal present , a pair of scissors , with which he nip carefully the stalk of the flower , and place it in a glass of water opposite he bed , he seek refuge there from care and bitter remembrance . it be to be presume that have more than one rose in she bouquet , and why should not the kind young creature give out of she superfluity , and make as many partner as possible happy ? s'amuse the exertion of that last night at have prove almost too much for major Pendennis ; and as soon as he could move he weary old body with safety , he transport himself groan to , and seek relief in the healing water of that place . parliament break up . Clavering and family leave town , and the affair which we have just mention to the reader be not advance , in the brief interval of a few day or week which have occur between this and the last chapter . the town be , however , empty since then . the season be now come to a conclusion : 's neighbour , the lawyer , be go upon circuit : and he more fashionable friend have take they passport for the continent , or have fle for health or excitement to the moor . Scarce a man be to be see in the bow - window of the clubs , or on the solitary Pall mall pavement . the red jacket have disappear from before the palace - gate : the tradesman of 's be abroad take they pleasure : the tailor have grow mustachio and be go up the : the bootmaker be at or , blush when they meet they customer at those place of recreation , or punt beside they creditor at the gambling - table : the clergyman of . 's only preach to half a congregation , in which there be not a single sinner of distinction : the band in have shut up they instrument of brass and trumpet of silver : only two or three old fly and chaise crawl by the bank of the ; and , who be retain in town by he arduous duty as a clerk , when he take he afternoon ride in row , compare its loneliness to the vastness of the Arabian desert and himself to a wend he way through that dusty solitude . stow away a quantity of Cavendish tobacco in he carpet - bag , and betake himself , as he custom be in the vacation , to he brother 's house in . be leave alone in chamber for a while , for this man of fashion could not quit the metropolis when he choose always : and be at present detain by the affair of he newspaper , the , of , which he act as the editor and charge d'affaire during the temporary absence of the chief , , who be with he family at the salutary watering - place of - - . although , as we have see , have pronounce himself for year past to be a man perfectly blase and weary of life , yet the truth be that he be a exceedingly healthy young fellow still : with a fine appetite , which he satisfy with the greatest relish and satisfaction at least once a day ; and a constant desire for society , which show he to be anything but misanthropical . if he could not get a good dinner he sate down to a bad one with perfect contentment ; if he could not procure the company of witty or great or beautiful person , he put up with any society that come to hand ; and be perfectly satisfied in a tavern - parlour or on board a steamboat , or in a jaunt to with , he colleague at the ; or in a visit to the summer theatre across the river ; or to the of , where he be on term of friendship with the great Simpson , and where he shook the principal comic singer of the lovely equestrian of the arena by the hand . and while he could watch the grimace or the graces of these with a satiric humour that be not deprive of sympathy , he could look on with a eye of kindness at the looker - on too ; at the roystering youth bend upon enjoyment , and here take it : at the honest parent , with they delighted child laugh and clapp they hand at the show : at the poor outcast , whose laughter be less innocent though perhaps louder , and who bring they shame and they youth here , to dance and be merry till the dawn at least ; and to get bread and dry care . of this sympathy with all condition of man often boast : say he be pleased to possess it : and that he hope thus to the last he should retain it . as another man have a ardour for art or music , or natural science , say that anthropology be he favourite pursuit ; and have he eye always eagerly open to its infinite variety and beauty : contemplate with a unfailing delight all specimen of it in all place to which he resorte , whether it be the coquetting of a wrinkle dowager in a ballroom , or a high - breed young beauty blush in she prime there ; whether it be a hulking guardsman coax a servant - girl in the -- or innocent little Tommy that be feed the duck whilst the nurse listen . and indeed a man whose heart be pretty clean , can indulge in this pursuit with a enjoyment that never cease , and be only perhaps the more keen because it be secret and have a touch
touch of sadness in it : because he be of he mood and humour lonely , and apart although not alone . yes , use to brag and talk in he impetuous way to . " I be in love so fiercely in my youth , that I have burn out that flame for ever , I think , and if ever I marry , it will be a marriage of reason that I will make , with a well - breed , good - tempered , good - look person who have a little money , and so forth , that will cushion we carriage in its course through life . as for romance , it be all do ; I have spend that out , and be old before my time -- I be proud of it . " " stuff ! " grow the other , " you fancie you be get bald the other day , and brag about it as you do about everything . but you begin to use the bear 's - grease pot directly the hairdresser tell you ; and be scent like a barber ever since . " " you be , " the other answer , " and you want every man to live in a tub like yourself . 's smell better than stale tobacco , you grizzly old cynic . " but be blush whilst he make this reply to he unromantical friend , and indeed care a great deal more about himself still than such a philosopher perhaps should have do . indeed , consider that he be careless about the world , ornament he person with no small pain in order to make himself agreeable to it , and for a weary pilgrim as he be , wore very tight boot and bright varnish . it be in this dull season of the year , then , of a shining night in autumn , that , have complete at he newspaper office a brilliant leading article -- such as himself might have write , have the be in good - humour , and inclin to work , which he never would do except under compulsion -- that have write he article , and review it approvingly as it lay before he in its wet proof - sheet at the office of the paper , bethotch he that he would cross the water , and regale himself with the firework and other amusement of . so he affably put in he pocket the order which admit " of and friend " to that place of recreation , and pay with the coin of the realm a sufficient sum to enable he to cross . the walk thence to the be pleasant , the star be shin in the sky above , look down upon the royal property , whence the rocket and Roman candles have not yet ascend to outshine the star . before you enter the enchanted ground , where twenty thousand additional lamps be burn every night as usual , most of we have pass through the black and dreary passage and wicket which hide the splendour of from uninitiated man . in the walls of this passage be two hole strongly illuminate , in the midst of which you see two gentleman at desk , where they will take either you money as a private individual , or you order of admission if you be provide with that passport to the . go to exhibit he ticket at the last - name orifice , where , however , a gentleman and two lady be already in parley before he . the gentleman , whose hat be very much on one side , and who wear a short and shabby cloak in a excessively smart manner , be cry out in a voice which at once recognise . " Bedad , sir , if ye doubt I honour , will ye obleege I by stipp out of that box , and ---- " " , ! " cry the elder lady . " do not bother I , " say the man in the box . and ask himself , who be in the gyarden , to let these leedy pass . do not be froighten , I dear madam , I be not go to quarl with this gintleman , at anyreet before leedy . will ye go , sir , and desoire ( whose orther I keem in , and he be I most intemate friend , and I know he be goan to s the ' ' here to - noight ) , with 's compliment , to stip out and let in the leedy -- for meself , sir , I have see , and I scawrun any interfayrance on moi account : but for these leedy , one of they have never be there , and of should think ye would harly take advantage of I misfartune in lose the ticket , to deproive she of she pleasure . " " it be not no use , . I can not go about you business , " the check - taker say ; on which the swore a oath , and the elder lady say , " , ow provokin ! " as for the young one , she look up at the and say , " never mind , , I be sure I do not want to go at all . come away , . " and with this , although she do not want to go at all , she feeling overcome she , and she begin to cry . " I poor child ! " the say . " can ye see that , sir , and will ye not let this innocent creature in ? " " it be not my business , " cry the doorkeeper , peevishly , out of the illuminate box .
. and at this minute Arthur come up , and recognise , say , " do not you know I , ? ! " and he take off he hat and make a bow to the two lady . " I dear boy ! I dear friend ! " cry the captain , extend towards the grasp of friendship ; and he rapidly explain to the other what he call " a most unluckee conthratong . " he have a order for , admit two , from , then within the , and singe ( as he do at the and the nobility 's concert , the ' body , ' the ' death of , ' the ' of , ' and other favourite melody ) ; and , have this order for the admission of two person , he think that it would admit three , and have come accordingly to the with he friend . but , on he way , have lose the paper of admission -- it be not forthcome at all ; and the leedy must go back again , to the great disappointment of one of they , as Pendennis see . yoArthu have a great deal of good - nature for everybody , and sympathise with the misfortunes of all sort of people : how could he refuse he sympathy in such a case as this ? he have see the innocent face as it look up to the , the appealing look of the girl , the piteous quiver of the mouth , and the final outburst of tear . if it have be he last guinea in the world , he must have pay it to have give the poor little thing pleasure . she turn the sad imploring eye away directly they lighte upon a stranger , and begin to wipe they with she handkerchief . yoArthu look very handsome and kind as he stand before the woman , with he hat off , blush , bow , generous , a gentleman . " who be they ? " he ask of himself . he think he have see the elder lady before . " if I can be of any service to you , , " the young man say , " I hope you will command I ; be there any difficulty about take these lady into the garden ? will you kindly make use of my purse ? and -- and I have a ticket myself which will admit two -- I hope , ma 'am , you will permit I ? " the first impulse of the of be to pay for the whole party , and to make away with he newspaper order as poor have do with he own ticket . but he instinct , and the appearance of the two woman , tell he that they would be better pleased if he do not give himself the air of a grand seigneur , and he hand he purse to , and laughingly pull out he ticket with one hand , as he offer the other to the elder of the ladie -- lady be not the word -- they have bonnet and shawl , and collar and ribbon , and the youngest show a pretty little foot and boot under she modest grey gown , but he Highness of Fairoaks be courteous to every person who wear a petticoat whatever its texture be , and the humbler the wearer , only the more stately and polite in he demeanour . " Fanny , take the gentleman 's arm , " the elder say ; " Since you will be so very kind -- I have see you often come in at we gate , sir , and go in to 's at no. 3 . " make a little curtsey , and put she hand under 's arm . it have on a shabby little glove , but it be pretty and small . she be not a child , but she be scarcely a woman as yet ; she tear have dry up , and she cheek mantle with youthful blush , and she eye glisten with pleasure and gratitude , as she look up into 's kind face . , in a protecte way , put he other hand upon the little one resting on he arm . " Fanny be a very pretty little name , " he say , " and so you know I , do you ? " " we keep the lodge , sir , at 's , " say with a curtsey ; " and I have never be at , sir , and do not like I to go -- and -- and -- o -- o -- law , how beautiful ! " she shrank back as she speak , start with wonder and delight as she see the blaze before she with a hundred million of lamps , with a splendour such as the finest fairy tale , the finest pantomime she have ever witness at the theatre , have never realise . be pleased with she pleasure , and press to he side the little hand which cling so kindly to he . " what would I not give for a little of this pleasure ? " say the blase young man . " you purse , , I dear boy , " say the 's voice behind he . " will ye count it ? it be all roight -- no -- ye thrust in old ( he thrust I , ye see , madam ) . ye have be I preserver , ( I have know since , ; he be the proproietor of , and many be the cooper of clart I have dthrink there with the first nobilitee of he neetive countee ) ,-- , ye have be I preserver , and of thank ye ; I
I daughtther will thank ye ;-- , you humble servant sir . " if be magnificent in he courtesy to the lady , what be he splendour in comparison to 's bow here and there , and cry bravo to the singer ? a man , descend like , from a long line of Hibernian king , chieftain , and other magnate and sheriffs of the county , have of course too much dignity and self - respect to walk arrum - in-arrum ( as the phrase it ) with a lady who occasionally sweep he room out , and cook he mutton - chop . in the course of they journey from 's to , have walk by the side of the two lady , in a patronising and affable manner point out to they the edifice worthy of note , and discoorse , accord to he wont , about other city and country which he have visit , and the people of rank and fashion with whom he have the honour of a acquaintance . could it be expect , nor , indeed , do expect , that , arrive in the property , and strongly illuminate by the flare of the twenty thousand additional lamps , the could relax from he dignity , and give a arm to a lady who be , in fact , little better than a housekeeper or charwoman . but , on he part , have no such scruple . do not make he bed nor sweep he chamber ; and he do not choose to let go he pretty little partner . as for , she colour heighten , and she bright eye shine the brighter with pleasure , as she lean for protection on the arm of such a fine gentleman as . and she look at number of other lady in the place , and at score of other gentleman under whose protection they be walk here and there ; and she think that she gentleman be handsomer and grander - look than any other gent in the place . of course there be votary of pleasure of all rank there -- rakish young surgeon , fast young clerk and commercialist , occasional dandy of the regiment , and the rest . be there in attendance upon , who have be ride in the ring ; and who talk she native french very loud , and use idiomatic expression of exceeding strength as she walk about , lean on the arm of he lordship . be in attendance upon , little be in attendance upon ; and rather pleased , too , with he position . when scalle the wall , there be never a want of a to hold the ladder . be quite happy to act as friend to the elderly viscount , and to carve the fowl , and to make the salad at supper . when and he young lady meet the 's party , that noble poor only give yoArthu a pass leer of recognition as he lordship 's eye pass from face under the bonnet of companion . but wag he head very good - naturedly at , and say , " how be you , old boy ? " and look extremely know at the godfather of this history . " that be the great rider at 's ; I have see she there , " say , look after ; " and who be that old man ? be it not the gentleman in the ring ! " " that be , , " say with a air of protection . he mean no harm ; he be pleased to patronise the young girl , and he be not displease that she should be so pretty , and that she should be hang upon he arm , and that yonder elderly should have see she there . be very pretty ; she eye be dark and brilliant , she tooth be like little pearl ; she mouth be almost as red as 's when the latter have put on she vermilion . and what a difference there be between the one 's voice and the other 's , between the girl 's laugh and the woman 's ! it be only very lately , indeed , that , when look in the little glass over the - mantelpiece as she be dust it have begin to suspect that she be a beauty . but a year ago , she be a clumsy , gawky girl , at whom she father sneer , and of whom the girl at the day - school ( 's , , ; , the younger sister , take the lead business at the circuit in 182 -- ; and she herself have play for two season with some credit , , until she fall down a trap - door and break she leg ) ; the girl at 's school , we say , take no account of she , and think she a dowdy little creature as long as she remain under 's instruction . and it be unremarked and almost unseen in the porter 's dark lodge of 's , that this little flower bloom into beauty . so this young person hang upon Pen's arm , and they pace the garden together , as be , there be still some two million of people leave linger about it , and amongst they , one or two of the acquaintance of . amongst they , silent and alone , pale , with he hand in he pocket , and a rueful nod of the head to as they meet , pass , yong be try to ease he mind by move from place to place , and from excitement to excitement . but he think about as he saunter in the dark walk ; he think about as he look at the device of the
the lamps . he consult the fortune - teller about she , and be disappointed when that gipsy tell he that he be in love with a dark lady who would make he happy ; and at the concert , though sang he most stun comic song , and ask he most astonish riddle , never do a kind smile come to visit 's lip . in fact , he never hear at all . and be hard by listen to the same concert , and the latter remark , and laugh at 's woebegone face . ask what it be that make that odd - look little man so dismal ? " I think he be cross in love ! " , say . " be not that enough to make any man dismal , Fanny ? " and he look down at she , splendidly protect she , like at in 's play , or at in 's novel . " cross in love be he ? poor gentleman , " say with a sigh , and she eye turn round towards he with no little kindness and pity -- but do not see the beautiful dark eye . " how dy do , ! " -- a voice break in here -- it be that of a young man in a large white coat with a red neckcloth , over which a dingy shirt - collar be turn so as to exhibit a dubious neck -- with a large pin of bullion or other metal , and a imaginative waistcoat with exceedingly fanciful glass buttons , and trousers that cry with a loud voice , " come look at I and see how cheap and tawdry I be ; my master , what a dirty buck ! " and a little stick in one pocket of he coat , and a lady in pink satin on the other arm --" how dy do -- forget I , I dare say ? ,-- . " " how do you do , , " the of say in he most princely manner --" I hope you be very well . " " pretty bobbish , thanky . " -- and wag he head . " I say , , you have be come it uncommon strong since we have the row at 's , do not you remember . great author , hay ? go about with the swell . see you name in the . I suppose you be too much of a swell to come and have a bit of supper with a old friend ?-- Charterhouse Lane to -morrow night , -- some devilish good fellow from 's , and some stun gin - punch . here be my card . " and with this release he hand from the pocket where he cane be , and pull off the top of he card - case with he tooth produce thence a visit ticket , which he hand to . " you be exceedingly kind , I be sure , " say : " but I regret that I have a engagement which will take I out of town to - morrow night . " and the of , wonder that such a creature as this could have the audacity to give he a card , put 's card into he waistcoat pocket with a lofty courtesy . possibly be not aware that there be any great social difference between and himself . 's father be a surgeon and apothecary at Clavering just as 's papa have be a surgeon and apothecary at . but the impudence of some man be beyond all calculation . " well , old fellow , never mind , " say , who , always frank and familiar , be from vinous excitement even more affable than usual . " if ever you be pass , look up we place , I be mostly at home ; and there be generally a cheese cupboard . , be the bell for the firework ring . come along , . " and he set off run with the rest of the crowd in the direction of the firework . so do presently , when this agreeable youth be out of sight , begin to run with he little companion ; follow after they , with at she side . but the be too majestic and dignify in he movement to run for friend or enemy , and he pursue he course with the usual jaunty swagger which distinguished he step , so that he and he companion be speedily distance by and . perhaps yoArthu forget , or perhaps he do not choose to remember , that the elder couple have no money in they pocket , as have be prove by they adventure at the entrance of the ; howbeit , pay a couple of shilling for himself and he partner , and with she hang close on he arm , scal the staircase which lead to the firework gallery . the and might have follow they if they like , but and be too busy to look back . people be push and squeeze there beside and behind they . one eager individual rush by , and elbow she so , that she fall back with a little cry , upon which , of course , yoArthu catch she adroitly in he arm , and , just for protection , keep she so defend , until they mount the stair , and take they place . poor Foker sate alone on one of the highest benche , he face illuminate by the firework , or in they absence by the moon . yoArthu see he , and laugh , but do not occupy himself about he friend much . he be engage with . how she wonder ! how happy she be ! how she cry o , o , o ,
, as the rocket soar into the air , and shower down in azure , and emerald , and vermilion ! as these wonder blaze and disappear before she , the little girl thrill and tremble with delight at 's side -- she hand be under he arm still , he feel it press he as she look up delighted . " how beautiful they be , sy ! " she cry . " do not call I sir , Fanny , " yoArthu say . a quick blush rush up into the girl 's face . " what shall I call you ? " she say , in a low voice , sweet and tremulous . " what would you wish I to say , sir ? " " again , ! well , I forget ; it be best so , my dear , " Pendennis say , very kindly and gently . " I may call you Fanny ? " " oh yes ! " she say , and the little hand press he arm once more very eagerly , and the girl clung to he so that he could feel she heart beat on he shoulder . " I may call you Fanny , because you be a young girl , and a good girl , Fanny , and I be a old gentleman . but you must not call I anything but sy , or , if you like ; for we live in very different stations , Fanny ; and do not think I speak unkindly ; and -- and why do you take you hand away , ? be you afraid of I ? do you think I would hurt you ? not for all the world , my dear little girl . and -- and look how beautiful the moon and star be , and how calmly they shine when the rocket have go out , and the noisy wheel have do hiss and blaze . when I come here to - night I do not think I should have have such a pretty little companion to sit by my side , and see these fine firework . you must know I live by myself , and work very hard . I write in book and newspaper , Fanny ; and I quite tired out , and be expect to sit alone all night ; and -- do not cry , my dear , dear , little girl . " here break out , rapidly put a end to the calm oration which he have begin to deliver ; for the sight of a woman 's tear always put he nerve in a quiver , and he begin forthwith to coax she and soothe she , and to utter a hundred and twenty little ejaculation of pity and sympathy , which need not be repeat here , because they would be absurd in print . so would a mother 's talk to a child be absurd in print ; so would a lover 's to he bride . that sweet artless poetry bear no translation ; and be too subtle for grammarians 's clumsy definition . you have but the same four letter to describe the salute which you perform on you grandmother 's forehead , and that which you bestow on the sacred cheek of you mistress ; but the same four letter , and not one of they a labial . do we mean to hint that make any use of the monosyllable in question ? not so . in the first place , it be dark : the firework be over , and nobody could see he ; secondly , he be not a man to have this kind of secret , and tell it ; thirdly and lastly , let the honest fellow who have kiss a pretty girl , say what would have be he own conduct in such a delicate juncture ? well , the truth be , that however you may suspect he , and whatever you would have do under the circumstance , or would have like to do , he behave honestly , and like a man . " I will not play with this little girl 's heart , " he say within himself , " and forget my own or she honour . she seem to have a great deal of dangerous and rather contagious sensibility , and I be very glad the firework be over , and that I can take she back to she mother . come along , Fanny ; mind the step , and lean on I . do not stumble , you heedless little thing ; this be the way , and there be you mamma at the door . " and there , indeed , be , unquiet in spirit , and grasp she umbrella . she seize with maternal fierceness and eagerness , and utter some rapid abuse to the girl in a undertone . the expression in 's eye -- stand behind the matron and wink at from under he hat -- be , I be bound to say , indefinably humorous . it be so much so , that could not refrain from burst into a laugh . " you should have take my arm , , " he say , offer it . " I be very glad to bring back quite safe to you . we think you would have follow we up into the gallery . we enjoy the firework , do not we ? " " oh yes ! " say , with rather a demure look . " and the bouquet be magnificent , " say . " and it be ten hour since I have anything to eat , lady ; and I wish you would permit I to invite you to supper . " " dad , " say , " I would loike a snack
snack to ; only I forgawt I purse , or I should have invoit these leedy to a collection . " with considerable asperity say , she ad a eadache , and would much rather go ome . " a lobster salad be the best thing in the world for a headache , " say gallantly , " and a glass of wine I be sure will do you good . come , , be kind to I and oblige I . I sha not have the heart to sup without you , and upon my word I have have no dinner . give I you arm : give I the umbrella . , I be sure you will take care of ; and I shall think angry with I , unless she will favour I with she society . and we will all sup quietly , and go back in a cab together . " the cab , the lobster salad , the frank and good -humoured look of , as he smilingly invite the worthy matron , subdue she suspicions and she anger . since he would be so obliging , she think she could take a little bit of lobster , and so they all march away to a box ; and call for a waither with such a loud and belligerent voice , as cause one of those official instantly to run to he . the carte be examine on the wall , and be ask to choose she favourite dish ; upon which the young creature say she be fond of lobster , too , but also own to a partiality for raspberry tart . this delicacy be provide by , and a bottle of the most frisky champagne be moreover order for the delight of the ladie . drank this ; -- what other sweet intoxication have she not drink in the course of the night ? when the supper , which be very brisk and gay , be over , and and have partaken of some of the rack - punch that be so fragrant at , the bill be call and dischar by with great generosity , -- " loike a foin young gentleman of th ' olden toime , be , " enthusiastically remark . and as , when they go out of the box , he step forward and give Bolton he arm , fell to lot , and the young people walk away in high good - humour together , in the wake of they senior . the champagne and the rack - punch , though take in moderation by all persons , except perhaps poor , who lurch ever so little in he gait , have set they in high spirit and good - humour , so that begin to skip and move she brisk little foot in time to the band , which be play waltze and galop for the dancers . as they come up to the dancing , the music and 's foot seem to go quicker together -- she seem to spre , as if naturally , from the ground , and as if she require repression to keep she there . " should not you like a turn ? " say the of . " what fun it would be ! , , do let I take she once round . " upon which say , " off wid you ! " and not refuse ( indeed , she be a old war - horse , and would have like , at the trumpet 's sound , to have enter the arena herself ) , 's shawl be off she back in a minute , and she and be whir round in a waltz in the midst of a great deal of queer , but exceedingly joyful company . have no mishap this time with little Fanny , as he have with in old day , -- at least , there be no mishap of he make . the pair dance away with great agility and contentment ,-- first a waltz , then a galop , then a waltz again , until , in the second waltz , they be bump by another couple who have join the choir . this be and he pink satin young friend , of whom we have already have a glimpse . very probably have be also partak of supper , for he be even more excited now than at the time when he have previously claim Pen's acquaintance ; and , have run against and he partner , and nearly knock they down , this amiable gentleman of course begin to abuse the people whom he have injured , and break out into a volley of slang against the unoffending couple . " now then , stoopid ! do not keep the ground if you can not dance , old slow coach ! " the young surgeon roar out ( use , at the same time , other expression far more emphatic ) , and be join in he abuse by the shrill language and laughter of he partner ; to the interruption of the ball , the terror of poor little Fanny , and the immense indignation of be furious ; and not so angry at the quarrel as at the shame attend it . a battle with a fellow like that ! a row in a public garden , and with a porter 's daughter on he arm ! what a position for ! he draw poor little Fanny hastily away from the dancer to she mother , and wish that lady , and , and poor Fanny underground , rather than there , in he companionship , and under he protection . when commence he attack , that free - spoken young gentleman have not see who be he opponent ; and directly he be aware that it be whom he have insult ,
, he begin to make apology . " hold you stoopid tongue , , " he say to he partner . " it be a old friend and crony at home . I beg pardon , ; be not aware it be you , old boy . " have be one of the boy of the , who have be present at a combat which have be mention in the early part of this story , when young Pen knock down the biggest champion of the academy , and know that it be dangerous to quarrel with . he apology be as odious to the other as he abuse have be . stop he tipsy remonstrance , by tell he to hold he tongue , and desire he not to use he ( 's ) name in that place or any other ; and he walk out of the garden with a titter behind he from the crowd , every one of whom he would have like to massacre for have be witness to the degrading broil . he walk out of the garden , quite forget poor little Fanny , who come trembl behind he with she mother and the . he be bring back to himself by a word from the , who touch he on the shoulder just as they be pass the inner gate . " there be no ray -admittance except ye pay again , " the say . " have not I better go back and take the fellow you message ? " burst out laugh . " take he a message ! do you think I would fight with such a fellow as that ? " he ask . " no , no ! do not , do not ? " cry out little . " how can you be so wicked , ? " the mutter something about honou , and wink knowingly at , but say gallantly , " no , , do not be frightened . it be my fault to have dance in such a place , -- I beg you padon to have ask you to dance there . " and he give she he arm once more , and call a cab , and put he three friend into it . he be about to pay the driver , and to take another carriage for himself , when little Fanny , still alarme , put she little hand out , and catch he by the coat , and implor he and besotch he to come in . " will nothing satisfy you , " say , in great good - humour , " that I be not go back to fight he ? well , I will come home with you . drive to 's , . " the cab drive to its destination . yoArthu be immensely pleased by the girl 's solicitude about he : she tender terrors quite make he forget he previous annoyance . put the lady into they lodge , have shaken hand kindly with both of they ; and the again whisper to he that he would see um in the morning if he be inclin , and take he message to that " scounthrel . " but the be in he usual condition when he make the proposal ; and be perfectly sure that neither he nor , when they awoke , would remember anything about the dispute . of never rouse from he slumber ; there be no hostile message from to disturb he ; and when woke , it be with a brisker and more lively feel than ordinarily attend that moment in the day of the tired and blase man . a man wake up to care and consol , and the thought of ' change and the counting - house take possession of he as soon as sleep fly from under he night - cap ; a lawyer rouse himself with the early morning to think of the case that will take he all he day to work upon , and the inevitable attorney to whom he have promise he papers ere night . which of we have not he anxiety instantly present when he eye be open , to it and to the world , after he night 's sleep ? kind strengthener that enable we to face the day 's task with renew heart ! beautiful ordinance of Providence that create rest as it award labour ! 's labour , or rather he disposition , be of that sort that he daily occupation do not much interest he , for the excitement of literary composition pretty soon subside with the hire labourer , and the delight of see one 's - self in print only extend to the first two or three appearance in the magazine or newspaper page . put into harness , and oblige to run a stage every day , be as prosaic as any other hack , and will not work without he whip or he feed of corn . so , indeed , perform he work at the ( and since he success as a novelist with a increase salary ) , but without the least enthusiasm , do he best or pretty nearly , and sometimes write ill and sometimes well . he be a literary hack , naturally fast in pace , and brilliant in action . neither do society , or that portion which he see , excite or amuse he over much . in spite of he brag and boast to the contrary , he be too young as yet for woman 's society , which probably can only be have in perfection when a man have cease to think about he own person , and have give up all design of be a conqueror of lady ; he be too young to be admit as a equal amongst man who have make they mark in
in the world , and of whose conversation he could scarcely as yet expect to be more than a listener . and he be too old for the man of pleasure of he own age ; too much a man of pleasure for the man of business ; destiny in a word to be a good deal alone . Fate award this lot of solitude to many a man ; and many like it from taste , as many without difficulty bear it . , in reality , suffer it very equanimously ; but in word , and accord to he wont , grumble over it not a little . " what a nice little artless creature that be , " think at the very instant of wake after the affair ; " what a pretty natural manner she have ; how much pleasanter than the minaudery of the young lady in the ballroom " ( and here he recall to himself some instance of what he could not help see be the artful simplicity of , and some of the stupid graces of other young lady in the polite world ) ; " who could have think that such a pretty rose could grow in a porter 's lodge , or bloom in that dismal old flower - pot of a Shepherd 's ? so she learn to s from old ? if she singe voice be as sweet as she speak , it must be pretty . I like those low voilee voice . ' what would you like I to call you ? ' indeed , poor little Fanny ! it go to my heart to adopt the grand air with she and tell she to call I , ' . ' but we will have no nonsense of that sort -- no and business for I . that old Bows ! so he teach she to s , do he ? he be a dear old fellow , old Bows : a gentleman in those old clothes : a philosopher , and with a kind heart , too . how good he be to I in the Fotheringay business . he , too , have have he grief and he sorrow . I must cultivate old Bows . a man ought to see people of all sort . I be get tired of genteel society . besides , there be nobody in town . yes , I will go and see Bows , and too ; what a rich character ! begad , I will study he , and put he into a book . " in this way we young anthropologist talk with himself , and as be the holiday of the week , the make it be appearance upon that day , and the contributor to that journal have no further call upon they brain or ink - bottle , determine he would take advantage of he leisure , and pay a visit to 's -- of course to see old Bows . the truth be , that if yoArthu have be the most determined roue and artful Lovelace who ever set about deceive a young girl , he could hardly have adopt better means for fascinating and overcome poor little than those which he have employ on the previous night . he dandify protect air , he conceit , generosity , and good - humour , the very sense of good and honesty which have enable he to check the tremulous advance of the young creature , and not to take advantage of that little fluttering sensibility , -- he fault and he virtue at once contribute to make she admire he ; and if we could peep into 's bed ( which she share in a cupboard , along with those two little sister to whom we have see administer gingerbread and apple ) , we should find the poor little maid tossing upon she mattress , to the great disturbance of its other two occupant , and think over all the delight and event of that delightful , eventful night , and all the word , look , and action of , it be splendid hero . many novel have Fanny read , in secret and at home , in three volume and in number . Periodical literature have not reach the height which it have attaine subsequently , and the girl of 's generation be not enable to purchase sixteen page of excitement for a penny , rich with history of crime , murder , oppress virtue , and the heartless seduction of the aristocracy ; but she have have the benefit of the circulating library which , in conjunction with she school and a small brandy - ball and millinery business , , -- and appear to she at once as the type and realisation of all the heroe of all those darling greasy volume which the young girl have devoure . , we have see , be rather a dandy about shirt and haberdashery in general . have look with delight at the fineness of he linen , at the brilliancy of he shirt - stud , at he elegant cambric pocket - handkerchief and white glove , and at the jetty brightness of he charming boot . the have appear and subjugate the poor little handmaid . he image traverse constantly she restless slumber ; the tone of he voice , the blue light of he eye , the generous look , half love , half pity , -- the manly protect smile , the frank , win laughter , -- all these be repeat in the girl 's fond memory . she feel still he arm encircle she , and see he smile so grand as he fill up that delicious glass of champagne . and then she think of the girl , she friend , who use to sneer at she -- of , who be
be so proud , forsooth , because she be engage to a cheesemonger , in a white apron , near ; and of Betsy Rodgers , who make such a to - do about she young man -- a attorney 's clerk , indeed , that go about with a bag ! so that , at about two o'clock in the afternoon -- the family have conclude they dinner ( and , who besides he place of porter of the , be in the employ of Messrs . Tressler , the eminent undertaker of the , be absent in the country with the Countess of 's hearse ) , when a gentleman in a white hat and white trousers make he appearance under the archway , and stop at the porter 's wicket , be not in the least surprised , only delightful , only happy , and blush beyond all measure . she know it could be no other than he . she know he would come . there he be ; there be he Highness beam upon she from the gate . she call to she mother , who be busy in the upper apartment , " , mamma , " and run to the wicket at once , and open it , push aside the other child . how she blush as she give she hand to he ! how affably he take off he white hat as he come in ; the child stare up at he ! he ask if she have sleep well , after the fatigue of the night , and hope she have no headache ; and he say that as he be go that way , he could not pass the door without ask news of he little partner . be perhaps rather shy and suspicious about these advance ; but 's good - humour be inexhaustible , he could not see that he be unwelcome . he look about the premise for a seat , and none be disengage , for a dish - cover be on one , a workbox on the other , and so forth , he take one of the child 's chair , and perch himself upon that uncomfortable eminence . at this , the child begin laugh , the child Fanny louder than all -- at least , she be more amused than any of they , and amaze at his 's condescension . he to sit down in that chair -- that little child 's chair !-- many and many a time after , she regard it : have not we almost all , such furniture in we room , that we fancy people with dear figure , that we memory fill with sweet smiling face , which may never look on we more ? so sate down and talk away with great volubility to . he ask about the undertaking business , and how many mute go down with 's remains ; and about the , and who live there . he seem very much interested about 's cab and horse , and have meet that gentleman in society . he think he should like share in the and ; do do for those chamber ? be there any chamber to let in the ? it be better than the Temple : he should like to come to live in 's . as for , and -- -- be he name ? he be deeply interested in they too . the be a old friend at home . he have dine with he at chamber here , before the come to live with he . what sort of man be the Colonel ? be not he a stout man , with a large quantity of jewellery , and a wig and large black whisker -- very black ( here be immensely waggish , and cause hysteric giggle of delight from the ladie ) -- very black indeed ; in fact , blue black ; that be to say , a rich greenish purple ? that be the man ; he have meet he , too , at Fr---- in . " oh , we know , " say the lady , " ---- be Claver he be often here : two or three time a week with the captain . my little boy have be out for bill - stamp for he . of ! I beg pardon , I should not have mention no secret , " blur out , be talk perfectly into good - nature by this time . " but we know you to be a gentleman , , for I be sure you have show that you can beayve as such . have not , ? " love she mother for that speech . she cast up she dark eye to the low ceiling and say , " oh , that he have , I be sure , ma , " with a voice full of feeling . be rather curious about the bill - stamp , and concern the transaction in 's chamber . and he ask , when not come and join the , whether he too be out for bill - stamp , who he be , whether he see many people , and so forth . these question , put with considerable adroitness by who be interested about 's doings from private motive of he own , be artlessly answer by , and to the utmost of she knowledge and ability , which , in truth , be not very great . these question answer , and be at a loss for more , luckily recollect he privilege as a member of the , and ask the lady whether they would like any order for the play ? the play be they delight , as it be almost always the delight of every theatrical person . when be away professionally ( it appear that
that of late the porter of Shepherd 's have take a serious turn , drank a good deal , and otherwise make himself unpleasant to the ladie of he family ) , they would like of all thing to slip out and go to the theatre -- little , they son , keep the lodge ; and 's most generous and most genteel compliment of order be receive with boundless gratitude by both mother and daughter . clap she hand with pleasure : she face beam with it . she look and nod , and laugh at har mamma , who nod and laugh in she turn . be not superannuate for pleasure yet , or by any means too old for admiration , she think . and very likely , in he conversation with she , have insinuate some compliment , or shape he talk so as to please she . at first against , and suspicious of he , she be he partisan now , and almost as enthusiastic about he as she daughter . when two woman get together to like a man , they help each other on -- each push the other forward -- and the second , out of sheer sympathy , become as eager as the principal :-- at least , so it be say by philosopher who have examine this science . so the offer of the play - ticket , and other pleasantry ; put all party into perfect good - humour , except for one brief moment , when one of the younger child , hear the name of ' 's ' pronounce , come forward and state that she should like very much to go , too ; on which , Fanny say , " do not bother ! " rather sharply ; and say , " Git - long , - , do now , and play in the court :" so that the two little one , namely , - and -- , go away in they little innocent pinafore , and disport in the courtyard on the smooth gravel , round about the statue of Shepherd the . and here , as they be play , they very possibly communicate with a old friend of their and dweller in the ; for while be make himself agreeable to the ladie at the lodge , who be laugh delighted at he sally , a old gentleman pass under the archway from the Inn-square , and come and look in at the door of the lodge . he make a very blank and rueful face when he see seat upon a table , like in the play , in easy discourse with and she daughter . " what ! ? how d' you do , ? " cry out , in a cheery , loud voice . " I be come to see you , and be ask you address of these ladie . " " you be come to see I , be you , sir ? " Bow say , and come in with a sad face , and shake hand with . " on that old man ! " somebody think in the room : and so , perhaps , some one else besides she . in 's our friend say " how would 'ye do , , " in a loud cheery voice on perceiving that gentleman , and salute he in a dashing off - hand manner , yet you could have see a blush upon 's face ( answer by , whose cheek straightway throw out a similar fluttering r signal ) ; and after and have shaken hand , and the former have ironically accept the other 's assertion that he be about to pay 's chamber a visit , there be a gloomy and rather guilty silence in the company , which presently try to dispel by make a great rattling noise . the silence of course depart at 's noise , but the gloom remain and deepen , as the darkness do in a vault if you light up a single taper in it . try to describe , in a jocular manner , the transaction of the previous night , and attempt to give a imitation of vainly expostulat with the check - taker at . it be not a good imitation . what stranger can imitate that perfection ? nobody laugh . do not in the least understand what part be perform , and whether it be the check - taker or the he be take off . wear a alarmed face , and try a timid giggle ; old look as glum as when he fiddle in the orchestra , or play a difficult piece upon the old piano at the . feel that he story be a failure ; he voice sank and dwindle away dismally at the end of it -- flicker , and go out ; and it be all dark again . you could hear the ticket - porter , who loll about 's , as he pass on the flag under the archway : the clink of he boot - heel be note by everybody . " you be come to see I , sir , " say . " will not you have the kindness to walk up to my chamber with I ? you do they a great honour , I be sure . they be rather high up ; but ---- " " oh ! I live in a garret myself , and 's be twice as cheerful as , " Pendennis break in . " I know that you have third - floor apartment , " say ; " and be go to say -- you will please not take my remark as discourteous -- that the air up three pair of stair be wholesomer for gentleman , than the air of a porter 's lodge . "
" " ! " say , whose candle flam up again in he wrath , and who be dispose to be as quarrelsome as man be when they be in the wrong . " will you permit I to choose my society without ---- ? " you be so polite as to say that you be about to honour my umble domicile with a visit , " say , with he sad voice . " shall I show you the way ? and I be old friend , -- very old acquaintance ; and at the earliest dawn of he life we cross each other . " the old man point towards the door with a trembling finger , and a hat in the other hand , and in a attitude slightly theatrical ; so be he word when he speak somewhat artificial , and choose from the vocabulary which he have hear all he life from the pain lip of the orator before the stage - lamps . but he be not act or masquerad , as know very well , though he be dispose to pooh - pooh the old fellow 's melodramatic air . " come along , sir , " he say , " as you be so very pressing . , I wish you a good day . good - bye , ; I shall always think of we night at with pleasure ; and be sure I will remember the theatre ticket . " and he take she hand , press it , be press by it , and be gone . " what a nice young man , to be sure ! " cry . " d' you think so , ? " say . " I be a - thinkin who he be like . when I be at the with , " continue , look through the window - curtain after , as he go up the court with , " there be a young gentleman from the city , that use to come in a tilbry , in a white at , the very image of he , only he whisker be black , and P.'s be red . " " Law , ma ! they be a most beautiful hawburn , " say . " he use to come for , who dance in ' , or the of , ' when be take ill -- a pretty dancer , and a fine stage figure of a woman -- and he be a great sugar - baker in the city , with a country ouse at ; and he use to drive she in the tilbry down ; and one day they drive and be marry at 's , , where they ad they band read quite private ; and she now keep she carriage , and I sor she name in the paper as patroness of the - Ball for the 's . and look at -- cap 's daughter -- she be profeshnl , as all very well know . " thus , and more to this purpose , speak , now pee through the window - curtain , now clean the mug and plate , and consign they to they place in the corner cupboard ; and finish she speech as she and Fanny shook out and fold up the dinner - cloth between they , and restore it to its drawer in the table . although have once before be make pretty accurately to understand what 's pecuniary means and expectation were , I suppose have forget the information acquire at year ago , or have be induce by he natural enthusiasm to exaggerate he friend 's income . he have describe in the most glow term to , on the preceding evening , as he be walk about with she during Pen's little escapade with , have dilate upon the enormous wealth of Pen's famous uncle , the major , and show a intimate acquaintance with 's fund and land property . very likely , in she wisdom , have speculate upon these matters during the night ; and have have vision of Fanny driving in she carriage , like 's old comrade , the dancer of 's Wells . in the last operation of table - cloth fold , these two foolish woman , of necessity , come close together ; and as take the cloth and give it the last fold , she mother put she finger under the young girl 's ching , and kiss she . again the red signal flow out , and flutter on 's cheek . what do it mean ? it be not alarm this time . it be pleasure which cause the poor little Fanny to blush so . poor little Fanny ! what ? be love sin ? that it be so pleasant at the beginning , and so bitter at the end ? after the embrace , think proper to say that she be a - goin out upon business , and that Fanny must keep the lodge ; which Fanny , after a very faint objection indeed , consent to do . so take she bonnet and market - basket , and depart ; and the instant she be go , go and sae by the window which command 's door , and never once take she eye away from that quarter of 's . - and - be buz in one corner of the place , and make believe to read out of a picture - book , which one of they hold topsy - turvy . it be a grave and dreadful tract , of 's collection . do not hear she sister prattl over it . she notice nothing but 's door . at last she give a little shake , and she eye light up . he have come out . he would pass the door again . but
but she poor little countenance fall in a instant more . , indeed , come out ; but follow after he . they pass under the archway together . he only take off he hat , and bow as he look in . he do not stop to speak . in three or four minute -- do not know how long , but she look furiously at he when he come into the lodge -- return alone , and enter into the porter 's room . " where be you ma , dear ? " he say to . " I do not know , " say , with a angry toss . " I do not follow ma 's step wherever she go , I suppose , . " " be I my mother 's keeper ? " Bow say , with he usual melancholy bitterness . " come here , - and - ; I have bring a cake for the one who can read she letter best , and a cake for the other who can read they the next best . " when the young lady have undergone the examination through which put they , they be reward with they gingerbread medal , and go off to discuss they in the court . meanwhile Fanny take out some work , and pretend to busy herself with it , she mind be in great excitement and anger , as she ply she needle . Bows sate so that he could command the entrance from the lodge to the street . but the person whom , perhaps , he expect to see , never make he appearance again . and come in from market , and find in place of the person whom she have expect to see . the reader perhaps can guess what be he name ? the interview between Bows and he guest , when those twill mount to the apartment occupy by the former in common with the descendant of the Milesian king , be not particularly satisfactory to either party . be sulky . if Bows have anything on he mind , he do not care to deliver himself of he thought in the presence of , who remaine in the apartment during the whole of visit ; have quit he bedchamber , indeed , but a very few minute before the arrival of that gentleman . we have witness the deshahille of major Pendennis : will any man wish to be valet - de - chambre to we other hero , ? it would seem that the captain , before issue from he bedroom , scent himself with otto - of - whisky . a rich odour of that delicious perfume breathed from out he , as he hold out the grasp of cordiality to he visitor . the hand which perform that grasp shook wofully : it be a wonder how it could hold the razor with which the poor gentleman dailly operate on he ching . 's room be as neat , on the other hand , as he comray 's be disorderly . he humble wardrobe hang behind a curtain . he book and manuscript music be trimly arrange upon shelf . a lithographed portrait of , as , with the actress 's sprawling signature at the corner , hing faithfully over the old gentleman 's bed . write much better than have be able to do . she Ladyship have laboure assiduously to acquire the art of penmanship since she marriage ; and , in a common note of invitation or acceptance , acquit herself very genteelly . Bows love the old handwriting best , though ; the fair artist 's earlier manner . he have but one specimen of the new style , a note in reply to a song compose and dedicate to , by she most humble servant ; and which document be treasure in he desk amongst he other state papers . he be teache now to s and to write , as he have teach Emily in former day . it be the nature of the man to attach himself to something . when Emily be tear from he he take a substitute : as a man look out for a crutch when he lose a leg ; or lash himself to a raft when he have suffer shipwreck . have give he heart to a woman , no doubt , before he grow to be so fond of a mouse in the Bastille . there be people who in they youth have feel and inspire a heroic passion , and end by be happy in the caress , or agitate by the illness of a poodle . but it be hard upon , and grat to he feeling as a man and a sentimentalist , that he should find again upon he track , and in pursuit of this little Fanny . meanwhile , have not the least idea but that he company be perfectly welcome to Messrs . Pendennis and Bows , and that the visit of the former be intend for himself . he express himself greatly pleased with that mark of poloightness and promise , in he own mind , that he would repay that obligation at least -- which be not the only debt which the owed in life -- by several visit to he young friend . he entertain he affably with news of the day , or rather of ten day previous ; for , in he quality of , remember to have see some of the 's opinion in the and , which be 's oracle . he state that and be go to - , and be most pressing in they invitation that he should join they there . reply with great gravity , that he have hear that be very pleasant , and the exceedingly hospitable to . answer , that the law of
of hospitalitee bekebe a ; that he sariously would think about visit he ; and make some remark upon the splendid festivity at , when he Excellency the of hold the there , and of which he , , have be a humble but pleased spectator . and -- as he hear these oft -told well - remember legend -- recollect the time when he have give a sort of credence to they , and have a certain respect for the captain . Emily and first love , and the little room at , and the kind talk with Bows on the bridge , come back to he . he feel quite kindly dispose towards he two old friend ; and cordially shook the hand of both of they when he rise to go away . he have quite forget about little whilst the be talk , and himself be absorb in other selfish meditation . he only remembe she again as come hobbl down the stair after he , bend evidently upon follow he out of 's . 's precaution be not a lucky one . the wrath of rise at the poor old fellow 's feeble persecution . Confound he , what do he mean by dog I ? think . and he burst out laugh when he be in the and by himself , as he think of the elder 's stratagem . it be not a honest laugh , . perhaps the thought struck himself , and he blush at he own sense of humour . he go off to endeaavor to banish the thought which occupy he , whatever those thought might be , and try various place of amusement with but indifferent success . he struggl up the highest stair of the ; but when he have arrive , pante at the height of the eminence , have come up with he , and be bear he company . he go to the , and write a long letter home , exceedingly witty and sarcastic , and in which , if he do not say a single word about and , it be because he think that subject , however interesting to himself , would not be very interesting to he mother and . nor could the novel or the library table fix he attention , nor the grave and respectable Jawkins ( the only man in town ) , who wish to engage he in conversation ; nor any of the amusement which he try , after fly from . he pass a on he way home , and see ' stunning ,' ' Roar of ,' ' and , ' placard in vermilion letter on the gate . he go into the pit , and see the lovely , as usual , in a man 's attire ; and that eminent buffo actor , , dress as a woman . 's travesty seem to he a horrid and hideous degradation ; 's glance and ankle have not the least effect . he laugh again , and bitterly , to himself , as he think of the effect which she have produce upon he , on the first night of he arrival in , a short time -- what a long long time ago ! or near the have long desert the green and pretty , which in make and to pluck the innocent white and red rose which become the badge of they bloody wars ; and the learned and pleasant writer of the of tell we that " the commonest and hardiest kind of rose have long cease to put forth a bud " in that smoky air . not many of the present occupier of the building round about the quarter know or care , very likely , whether or not rose grow there , or pass the old gate , except on they way to chamber . the attorney 's clerk do not carry flower in they bag , or posy under they arm , as they run to the counsel 's chamber -- the few lawyer who take constitutional walk think very little about and , especially since the railroad business be over . only antiquarian and literary amateur care to look at the garden with much interest , and fancy good and with he short face pace up and down the road ; or dear in the summer - house , perhaps meditat about the next ' citizen of the , ' or the new suit that , the tailor , be fashione for he , or the dunning letter that have send . Tread heavily on the gravel , and roll majestically along in a snuff - colou suit , and a wig that sadly want the barber 's powder and iron , one see the great doctor step up to he ( he Scotch lackey follow at the lexicographer 's heel , a little the worse for port wine that they have be take at the ) , and ask to come home and take a dish of tea with . kind faith of Fancy ! and be as real to we now as the two doctor and the boozy and faithful . the poetical figure live in we memory just as much as the real personage , -- and as be of a romantic and literary turn , by no means addict to the legal pursuit common in the neighbourhood of the place , we may presume that he be cherish some such poetical reflection as these , when , upon the evening after the event record in the last chapter , the young gentleman choose the as a place for exercise and meditation . on the even the Temple be commonly calm . the chamber be for the most part vacant : the great lawyer be give grand dinner - party at they house in the Belgravian or Tyburnian district ; the agreeable young
young barrister be absent , attend those party , and pay they respects to 's excellent claret , or 's accomplished daughter the uninvited be partaking of the economic joint and the modest half - pint of wine at the club , entertain themselves , and the rest of the company in the club - room , with joke and point of wit and law . nobody be in chamber at all , except poor , who be ill , and whose laundress be make he gruel ; or , who be a amateur of the flute , and whom you may hear pipe solitary from he chamber in the second floor ; or young , the student , from whose open window come a great gush of cigar smoke , and at whose door be a quantity of dish and cover , bear the insignia of Dick ' or the cock . but stop ! Whither do lead we ? it be vacation time ; and with the exception of , nobody be in at all . perhaps it be solitude , then , which drive into the garden ; for although he have never before pass the gate , and have look rather carelessly at the pretty flower - bed , and the group of pleased citizen saunter over the trim lawn and the broad gravel - walk by the river , on this evening it happen , as we have say , that the young gentleman , who have dine alone at a tavern in the neighbourhood of the , take a fancy , as he be return home to he chamber , to take a little walk in the garden , and enjoy the fresh evening air , and the sight of the shining Thames . after walk for a brief space , and look at the many peaceful and happy group round about he , he grow tired of the exercise , and betake himself to one of the summer - house which flank either end of the main walk , and there modestly seat himself . what be he cogitation ? the evening be delightfully bright and calm ; the sky be cloudless ; the chimney on the opposite bank be not smoke ; the wharf warehouse look rosy in the sunshine , and as clear as if they , too , have wash for the holiday . the steamer rush rapidly up and down the stream , laden with holiday passenger . the bell of the multitudinous city churche be ring to even prayer -- such peaceful Sabbath evening as this may have remember in he early day , as he pace , with he arm round he mother 's waist , on the terrace before the lawn at home . the sun be ligh up the little , too , as well as the , and sink downward majestically behind the Clavering elm , and the tower of the familiar village church . be it thought of these , or the sunset merely , that cause the blush in the young man 's face ? he beat time on the bench , to the chorus of the bell without ; flick the dust off he shining boot with he pocket - handkerchief , and start up , stamp with he foot and say , " no , by , I will go home . " and with this resolution , which indicate that some struggle as to the propriety of remain where he be , or of quit the garden , have be go on in he mind , he step out of the summer - house . he nearly knock down two little child , who do not indeed reach much higher than he knee , and be trot along the gravel - walk , with they long blue shadow slant towards the east . one cry out " oh ! " the other begin to laugh ; and with a know little infantile chuckle , say , " ! " and , look down , see he two little friend of the day before , - and - . he blush more than ever at see they , and seize the one whom he have nearly upset , jump she up into the air , and kiss she : at which sudden assault - begin to cry in great alarm . this cry bring up instantly two lady in clean collar and new ribbon , and grand shawl , namely : in a rich scarlet , and a black silk dress , and with a yellow scarf and a sweet sprigged muslin , and a parasol -- quite the lady . do not say one single word : though ; she eye flash a welcome , and shone as bright -- as bright as the most blazing window in . but , after admonish - , say , " Lor sir -- how very odd that we should meet you year ! I ope you ave you ealth well , sir . -- be not it odd , Fanny , that we should meet ? " what do you mean by snigger , ? when young have be stay at a country - house , have you never , by any singular coincidence , be walk with you Fanny in the shrubbery ? have you and you Fanny never happen to be listen to the band of the at , when young and come clink down the ? have you and you darling Frances never chance to be visit old widow Wheezy at the cottage on the common , when the young curate have step in with a tract adapt to the rheumatism ? do you suppose that , if singular coincidence occur at the hall , they do not also happen at the Lodge ? it be a coincidence , no doubt : that be all . in the course
course of the conversation on the day previous , have merly say , in the simplest way imaginable , and in reply to a question of , that although some of the court be gloomy , part of the Temple be very cheerful and agreeable , especially the chamber look on the river and around the garden , and that the garden be a very pleasant walk on evening and frequent by a great number of people -- and here , by the merest chance , all we acquaintance meet together , just like so many people in genteel life . what could be more artless , good - natured , or natural ? look very grave , pompous , and dandified . he be unusually smart and brilliant in he costume . he white duck trousers and white hat , he neckcloth of many colour , he light waistcoat , gold chain , and shirt - stud , give he the air of a prince of the blood at least . how he splendour become he figure ! be anybody ever like he ? some one thought . he blush -- how he blush become he ! the same individual say to herself . the child , on see he the day before , have be so strike with he , that after he have go away they have be play at he . and - , stick she little chubby finger into the arm -hole of she pinafore , as be will not to do with he waistcoat , have say , " now , - , I will be . " have laugh till she cry , and smother she sister with kiss for that feat . how happy , too , she be to see embrace the child ! if be red , , on the contrary , be very worn and pale . yoArthu remarke it , and ask kindly why she look so fatigued . " I be awake all night , " say , and begin to blush a little . " I put out she candle , and horder she to go to sleep and leave off readin , " interpose the fond mother . " you be read ! and what be it that interest you so ? " ask , amuse . " oh , it be so beautiful ! " say . " what ? " " ' , ' " sigh out . " how I do hate that -- Neaera -- I do not know the pronunciation . and I love , and , oh , how dear he be ! " how have discover the novel of ' , ' and that be the author ? this little person remembe every single word which have speak on the night previous , and how he write in book and newspaper . what book ? she be so eager to know , that she have almost a mind to be civil to old Bows , who be suffer under she displeasure since yesterday , but she determine first to make application to . she begin by coax the and smile upon he in she most win way , as she help to arrange he dinner and set he humble apartment in order . she be sure he linen want mending ( and indeed the 's linen - closet contain some curiious specimen of manufactured flax and cotton ) . she would mmend he shirts -- all he shirts . what horrid holes -- what funny holes ! she put she little face through one of they , and laugh at the old warrior in the most win manner . she would have make a funny little picture look through the hole . then she daintily remove 's dinner thing , trip about the room as she have see the dancer do at the play ; and she dance to the 's cupboard , and produce he whisky - bottle , and mix he a tumbler , and must taste a drop of it -- a little drop ; and the must s she one of he song , he dear song , and teach it to she . and when he have sng a irish melody in he rich quavering voice , fancie it be he who be fascinate the little siren , she put she little question about and he novel , and have get a answer , care for nothing more , but leave the at the piano about to s she another song , and the dinner - tray on the passage , and the shirt on the chair , and run downstairs quicken she pace as she s . , as he say , be not a litherary cyarkter , nor have he as yet find time to peruse he young friend 's ellygant perfaurumance , though he intend to teak a early opporchunitee of purchase a cawpee of he work . but he know the name of 's novel from the fact that . , , and other frequenter of the , spoke of ( and not all of they with great friendship ; for call he a confound coxcomb , and wonder that do not kick he etc. ) by the sobriquet of , -- and be hence enable to give Fanny the information which she require . " and she go and ast for it at the libery , " say ,-- several libery -- and some ad it and it be bout , and some ad not it . and one of the libery as ad it would not let ave it without a sovering : and she ad not one , and she come back a - cryin to I -- do not you , ?-- and I give she a sovering . " " and , oh , I be in such a fright lest any one should have
have come to the libery and take it while I be away , " say , she cheek and eye glow . " and , oh , I do like it so ! " yoArthu be touch by this artless sympathy , immensely flatter and move by it . " do you like it ? " he say . " if you will come up to my chamber I will -- no , I will bring you one -- no , I will send you one . good night . thank you , . bless you . I must not stay with you . good - bye , good - bye . " and , press she hand once , and nodd to she mother and the other child , he strode out of the garden . he quicken he pace as he go from they , and run out of the gate talk to himself . " dear , dear little thing , " he say , -- " darl little Fanny ! you be worth they all . I wish to be back . I would go home to my mother . I must not see she . I will not . I will not , so help I ---- " as he be talk thus , and run , the passer - by turn to look at he , he run against a little old man , and perceive it be . " you very umble servant , sir , " say Bows , make a sarcastic bow , and lift he old hat from he forehead . " I wish you a good day , " yoArthu answer sulkily . " do not let I detain you , or give you the trouble to follow I again . I be in a hurry , sir . good evening . " think have some reason for hurrying to he room . " where be they ? " exclaim the old gentleman . " you know whom i mean . they be not in you room , sir , be they ? they tell they be go to church at the Temple , they be not there . they be in you chamber : they must not stay in you chamber , . " " damn it , sir ! " cry out , fiercely . " come and see if they be in my chamber : here be the court and the door -- come in and see . " and Bows , take off he hat and bow first , follow the young man . they be not in Pen's chamber , as we know . but when the garden be close , the two woman , who have be have but a melancholy evening 's amusement , walk away sadly with the child , and they enter into , and stand under the lamp - post which cheerfully ornament the centre of that quadrangle , and look up to the third floor of the house where 's chamber were , and where they see a light presently kindle . then this couple of fool go away , the child drag wearily after they , and return to , who be immerse in rum - and - water at he lodge in 's . look round the blank room which the young man occupi , and which have receive but very few ornament or addition since the last time we see they . 's old bookcase and batter library , Pen's write - table with its litter of papers , present a aspect cheerless enough . " will you like to look in the bedroom , , and see if my victim be there ? " he say bitterly ; " or whether I have make away with the little girl , and hide they in the coal - hole ? " " you word be sufficient , , " the other say in he sad tone . " you say they be not here , and I know they be not . and I hope they never have be here , and never will come . " " upon my word , sir , you be very good , to choose my acquaintance for I , " yoArthu say , in a haughty tone ; " and to suppose that anybody would be the worse for my society . I remember you , and owe you kindness from old time , ; or I should speak more angrily than I do , about a very intolerable sort of persecution to which you seem inclined to subject I . you follow I out of you yesterday , as if you want to watch that I should not steal something . " here stammer and turn red , directly he have say the word ; he feel he have give the other a opening , which instantly take . " I do think you come to steal something , as you say the word , sir , " Bows say . " do you mean to say that you come to pay a visit to poor old Bows , the fiddler ; or to , at the porter 's lodge ? of fie ! such a fine gentleman as , , do not condescmend to walk up to my garret , or to sit in a laundress 's kitchen , but for reason of he own . and my belief be that you come to steal a pretty girl 's heart away , and to ruin it , and to spurn it afterwards , . that be what the world make of you young dandy , you gentleman of fashion , you high and mighty aristocrat that trample upon the people . it be sport to you , but what be it to the poor , think you ; the toy of you pleasure , whom you play
play with and whom you fl into the street when you be tired ? I know you order , sir . I know you selfishness , and you arrogance , and you pride . what do it matter to my lord , that the poor man 's daughter be make miserable , and she family bring to shame ? you must have you pleasure , and the people of course must pay for they . what be we make for , but for that ? it be the way with you all -- the way with you all , sir . " be speak beside the question , and have he advantage here , which he be not sorry to take -- not sorry to put off the debate from the point upon which he adversary have first engage it . yoArthu break out with a sort of laugh , for which he ask 's pardon . " yes , I be a aristocrat , " he say , " in a palace up three pair of stair , with a carpet nearly as handsome as yours , . my life be pass in grind the people , be it ?-- in ruin virgin and rob the poor ? my good sir , this be very well in a comedy , where slap he breast , and ask my how dare he trample on a honest man and peak out a 's fireside ; but in real life , , to a man who have to work for he bread as much as you do -- how can you talk about aristocrat tyrannising over the people ? have I ever do you a wrong ? or assume air of superiority over you ? do you not have a early regard for I -- in day when we be both of we romantic young fellow , ? come , do not be angry with I now , and let we be as good friend as we be before . " " those day be very different , " answer ; " and be a honest , impetuous young fellow then ; rather selfish and conceit , perhaps , but honest . he like you then , because you be ready to ruin yourself for a woman . " " and now , sir ? " yoArthu ask . " and now time be change , and you want a woman to ruin herself for you , " Bows answer . " I know this child , sir . I have always say this lot be hang over she . she have heat she little brain with novel , until she whole thought be about love and lover , and she scarcely see that she tread on a kitchen floor . I have teach the little thing . she be full of many talents and win way , I grant you . I be fond of the girl , sir . I be a lonely old man ; I lead a life that I do not like , among boon companion , who make I melancholy . I have but this child that I care for . have pity upon I , and do not take she away from I , -- do not take she away . " the old man 's voice break as he speak . its accents touch , much more than the menacing or sarcastic tone which have commence by adopting . " indeed , " say he , kindly , " you do I a wrong if you fancy I intend one to poor little Fanny . I never see she till night . it be the merest chance that we friend throw she into my way . I have no intentions regard she -- that be -- -- " " that be , you know very well that she be a foolish girl , and she mother a foolish woman , -- that be , you meet she in the , and of course without previous concert , -- that be , that when I find she yesterday read the book you have write , she scorn I , " Bows say . " what be I good for but to be laugh at ? a deform old fellow like I ; a old fiddler , that wear a threadbare coat , and get he bread by play tune at a ale - house ? you be a fine gentleman , you be . you wear scent in you handkerchief , and a ring on you finger . you go to dine with great people . who ever give a crust to old Bows ? and yet I might have be as good a man as the best of you . I might have be a man of genius , if I have have the chance ; ay , and have live with the master - spirit of the land . but everything hads ail with I . I have ambition once , and write play , poem , music -- nobody would give I a hearing . I never love a woman , but she laugh at I ; and here I be in my old age alone -- alone ! do not take this girl from I , , I say again . leave she with I a little longer . she be like a child to I till yesterday . why do you step in , and make she to mock my deformity and old age ? " " I be guiltless of that , at least , " yoArthu say , with something of a sigh . " upon my word of honour , I wish I have never see the girl . my calling be not seduction , . I do not imagine that I have make a impression on poor Fanny , until --until to - night . and then
then , sir , I be sorry , and be fly from my temptation , as you come upon I . and , " he add , with a glow upon he cheek , which , in the gather darkness , he companion could not see , and with a audible tremor in he voice , " I do not mind tell you , sir , that on this evening , as the church bell be ring , I think of my own home , and of woman angelically pure and good , who dwell there ; and I be run hither as I meet you , that I might avoid the danger which beset I , and ask strength of to do my duty . " after these word from a silence ensue , and when the conversation be resum by he guest , the latter spoke in a tone which be much more gentle and friendly . and on take farewell of , ask leave to shake hand with he , and with a very warm and affectionate greeting on both side , apologise to for have mistake he , and pay he some compliment which cause the young man to squeeze he old friend 's hand heartily again . and as they part at door , yoArthu say he have give a promise , and he hope and trust that might rely on it ? " amen to that prayer , " say , and go slowly down the stair . the happy again Early in this history , we have have occasion to speak of the little town of , near which Pen's paternal home of Fairoaks stood , and of some of the people who inhabite the place ; and as the society there be by no means amuse or pleasant , we report concern it be not carry to any very great length . , the gentleman whose acquaintance we lately make at , be one of the choice spirit of the little town , when he visit it during he vacation , and enliven the table of he friend there , by the wit of 's and the gossip of the fashionable circle which he frequent . , the young gentleman whom have thrash in consequence of the quarrel in the affair , be , whilst a pupil at the at , make very welcome at the tea - table of , 's mother , and be free of the surgery , where he know the way to the tamarind - pots , and could scent he pocket - handkerchief with rose-water . and it be at this period of he life that he form a attachment for , whom , on he father 's demise , he marry , and take home to he house of the , at a few mile from . the family have possess and cultivate a estate there for many year , as yeoman and farmer . 's father pull down the old farmhouse ; build a flaring new whitewashed mansion , with capacious stable ; and a piano in the drawing - room ; keep a pack of harrier ; and assume the title of . when he die , and he son reign in he stead , the family might be fairly consider to be establish as county gentry . and , at , do no great wrong in boasting about he brother - in - law 's place , he hound , horse , and hospitality , to he admiring comrade at 's . every year , at a time commonly when . could not leave the increase duty of she nursery , come up to for a lark , have room at the Tavistock , and he and indulge in the pleasure of the town together . Ascot , the theatre , , and the convivial tavern in the joyous neighbourhood of , be visit by the vivacious squire , in company with he learn brother . when he be in , as he say , he like to do as do , and to " go it a bit , " and when he return to the west , he take a new bonnet and shawl to , and relinquish , for country sport and occupations during the next eleven month , the elegant amusement of life . keep up a correspondence with he relative , and supply he with choice news of the metropolis , in return for the basket of hare , partridge , and cloute cream which the squire and he good - natured wife forward to . a youth more brilliant and distinguished they do not know . he be the life and soul of they house , when he make he appearance in he native place . he songs , joke , and fun keep the in a roar . he have save they eldest darling 's life , by take a fish - bone out of she throat : in fine , he be the delight of they circle . as ill - luck would have it , again fell in with , only three day after the rencontre at . faithful to he vow , he have not be to see little Fanny . he be try to drive she from he mind by occupation , or other mental excitement . he laboure , though not to much profit , incessantly in he room ; and , in he capacity of critic for the , make woful and savage onslatch on a poem and a romance which come before he for judgment . these author slain , he go to dine alone at the lonely club of the , where the vast solitude frightene he , and make he only the more moody . he have be to more theatre for relaxation . the whole house be roar with laughter and applause , and he see
see only a ignoble farce that make he sad . it would have dam the spirits of the buffoon on the stage to have see Pen's dismal face . he hardly know what be happen ; the scene and the drama pass before he like a dream or a fever . then he think he would go to the , he old haunt with -- he be not a bit sleepy yet . the day before he have walk twenty mile in search after rest , over and lane , and have get no sleep at night . he would go to the . it be a sort of comfort to he to think he should see . be there , very calm , presid at the old piano . some tremendous comic songs be sung , which make the room crack with laughter . how strange they seem to ! he could only see Bows . in a extinct volcano , such as he boast that he breast be , it be wonderful how he should feel such a flame ! two day ' indulgence have kind it ; two day ' abstinence have set it burn in fury . so , muse upon this , and drink down one glass after another , as ill luck would have it , 's eye light upon , who have be to the theatre , like himself , and , with two or three comrade , now enter the room . whisper to he companion , greatly to 's annoyance . yoArthu feel that the other be talk about he . then work through the room , follow by he friend , and come and take a place opposite , nodd familiarly to he , and hold he out a dirty hand to shake . shook hand with he fellow- townsman . he think he have be needlessly savage to he on the last night when they have meet . as for , perfectly at good - humour with himself , and the world , it never enter he mind that he could be disagreeable to anybody ; and the little dispute , or " chaff , " as he style it , of , be a trifle which he do not in the least regard . the disciple of have call for " four stout , " with which he and he party refresh themselves , begin to think what would be the most amusing topic of conversation with , and hit upon that precise one which be most painful to we young gentleman . " night at -- be not it ? " he say , and wink in a very knowing way . " I be glad you like it , " poor Pen say , groan in spirit . " I be dev'lish cut --uncommon -- be dine with some chap at . that be a pretty bit of muslin hang on you arm -- who be she ? " ask the fascinating student . the question be too much for . " have I ask you any question about yourself , ? " he say . " I do not mean any offence -- beg pardon -- hang it , you cut up quite savage , " say Pen's astonished interlocutor . " do you remember what take place between we the other night ? " ask , with gather wrath . " you forget ? very probably . you be tipsy , as you observ just now , and very rude . " " hang it , sir , I ask you pardon , " say , look red . " you do certainly , and it be grant with all my heart . I be sure . but if you recollect , I beg that you would have the goodness to omit I from the list of you acquaintance for the future ; and when we meet in public , that you would not take the trouble to recognise I . will you please to remember this , hereafter ? and as the song be begin , permit I to leave you to the unrestrained enjoyment of the music . " he take he hat , and make a bow to the amazed leave the table , as 's comrade , after a pause of wonder , set up such a roar of laughter at , as call for the intervention of the of the room ; who bawl out , " Silence , gentlemen ; do have silence for the ! " which popular song begin as leave the . he flatter himself that he have command he temper perfectly . he rather wish that have be pugnacious . he would have like to fight he or somebody . he go home . the day 's work , the dinner , the play , the whisky - and - water , the quarrel ,-- nothing soothe he . he sleep no better than on the previous night . a few day afterwards , write home a letter to in the country , of which for the principal subject . describe 's pursuit in , and he confound insolence of behaviour to he old friend from home . he say he be a abandon criminal , a regular , a fellow who , when he do come into the country , ink to be keep out of honest people 's house . he have see he at , dance with a innocent girl in the lower rank of life , of whom he be make a victim . he have find out from a irish gentleman ( formerly in the army ) , who frequent a club of which he , , be member , who the girl be , on whom this conceit humbug be practise he infernal art ; and he think he should warn she father , etc. etc. , -- the
the letter then touch on general news , convey the writer 's thanks for the last parcel and the rabbit , and hint he extreme readiness for further favour . about once a year , as we have state , there be occasion for a christening at the , and it happen that this ceremony take place a day after have receive the letter of he brother - in - law in town . the infant ( a darling litle girl ) be christen , after its two godmother , and of , and as of course Hobnell have communicate 's letter to he wife , impart it be horrid contents to she two gossip . a pretty story it be , and prettily it be tell throughout Clavering in the course of that day . do not -- she be too much shocked to do so -- speak on the matter to she mamma , but have no such feeling of reserve . she talk over the matter not only with , but with and the Honourable , with , she daughter be to that end order out of the room , with , and , in a word , with the whole of the society . Madame Fribsby look furtively up at she picture of the dragoon , and inwards into she own wounded memory , say that man would be man , and as long as they be man would be deceiver ; and she pensively quote some line from , request to know where deceive lover should rest ? have no word of hatred , horror , contempt , strong enough for a villain who could be capable of conduct so base . this be what come of early indulgence , and insolence , and extravagance , and aristocratic air ( it be certain that have refuse to drink tea with ) , and attend the corrupt and horrid party in the dreadful modern ! be afraid that she must acknowledge that the mother 's fatal partiality have spoil this boy , that he literary success have turn he head , and he horrid passion have make he forget the principle which have instil into he in early life . Glanders , the atrocious of , when inform of the occurrence by , whistle and make jocular allusion to it at dinner - time ; on which call he a brute , and order the girl again out of the room , as the burst out laugh . be calm under the intelligence ; but rather pleased than otherwise ; it only serve to confirm the opinion which he have always have of that wretched young man : not that he know anything about he -- not that he have read one line of he dangerous and poisonous work ; forbid that he should : but what could be expect from such a youth , and such frightful , such lamentable , such deplorable want of seriousness ? form the subject for a second sermon at the chapel - of - ease : where the dangers of , and the crime of reading or write novel , be point out on a evening to a large and warm congregation . they do not wait to hear whether he be guilty or not . they take he wickedness for grant : and with these admirable moralist , it be who should fl the stone at poor . the next day , alone and almost faint with emotion and fatigue , walk or rather run to 's house to consult the good doctor . she have have a anonymous letter ;-- some have think it he or she duty to stab the good soul who have never do mortal a wrong -- a anonymous letter with reference to , point out the doom of such sinner and a detailed account of Pen's crime . she be in a state of terror and excitement pitiable to witness . two or three hour of this pain have a she already . in she first moment of agitation she have drop the letter , and have read it . blush when she read it ; she whole frame tremble , but it be with anger . " the coward , " she say .-- it be not true .-- no , mother , it be not true . " " it be true , and you have do it , , " cry out fiercely . " why do you refuse he when he ask you ? why do you break my heart and refuse he ? it be you who lead he into crime . it be you who fling he into the arm of this -- this woman .-- do not speak to I .-- do not answer I . I will never forgive you , never . , bring I my bonnet and shawl . I will go out . I will not have you come with I . go away . leave I , cruel girl ; why have you bring this shame on I ? " and bid she daughter and she servants keep away from she , she run down the road to . , glance over the letter , think he know the handwriting , and , of course , be already acquaint with the charge make against poor . against he own conscience , perhaps ( for the worthy doctor , like most of we , have a considerable natural aptitude for receive any report unfavourable to he neighbour ) , he strove to conseal ; he point out that the slander come from a anonymous quarter , and therefore must be the work of a rascal ; that the charge might not be true -- be not true , most likely -- at least , that must be hear before he be condemn ; that the son of such a mother be not
not likely to commit such a crime , etc. etc . Hel at once see through he feint of objection and denial . " you think he have do it , " she say , --" you know you think he have do it . oh , why do I ever leave he , , or suffer he away from I ? but he can not be dishonest -- pray , not dishonest -- you do not think that , do you ? remember he conduct about that other -- person -- how madly he be attach to she . he be a honest boy then -- he be now . and I thank -- yes , I fall down on my knee and thank he pay . you say he be good -- you do yourself . and now -- if this woman love he -- and you know they must -- if he have take she from she home , or she temp he , which be most likely -- why still , she must be he wife and my daughter . and he must leave the dreadful world and come back to I -- to he mother , . let we go away and bring he back -- yes -- bring he back -- and there shall be joy for the -- the sinner that repenteth . let we go now , directly , dear friend -- this very ---- " Helen could say no more . she fall back and faint . she be carry to a bed in the house of the pitying Doctor , and the surgeon be call to attend she . she lay all night in a alarming state . come to she , or to the rectory rather ; for she would not see . and , still beseech she to be tranquil , and grow bolder and more confident of 's innocence as he witness the terrible grief of the poor mother , write a letter to warn he of the rumour that be against he and earnestly pray that he would break off and repent of a connexion so fatal to he best interest and he soul 's welfare . and ?--be she heart not wring by the thought of 's crime and 's estrangement ? be it not a bitter blow for the innocent girl to think that at one stroke she should lose all the love which she care for in the world ? have very nearly be the last of the 's letter be send off to its destination in , and the worthy clergyman endeavoure to soothe down into some state of composure until a answer should arrive , which the Doctor try to think , or at any rate persist in say , would be satisfactory as regard the morality of . at least 's wisdom of move upon and appear in person to warn she son of he wickedness , be impracticable for a day or two . the apothecary forbade she move even so far as Fairoak for the first day , and it be not until the subsequent morning that she find herself again back on she sofa at home , with the faithful , though silent , nurse at she side . Unluckily for himself and all party , never read that homily which address to he , until many week after the epistle have be compose ; and day after day the widow wait for she son 's reply to the charge against he ; she own illness increase with every day 's delay . it be a hard task for to bear the anxiety ; to witness she dearest friend 's suffering ; worst of all , to support 's estrangement , and the pain cause to she by that averted affection . but it be the custom of this young lady to the utmost of she power , and by means of that gracious assistance which award to she pure and constant prayer , to do she duty . and ; as that duty be perform quite noiselessly , -- while the supplication , which endow she with the requisite strength for fulfil it , also take place in she own chamber , away from all mortal sight , -- we , too , must be perforce silent about these virtue of hers , which no more bear public talk about , than a flower will bear to bloom in a ballroom . this only we will say -- that a good woman be the loveliest flower that bloom under heaven ; and that we look with love and wonder upon its silent grace , it be pure fragrance , its delicate bloom of beauty . sweet and beautiful !-- the fairest and the most spotless !-- be it not pity to see they bow down or devoure by or inexorable -- waste in disease -- pin with long pain -- or cut off by sudden fate in they prime ? we may deserve grief -- but why should these be unhappy ?--except that we know that chasten those whom it love best ; be pleased , by repeat trial , to make these pure spirits more pure . so never get the letter , although it be duly posted and faithfully dischar by the postman into he letter - box in , and thence carry by the laundress to he writing - table with the rest of he lordship 's correspondence ; into which room , have we not see a picture of he , enter from he little bedroom adjoining , as , he laundress , be in the act of drink he gin ? those kind reader who have watch 's career hithertoo , and have make , as they naturally would do , observation upon the moral character and peculiarity of they acquaintance , have probably discover by this time what be the prevailing
prevailing fault in Pen's disposition , and who be that greatest enemy , artfully indicate in the title - page , with whom he have to contmend . not a few of we , my beloved public , have the very same rascal to contend with : a scoundrel who take every opportunity of bring we into mischief , of plunge we into quarrel , of lead we into idleness and unprofitable company , and what not . in a word , Pen's greatest enemy be himself : and as he have be pamper , and coax , and indulge that individual all he life , the rogue grow insolent , as all spoiled servants will be ; and at the slightest attempt to coerce he , or make he do that which be unpleasant to he , become frantically rude and unruly . a person who be use to make sacrifice -- , for instance , who have get such a habit of give up she own pleasure for other -- can do the business quite easily ; but , unaccustomed as he be to any sort of self - denial , suffer woundily when call on to pay he share , and savagely grumble at be oblige to forgo anything he like . he have resolve in he mighty mind then that he would not see Fanny ; and he would not . he try to drive the thought of that fascinating little person out of he head , by constant occupation , by exercise , by dissipation and society . he work then too much ; he walk and ride too much ; he eat , drank , and smoke too much : nor could all the cigar and the punch of which he partake drive little 's image out of he inflam brain , and at the end of a week of this discipline and self - denial we young gentleman be in bed with a fever . let the reader who have never have a fever in chamber pity the wretch who be bound to undergo that calamity . a committee of marriageable lady , or of any Christian person interested in the propagation of the domestic virtue , should employ a Cruikshank or a Leech , or some other kindly expositor of the folly of the day , to make a series of design represent the horror of a bachelor 's life in chamber , and lead the beholder to think of better thing , and a more wholesome condition . what can be more uncomfortable than the bachelor 's lonely breakfast ?-- with the black kettle in the dreary fire in midsummer ; or , worse still , with the fire go out at , half a hour after the laundress have quit the sitting - room ? into this solitude the owner enter shivering , and have to commence he day by hunting for coal and wood ; and before he begin the work of a student , have to discharge the duty of a housemaid , vice , who be absent without leave . or , again , what can form a finer subject for the classical designer than the bachelor 's shirt -- that garment which he want to assume just at dinner - time , and which he find without any button to fasten it ? then there be the bachelor 's return to chamber , after a merry holiday , spend in a cosy country - house , full of pretty face , and kind welcomes and regret . he leave he portmanteau at the barber 's in the court : he light he dismal old candle at the sputtering little lamp on the stair : he enter the blank familiar room , where the only token to greet he , that show any interest in he personal welfare , be the bill , which be lie in wait for he , amiably spread out on he reading - table . add to these scene a appal picture of bachelor 's illness , and the rent in the Temple will begin to fall from the day of the publication of the dismal diorama . to be well in chamber be melancholy , and lonely and selfish enough ; but to be ill in chamber -- to pass long night of pain and watchfulness -- to long for the morning and the laundress -- to serve yourself you own medicine by you own watch -- to have no other companion for long hour but you own sickening fancie and fevered thought : no kind hand to give you drink if you be thirsty , or to smooth the hot pillow that crumple under you , -- this , indeed , be a fate so dismal and tragic , that we shall not enlarge upon its horror , and shall only heartily pity those bachelor in the Temple , who brave it every day . this lot befell after the various excess which we have mention , and to which he have subject he unfortunate brain . one night he go to be ill , and the next day awoke worse . he only visitor that day , besides the laundress , be the 's , from the office , whom the writer endeavoure , as best he could , to satisfy . he exertion to complete he work render he fever the greater : he could only furnish a part of the quantity of " copy " usually supply by he ; and be absent , and not in to give a help , the political and editorial column of the look very blank indeed ; nor do the sub-editor know how to fill they . rush up to Pen's chamber , and find that gentleman so exceedingly unwell , that the good - natured Irishman set to work to supply he place , if possible , and produce a
a series of political and critical composition , such as no doubt greatly edify the reader of the periodical in which he and be concerned . Allusion to the greatness of , and the genius and virtue of the inhabitant of that injured country , flowed magnificently from 's pen ; and , the of the paper , who be enjoy himself placidly at boulogne- sur - Mer , look over the column of the journal , which be forward to he , instantly recognise the hand of the great Sub-editor , and say , laugh , as he fling over the paper to he wife , " look here , , my dear , here be Jack at work again . " indeed , be a warm friend , and a gallant partisan , and when he have the pen in hand , seldom let slip a opportunity of let the world know that be the greatest painter in , and wonder at the petty jealousy of the , which refuse to make he a R.A. : of state that it be generally report at the , that , , be appoint of ; or of introduce into the subject in hand , whatever it might be , a compliment to the , or the 's . and besides do work for he , to the best of he ability , he kind - hear comrade offer to forgo he 's and 's holiday , and pass those day of holiday and rest as nurse - tender to , who , however , insist , that the other should not forgo he pleasure , and thankfully assure he that he could bear best he malady alone . take he supper at the on the night , after have achieve the work of the paper , inform of the illness of they young friend in the Temple ; and remember the fact two day afterwards , the go to and pay a visit to the invalid on afternoon . he find , the laundress , in tear in the sitting - room , and get a bad report of the poor dear young gentleman withing . 's condition have so much alarme she , that she be oblige to have recourse to the stimulus of brandy to enable she to support the grief which he illness occasion . as she hang about he bed , and endeavoure to minister to he , she attention become intolerable to the invalid , and he beg she peevishly not to come near he . hence the laundress 's tear and redouble grief , and renew application to the bottle , which she be accustom to use as a anodyne . the rate the woman soundly for she intemperance , and point out to she the fatal consequence which must ensue if she persist in she imprudent course . , who be by this time in a very fevered state , yet be greatly pleased to receive 's visit . he hear the ell - know voice in he sitting - room , as he lay in the bedroom within , and call the eagerly to he , and thanke he for come , and beg he to take a chair and talk to he . the feel the young man 's pulse with great gravity --( he own tremulous and clammy hand grow steady for the instant while he finger presse 's throbb vein ) -- the pulse be beat very fiercely -- 's face be haggard and hot -- he eye be bloodshot and gloomy ; he " bird , " as the pronounce the word , afterwards give a description of he condition , have not be shave for nearly a week . make he visitor sit down , and , toss and turn in he comfortless bed , begin to try and talk to the in a lively manner , about the , about and when they should go again , and about Fanny -- how be little ? indeed how be she ? we know how she go home very sadly on the previous evening , after she have see light he lamp in he chamber , whilst he be have he interview with Bows . come back to he own room presently , pass by the lodge door , and look into 's , accord to he wont , as he pass , but with a very melancholy face . she have another weary night that night . she restlessness wake she little bedfellow more than once . she dare not read more of ' :' be at home , and would suffer no light . she keep the book under she pillow , and feel for it in the night . she have only just get to sleep , when the child begin to stir with the morning , almost as early as the bird . though she be very angry with , she go to he room at she accustom hour in the day , and there the good - hear musician begin to talk to she . " I see last night , , " he say . " do you ? I think you do , " Fanny answer , look fiercely at the melancholy old gentleman . " I have be fond of you ever since we come to live in this place , " he continue . " you be a child when I come ; and you use to like I , Fanny , until three or four day ago : until you see this gentleman . " " and now , I suppose , you be go to say ill of he , " say . " , -- that will make I like you better . " " indeed I shall do no such thing , " Bows answer ; " I think he be a very good and honest
honest young man . " " indeed ! you know that if you say a word against he , I would never speak a word to you again -- never ! " cry ; and clench she little hand , and pace up and down the room . Bows note , watch , and follow the ardent little creature with admiration and gloomy sympathy . she cheek flush , she frame tremble ; she eye beam love , anger , defiance . " you would like to speak ill of he , " she say ; " but you dare not -- you know you dare not ! " " I know he many year since , " Bows continue , " when he be almost as young as you be , and he have a romantic attachment for we friend the 's daughter -- that be now . " laugh . " I suppose there be other people , too , that have romantic attachment for , " she say : " I do not want to hear about th'ey . " " he want to marry she ; but they age be quite disproportionate : and they rank in life . she would not have he because he have no money . she act very wisely in refuse he ; for the two would have be very unhappy , and she be not a fit person to go and live with he family , or to make he home comfortable . have he way to make in the world , and must marry a lady of he own rank . a woman who love a man will not ruin he prospect , cause he to quarrel with he family , and lead he into poverty and misery for she gratification . a honest girl will not do that , for she own sake , or for the man 's . " 's emotion , which but now have be that of defiance and anger , here turn to dismay and supplication . " what do I know about marrying , ? " she say . " when be there any talk of it ? what have there be between this young gentleman and I that be to make people speak so cruel ? it be not my do ; nor 's -- . 's -- that I meet he at . it be the take I and Ma there . we never think of nothing wrong , I be sure . he come and rescue we , and he be so very kind . then he come to call and ask after we : and very , very good it be of a such grand gentleman to be so polite to humble folk like we ! and yesterday ma and I just go to walk in the , and -- and " -- here she break out with that usual , unanswerable female argument of tear -- and cry , " oh ! I wish I be dead ! I wish I be laid in my grave ; and have never , never see he ! " " he say as much himself , , " Bows say ; and ask through she sob , why , why should he wish he have never see she ? have she ever do he any harm ? oh , she would perish rather than do he any harm . Whereupon the musician inform she of the conversation of the day previous , show she that could not and must not think of she as a wife fit for he , and that she , as she value she honest reputation , must strive too to forget he . and Fanny , leave the musician , convince , but still of the same mind , and promise that she would avoid the danger which menace she , go back to the porter 's lodge , and tell she mother all . she talk of she love for , and bewail , in she artless manner , the inequality of they condition , that set barriers between they . " there be the ' lady of Lyons , ' " say ; " oh , Ma ! how I do love when I see he do it ; and , for be faithful to poor Claude , and always think of he ; and he come back to she , a officer , through all he dangers ! and if everybody admire -- and I be sure everybody do , for be so true to a poor man -- why should a gentleman be asham of love a poor girl ? not that love I -- oh no , no ! I be not worthy of he ; only a princess be worthy of such a gentleman as he . such a poet !--writing so beautifully , and look so grand ! I be sure he be a nobleman , and of ancient family , and kep ' out of he estate . perhaps he uncle have it . ah , if I might , oh , how I would serve he , and work for he , and slave for he , that I would . I would not ask for more than that , ma , just to be allow to see he of a morning ; and sometimes he would say ' how d' you , Fanny ? ' or ' bless you , Fanny ! ' as he say on . and I would work , and work ; and I would sit up all night , and read , and learn , and make myself worthy of he . the say he mother life in the country , and be a grand lady there . oh , how I wish I might go and be she servant , ma ! I can do plenty of thing , and
and work very neat ; and -- and sometimes he would come home , and I should see he ! " the girl 's head fall on she mother 's shoulder , as she speak , and she give way to a plentiful outpouring of girlish tear , to which the matron , of course , join she own . " you must not think no more of he , , " she say . " if he do not come to you , he be a horrid , wick man . " " do not call he so , mother , " Fanny reply . " he be the best of man , the best and the kindest . Bows say he think he be unhappy at leave poor little Fanny . it be not he fault , be it , that we meet ?-- and it be not he that I must not see he again . he say I must not -- and I must not , mother . he will forget I , but I shall never forget he . no ! I will pray for he , and love he always -- until I die -- and I shall die , I know I shall -- and then my spirit will always go and be with he . " " you forget you poor mother , Fanny , and you will break my heart by goin on so , " say . " perhaps you will see he . I be sure you will see he . I be sure he will come to - day . if ever I see a man in love , that man be he . when 's young man first come about she , he be send away by old , a most respectable man , and violoncello in the orchestra at the Wells ; and he own family would not hear of it neither . but he come back . we all know he would . Emily always say so ; and he marry she ; and this one will come back too ; and you mark a mother 's word , and see if he do not , dear . " at this point of the conversation enter the lodge for he evening meal . at the father 's appearance , the talk between mother and daughter cease instantly . caress and cajol the surly undertaker 's aide - de - camp , and say , " , who would have think to see you away from the club of a night . Fanny , dear , get you pa some supper . what will you have , B.? the poor gurl 's get a gathering in she eye , or somethink in it -- I be lookin at it just now as you come in . " and she squeeze she daughter 's hand as a signal of prudence and secrecy ; and 's tear be dry up likewise ; and by that wondrous hypocrisy and power of disguise which woman practise , and with which weapon of defence nature endow they , the trace of she emotion disappear ; and she go and take she work , and sate in the corner so demure and quiet , that the careless male parent never suspect that anything ail she . thus , as if fate seem determined to inflame and increase the poor child 's malady and passion , all circumstance and all party round about she urge it on . she mother encourage and applaude it ; and the very word which use in endeavouring to repress she flame only augment this unlucky fever . be not wick and a seducer : be high - mind in wishing to avoid she . love she : the good and the great , the magnificent youth , with the chain of gold and the scent auburn hair ! and so he do : or so he would have love she five year back perhaps , before the world have harden the ardent and reckless boy -- before he be asham of a foolish and imprudent passion , and strangle it as poor woman do they illicit child , not on account of the crime , but of the shame , and from dread that the finger of the world should point to they . what respectable person in the world will not say he be quite right to avoid a marriage with a ill - educated person of low degree , whose relation a gentleman could not well acknowledge , and whose manners would not become she new station ?-- and what philosopher would not tell he that the best thing to do with these little passion if they spre up , be to get rid of they , and let they pass over and cure they : that no man die about a woman or vice versa : and that one or the other have find the impossibility of gratify he or she desire in the particular instance , must make the best of matter , forget each other , look out elsewhere , and choose again ? and yet , perhaps , there may be something say on the other side . perhaps be right in admir that passion of Pen's , blind and unreasoning as it be , that make he ready to stake he all for he love ; perhaps if self - sacrifice be a laudable virtue , mere worldly self - sacrifice be not very much to be praise ; -- in fine , let this be a reserve point to be settle by the individual moralist who choose to debate it . so much be certain , that with the experience of the world which now have , he would have laugh at and scoute the idea of marry a penniless girl out of a kitchen . and this point be
be fix in he mind , he be but do he duty as a honest man , in crush any unlucky fondness which he might feel towards poor little Fanny . so she wait and wait in hope that yoArthu would come . she wait for a whole week , and it be at the end of that time that the poor little creature hear from of the illness under which be suffer . it chance on that very even after have visit , that 's uncle the excellent major arrive in town from , where he health have be mende , and send he valet to make inquirie for , and to request that gentleman to breakfast with the major the next morning . the major be merely pass through on he way to the of 's house of , where he be engage to shoot partridge . come back to he master with a very long face . he have see ; be very bad indeed ; be in bed with a fever . a doctor ought to be send to he ; and think he case most alarm . gracious goodness ! this be sad news indeed . he have hope that yoArthu could come down to Stillbrook : he have arrange that he should go , and procure a invitation for he nephew from . he must go himself ; he could not throw over : the fever might be catch : it might be measle : he have never himself have the measle ; they be dangerous when contract at he age . be anybody with ? say there be somebody a - nussing of . the major then ask , have he nephew take any advice ? say he have ask that question , and have be tell that have have no doctor . 's master be sincerely vex at hearing of 's calamity . he would have go to he , but what good could it do Arthur that he , the major , should catch a fever ? he own ailment render it absolutely impossible that he should attend to anybody but himself . but the young man must have advice -- the best advice ; and be straightway despatch with a note from major Pendennis to he friend , who by good luck happen to be in and at home , and who quit he dinner instantly , and whose carriage be in half a hour in , near Pen's chamber . the major have ask the kind - hear physician to bring he news of he nephew at the club where he himself be dine , and in the course of the night the doctor make he appearance . the affair be very serious : the patient be in a high fever : he have have ble instantly : and would see he the first thing in the morning . the major go disconsolate to be with this unfortunate news . when come to see he accord to he promise the next day , the have to listen for a quarter of a hour to a account of the major 's own malady , before the latter have leisure to hear about . he have have a very bad night -- he -- he nurse say : at one hour he have be delirious . it might end badly : he mother have better be send for immediately . the major write the letter to with the greatest alacrity , and at the same time with the most polite precaution . as for go himself to the lad , in he state it be impossible . " could I be of any use to he , my dear doctor ? " he ask . the Doctor , with a peculiar laugh , say , no : he do not think the major could be of any use : that he own precious health require the most delicate treatment , and that he have best go into the country and stay : that he himself would take care to see the patient twice a day , and do all in he power for he . the major declare upon he honour , that if he could be of any use he would rush to Pen's chamber . as it be , should go and see that everything be right . the Doctor must write to he by every post to Stillbrook : it be but forty mile distant from , and if anything happen he would come up at any sacrifice . major Pendennis transact he benevolence by deputy and by post . " what else could he do , " as he say ? " Gad , you know , in these case , it be best not disturb a fellow . if a poor fellow go to the bad , why , , you know he be dispose of . but in order to get well ( and in this , my dear Doctor , I be sure that you will agree with I ) , the best way be to keep he quiet -- perfectly quiet . " thus it be the old gentleman try to satisfy he conscience and he go he way that day to Stillbrook by railway ( for railway have spring up in the course of this narrative , though they have not quite penetrate into country yet ) , and make he appearance in he usual trim order and curly wig , at the dinner - table of the of . but we must do the major the justice to say , that he be very unhappy and gloomy in demeanour . and rally he about he low spirit ; ask whether he be cross in love ? and otherwise divert themselves at he expense . he lose he money at whist after dinner , and actually trump he partner 's highest spade .
. and the thought of the suffering boy , of whom he be proud , and whom he love after he manner , keep the old fellow awake half through the night , and make he feverish and uneasy . on the morrow he receive a note in a handwriting which he do not know : it be that of , indeed , say that have have a tolerable night ; and that as have state that the major desire to be inform of he nephew 's health , he , , have send he the news per rail . the next day he be go out shoot , about noon , with some of the gentleman stay at 's house ; and the company , wait for the carriage , be assemble on the terrace in front of the house , when a fly drive up from the neighbouring station , and a grey - head , rather shabby old gentleman jump out , and ask for major Pendennis . it be . he take the major aside and speak to he ; most of the gentleman round about saw that something serious have happen , from the alarmed look of the major 's face . say , " it be a bailiff come down to nab the major , " but nobody laugh at the pleasantry . " Hullo ! what be the matter , ? " cry , with he strident voice ;--" anything wrong ? " " it be -- it be --my boy that be dead , " say the major , and burst into a sob -- the old man be quite overcome . " not dead , my ; but very ill when I leave , " say , in a low voice . a britzka come up at this moment as the three man be speak . the look at he watch . " you have twenty minute to catch the mail - train . jump in , ; and drive like h --- , sir , do you hear ? " the carriage drive off swiftly with and he companion , and let we trust that the oath will be pardon to the of . the major drive rapidly from the station to the Temple , and find a travel carriage already before he , and block up the narrow . two lady get out of it , and be ask they way of the porter ; the major look by chance at the panel of the carriage , and see the worn - out crest of the eagle look at the , and the motto , " , " pain beneath . it be he brother 's old carriage , build many , many year ago . it be and that be ask they way to Pen's room . he run up to they ; hastily clasp he sister 's arm and kiss she hand ; and the three enter into , and mount the long gloomy stair . they knock very gently at the door , on which 's name be write , and it be open by . a critical chapter as see the two lady and the anxious countenance of the eider , who regard she with a look of inscrutable alarm and terror , the poor girl at once know that mother be before she ; there be a resemblance between the widow 's haggard eye and 's as he toss in he bed in fever . look wistfully at and at afterwards ; there be no more expression in the latter 's face than if it have be a mass of stone . hard - heartedness and gloom dwelt on the figure of both the new - comer ; neither show any the faintest gleam of mercy or sympathy for . she look desperately from they to the major behind they . drop he eyelid , look up ever so stealthily from under they at 's poor little nurse . " I -- I write to you yesterday , if you please , ma 'am , " say , trembl in every limb as she speak ; and as pale as , whose sad menacing face look over 's shoulder . " do you , madam ? " say . " I suppose I may now relieve you from nurse my son . I be he mother , you understand . " " yes , ma 'am . I -- this be the way to he -- oh , wait a minute , " cry out . " I must prepare you for he ---- " the widow , whose face have be hopelessly cruel and ruthless , here start back with a gasp and a little cry , which she speedily stifle . " he be be so since yesterday , " say , trembl very much , and with chattering tooth . a horrid shriek of laughter come out of room , whereor the door be open ; and , after several shout , the poor wretch begin to s a college drinking - song , and then to hurray and to shout as if he be in the midst of a wine - party , and to thump with he fist against the wainscot . he be quite delirious . " he do not know I , ma 'am , " say . " indeed . perhaps he will know he mother ; let I pass , if you please , and go in to he . " and the widow hastily push by little , and through the dark passage which lead into sitting - room . sail by , too , without a word ; and major Pendennis follow they . sit down on a bench in the passage , and cry , and pray as well as she could . she would have die for he ; and they hate
hate she . they have not a word of thanks or kindness for she , the fine lady . she sate there in the passage , she do not know how long . they never come out to speak to she . she sate there until come to pay he second visit that day ; he find the poor little thing at the door . " what , nurse ? how be you patient ? " ask the good - natured doctor . " have he have any rest ? " " go and ask they . they be inside , " answer . " who ? he mother ? " nod she head and do not speak . " you must go to be yourself , my poor little maid , " say the Doctor . " you will be ill , too , if you do not . " " oh , may not I come and see he : may not I come and see he ! I -- I -- love he so , " the little girl say ; and as she speak she fall down on she knee and clasp hold of the 's hand in such a agony that to see she melte the kind physician 's heart , and cause a mist to come over he spectacle . " Pooh , pooh ! Nonsense ! nurse , have he take he dratch ? have he have any rest ? of course you must come and see he . so must I . " " they will let I sit here , will not they , sir ? I will never make no noise . I only ask to stop here , " say . on which the call she a stupid little thing ; put she down upon the bench where Pen's printer 's devil use to sit so many hour ; tap she pale cheek with he finger , and bust into the farther room . be ensconce pale and solemn in a great chair by Pen's bedside . she watch be on the bed - table by Pen's medicine . she bonnet and cloak be laid in the window . she have she in she lap , without which she never travel . she first movement , after see she son , have be to take 's shawl and bonnet which be on he drawer , and bring they out and drop they down upon he study - table . she have close the door upon major Pendennis , and too ; and take possession of she son . she have have a great doubt and terror lest yoArthu should not know she ; but that pang be spare to she in part at least . know he mother quite well , and familiarly smile and nod at she . when she come in , he instantly fancie that they be at home at Fairoaks ; and begin to talk and chatter and laugh in a rambling wild way . could hear he outside . he laughter shot shaft of poison into she heart . it be true , then . he have be guilty -- and with that creature !-- a intrigue with a servant-maid , and she have love he -- and he be die most likely raving and unrepentant . the major now and then hum out a word of remark or consolation , which scarce hear . a dismal sit it be for all party ; and when appear , he come like a angel into the room . it be not only for the sick man , it be for the sick man 's friend that the doctor come . he presence be often as good for they as for the patient , and they long for he yet more eagerly . how we have all watch after he ! what a emotion the thrill of he carriage - wheel in the street , and at length at the door , have make we feel ! how we hang upon he word , and what a comfort we get from a smile or two , if he can vouchsafe that sunshine to lighten we darkness ! who have not see the mother pry into he face , to know if there be hope for the sick infant that can not speak , and that lie yonder , it be little frame battling with fever ? ah how she look into he eye ! what thanks if there be light there ; what grief and pain if he cast they down , and dare not say " hope ! " or it be the house - father who be stricken . the terrified wife look on , while the physician feel he patient 's wrist , smother she agony , as the child have be call upon to stay they play and they talk . over the patient in the fever , the wife expectant , the child unconscious , the doctor stand as if he be Fate , the dispenser of life and death : he must let the patient off this time : the woman pray so for he respite ! one can fancy how awful the responsibility must be to a conscientious man : how cruel the feeling that he have give the wrong remedy , or that it might have be possible to do better : how harasse the sympathy with survivor , if the case be unfortunate -- how immense the delight of victory ! have pass through a hasty ceremony of introduction to the new - comer , of whose arrival he have be make aware by the heartbroken little nurse in wait without , the proceed to examine the patient , about whose condition of high fever there could be no mistake , and on whom he think it necessary to exercise the strongest antiphlogistic remedy in he power .
. he consol the unfortunate mother as best he might ; and give she the most comfortable assurance on which he could venture , that there be no reason to despair yet , that everything might still be hope from he youth , the strength of he constitution , and so forth ; and have do he utmost to allay the horror of the alarmed matron , he take the elder aside into the vacant room ( 's bedroom ) , for the purpose of hold a little consultation . the case be very critical . the fever , if not stop , might and would carry off the young fellow : he must be b forthwith : the mother must be inform of this necessity . why be that other young lady brotch with she ? she be out of place in a sick - room . " and there be another woman still , be hang to it ! " the major say , " the -- the little person who open the door . " he sister - in - law have bring the poor little 's bonnet and shawl out , fling they upon the study - table . do know anything about the -- the little person ? " I just catch a glimpse of she as we pass in , " the major say , " and begad she be uncommonly nice - look . " the look queer : the smile -- in the very gravest moment , with life and death pending , such strange contrast and occasion of humwe will arise , and such smile will pass , to satirise the gloom , as it be , and to make it more gloomy ! " I have it , " at last he say , re-enter the study ; and he write a couple of note hastily at the table there , and seal one of they . then , take up poor 's shawl and bonnet , and the note , he go out in the passage to that poor little messenger , and say , " Quick , nurse ; you must carry this to the surgeon , and bid he come instantly ; and then go to my house , and ask for my servant , and tell he to get this prescription prepare , and wait until I -- until it be ready . it may take a little in preparation . " so poor Fanny trudge away with she two note , and find the apothecary , who live in the hard by , and who come straightway , he lancet in he pocket , to operate on he patient ; and then make for the 's house , in . the Doctor be at home again before the prescription be make up , which take , he servant , such a long time in compounding ; and , during the remainder of 's illness , poor Fanny never make she appearance in the quality of nurse at he chamber any more . but for that day and the next , a little figure might be see lurking about staircase , -- a sad , sad little face look at and interrogate the apothecary , and the apothecary 's boy , and the laundress , and the kind physician himself , as they pass out of the chamber of the sick man . and on the third day , the kind doctor 's chariot stop at 's , and the good , and honest , and benevolent man go into the porter 's lodge , and ten a little patient whom he have there , for the best remedy he find be on the day when he be enable to tell that the crisis be over , and that there be at length every hope for . , , late of 's service , see the Doctor 's carriage , and criticise its horse and appointment . " green livery , bedad ! " the general say , " and as foin a pair of high - stepping bee horse as ever a gentleman need sit behoind , let alone a docthor . there be no ind to the proide and ar'gance of they docthor , nowadays -- not but that be a good one , and a scoientific cyarkter , and a roight good fellow , bedad ; and he be bring the poor little girl well tro she faver , Bows , I boy ; " and so pleased be with the Doctor 's behaviour and skill , that , whenever he meet 's carriage in future , he make a point of salut it and the physician inside , in as courteous and magnificend a manner , as if have be the himself , and have be in he glory in . the widow 's gratitude to the physician know no bounds -- or scarcely any bounds , at least . the kind gentleman laugh at the idea of take a fee from a literary man , or the widow of a brother practitioner ; and she determine when she get to Fairoak that she would send Goodenough the silver - gilt vase , the jewel of the house , and the glory of the late , preserve in green baize , and present to he at , by the , on the recovery of she son , the late , from the scarlet fever . Hippocrates , , , and a wreath of serpent surmount the cup to this day ; which be execute in they finest manner by Messrs . Abednego , of ; and the inscription be by , tutor to the young baronet . this priceless gem of art the widow determined to devote to , the preserver of she son ; and there be scarcely any other favour which she gratitude would not have confer upon he , except
except one , which he desire most , and which be that she should think a little charitably and kindly of poor Fanny , of whose artless , sad story he have get something during he interview with she , and of whom he be induce to think very kindly , -- not be dispose , indeed , to give much credit to for he conduct in the affair , or not know what that conduct have be . he know enough , however , to be aware that the poor infatuate little girl be without stain as yet ; that while she have be in Pen's room it be to see the last of he , as she think , and that be scarcely aware of she presence ; and that she suffer under the deepest and most pitiful grief , at the idea of lose he , dead or liive . but on the one or two occasion when allude to , the widow 's countenance , always soft and gentle , assume a expression so cruel and inexorable , that the Doctor see it be in vain to ask she for justice or pity , and he break off all entreaty , and cease make any further allusion regard he little client . there be a complaint which neither poppy , nor mandragora , nor all the drowsy syrup of the could allay , in the man in he time , as we be inform by a popular poet of the day of ; and which , when exhibit in woman , no medical discoveries or practice subsequent -- neither homoeopathy , nor hydropathy , nor mesmerism , nor , nor can cure , and that be -- we will not call it jealousy , but rather gently denominate rivalry and emulation in lady . some of those mischievous and prosaic people who carp and calculate at every detail of the romancer , and want to know , for instance , how , when the character in the ' critic ' be at a dead lock with they dagger at each other 's throat , they be to be get out of that murderous complication of circumstance , may be induce to ask how it be possible in a set of chamber in the Temple , consist of three room , two cupboard , a passage , and a coal - box , yoArthu a sick gentleman , Hel he mother , she adopt daughter , they country attendant , . Wheezer a nurse from 's , a irish laundress , major a retire military officer , he valet , 's boy , and other could be accommodate -- the answer be give at once , that almost everybody in the Temple be out of town , and that there be scarcely a single occupant of Pen's house in except those who be occupy round the sick - bed of the sick gentleman , about whose fever we have not give a lengthy account , neither enlarge we very much upon the more cheerful theme of he recovery . everybody we have say be out of town , and of course such a fashionable man as young , who occupy chamber on the second floor in Pen's staircase , could not be suppose to remain in . , 's laundress be acquaint with who do for ; and that gentleman 's bedroom be get ready for , or , when the latter should be inclin to leave she son 's sick - room , to try and seek for a little rest for herself . if that young buck and flower of , , could have know who be the occupant of he bedroom , how proud he would have be of that apartment :-- what poem he would have write about ! ( several of he thing have appear in the annual , and in manuscript in the nobility 's album ) -- he be a Camford man and very nearly get the , it be say -- Sibwright , however , be absent and he bed give up to . it be the prettiest little brass be in the world , with chintz curtain line with pink -- he have a mignonette - box in he bedroom window , and the mere sight of he little exhibition of shiny boot , arrange in trim row over he wardrobe , be a gratification to the beholder . he have a museum of scent , pomatum , and bear ' - grease pots , quite curiious to examine , too ; and a choice selection of portrait of female , almost always in sadness and generally in disguise or deshabille , glitter round the neat wall of he elegant little bower of repose . with dishevelled hair be consol herself over she banjo for the absence of she Conrad -- the ( of and the ) be sadly ogl out of the bar of she convent cage , in which , poor prison bird , she be moult away ,-- Dorothea of be wash she eternal foot :-- in fine , it be such a elegant gallery as become a gallant lover of the sex . and in 's sitting - room , while there be quite a infantine law library clad in skins of fresh new - bear calf , there be a tolerably large collection of classical book which he could not read , and of english and french work of poetry and fiction which he read a great deal too much . he invitation card of the past season still decorate he look - glass : and scarce anything tell of the lawyer but the wig - box beside the upon the middle shelf of the bookcase , on which the name of . , , be gild . with Sibwright in chamber be . be a sporting man marry to a rich widow .
. have no practice -- do not come to chamber thrice in a term : go a circuit for those mysterious reason which make man go circuit , -- and he room serve as a great convenience to Sibwright when that young gentleman give he little dinner . it must be confess that these two gentleman have nothing to do with we history , will never appear in it again probably , but we can not help glance through they door as they happen to be open to we , and as we pass to Pen's room ; as in the pursuit of we own business in life through the , at the club , nay at church itself , we can not help pee at the shop on the way , or at we neighbour 's dinner , or at the face under the bonnet in the next pew . very many year after the circumstance about which we be at present occupy , , with a blush and a laugh show much humour , own to have read a french novel once much in vogue , and when she husband ask she , wonder where on earth she could have get such a volume , she own that it be in the Temple , when she live in 's chamber . " and , also , I never confess , " she say , " on that same occasion , what I must now own to : that I open the japanned box , and take out that strange - look wig inside it , and put it on and look at myself in the glass in it . " suppose have come in at such a moment as that ? what would he have say , -- the enraptured rogue ? what would have be all the picture of disguis beauty in he room compare to that live one ? ah , we be speak of old time , when be a bachelor and before he get a county court , -- when people be young -- when most people be young . other people be young now ; but we know more . when play this prank with the wig , you can not suppose that could have be very ill upstairs ; otherwise , though she have grow to care for he ever so little , common sense of feeling and decorum would have prevent she from perform any trick or try any disguise . but all sort of event have occur in the course of the last few day which have contribute to increase or account for she gaiety , and a little colony of the reader 's old friend and acquaintance be by this time establish in , , and round Pen's sick - be there . first , , 's servant , have arrive from , be summon thence by the major who justly think she presence would be comfortable and useful to she mistress and she young master , for neither of whom the constant neighbourhood of ( who during Pen's illness require more spirituous consolation than ever to support she ) could be pleasant . then make she appearance in due season to wait upon , nor do that lady go once to be until the faithful servant have reach she , when , with a heart full of maternal thankfulness she go and lay down upon 's straw mattress , and among he mathematical book as have be already describe . it be true that ere that day a great and delightful alteration in Pen's condition have take place . the fever , subjugate by 's blister , potion , and lancet , have leave the young man , or only return at interval of feeble intermittence ; he wander sense have settle in he weaken brain : he have have time to kiss and bless he mother for come to he , and call for and he uncle ( who be both affect accord to they different nature by he wan appearance , he lean shrunken hand , he hollow eye and voice , he thin bearded face ) to press they hand and thank they affectionately ; and after this greeting , and after they have be turn out of the room by he affectionate nurse , he have sunk into a fine sleep which have last for about sixteen hour , at the end of which period he awoke call out that he be very hungry . if it be hard to be ill and to loathe food , oh , how pleasant to be get well and to be feel hungry -- how hungry ! Alas , the joy of convalescence become feebler with increasing year , as other joy do -- and then -- and then come that illness when one do not convalesce at all . on the day of this happy event , too , come another arrival in . this be introduce into the pen- Warring sit - room by large puffs of tobacco smoke -- the puffs of be follow by a individual with a cigar in he mouth , and a carpet - bag under he arm -- this be who have run back from , when thoughtfully write to inform he of he friend 's calamity . but he have be from home when 's letter have reach he brother 's house -- the eastern county do not then boast of a railway ( for we beg the reader to understand that we only commit anachronism when we choose and when by a daring violation of those natural law some great ethical truth be to be advance ) -- in fine , only appear with the rest of the good luck upon the lucky day after Pen's convalescence may have be say to have begin . he surprise be , after all , not very great when he find
find the chamber of he sick friend occupi , and he old acquaintance the major seate demurely in a easy - chair ( have let himself into the room with he own passkey ) , listen , or pretend to listen , to a young lady who be read to he a play of Shakspeare in a low sweet voice . the lady stop and start , and lay down she book , at the apparition of the tall traveller with the cigar and the carpet - bag . he blush , he fling the cigar into the passage : he take off he hat , and drop that too , and go up to the major , seize that old gentleman 's hand , and ask question about . the major answer in a tremulous , though cheery voice -- it be curiious how emotion seem to olden he -- and return 's pressure with a shake hand , tell he the news of 's happy crisis , of he mother 's arrival -- with she young charge -- with ---- " " you need not tell I she name , " say with great animation , for he be affect and elate with the thought of he friend 's recovery --" you need not tell I you name . I know at once it be . " and he hold out he hand and take hers . immense kindness and tenderness gleam from under he rough eyebrow , and shake he voice as he gaze at she and speak to she . " and this be ! " he look seem to say . " and this be ! " the generous girl 's heart beat back . " be hero -- the brave and the kind -- he have come hundred of mile to succour he , when he hear of he friend 's misfortune ! " " thank you , , " be all that say , however ; and as she return the pressure of he kind hand , she blush so , that she be glad the lamp be behind she to conceal she flush face . as these two be stand in this attitude , the door of Pen's bedchamber be open stealthily as he mother be will not to open it , and see another lady , who first look at he , and then turn round towards the bed , say , " Hsh ! " and put up she hand . it be to be turn , and give caution . he call out with a feeble , tremulous , but cheery voice , " come in , -- come in , . I know it be you -- by the -- by the smoke , old boy , " he say , as hold he worn hand out , and with tear at once of weakness and pleasure in he eye , he greet he friend . " I -- I beg pardon , ma 'am , for smoking , " say , who now almost for the first time blush for he wicked propensity . Helen only say , " God bless you , . " she be so happy , she would have like to kiss . then , and after the friend have have a brief , very brief interview , the delighted and inexorable mother , give she hand to , send he out of the room , too , back to and the major , who have not resume they play of where they have leave it off at the arrival of the rightful owner of Pen's chamber . Convalescence we duty now be to record a fact concern , which , however shameful and disgraceful , when tell regard the chief personage and godfather of a novel , must , nevertheless , be make known to the public who read he veritable memoir . have go to be ill with fever , and suffer to a certain degree under the passion of love , after he have go through he physical malady , and have be b and have be blister , and have have he head shaved , and have be treat and medicament as the doctor ordain :-- it be a fact , that , when he rally up from he bodily ailment , he mental malady have likewise quit he , and he be no more in love with than you or I , who be much too wise , or too moral , to allow we heart to go gadd after porter 's daughter . he laugh at himself as he lay on he pillow , think of this second cure which have be effect upon he . he do not care the least about now : he wonder how he ever should have care : and accord to he custom make a autopsy of that dead passion , and anatomise he own defunct sensation for he poor little nurse . what could have make he so hot and eager about she but a few week back ? not she wit , not she breed , not she beauty -- there be hundred of woman better - look than she . it be out on himself that the passion have go : it do not reside in she . she be the same ; but the eyes which see be change ; and , ala , that it should be so ! be not particularly eager to see she any more . he feel very well dispose towards the little thing , and so forth , but as for violent personal regard , such as he have but a few week ago , it have fle under the influence of the pill and lancet , which have destroy the fever in he frame . and a immense source of comfort and gratitude it be to ( though there be something
something selfish in that feeling , as in most other of we young man ) , that he have be enable to resist temptation at the time when the danger be greatest , and have no particular cause of self - reproach as he remember he conduct towards the young girl . as from a precipice down which he might have fall , so from the fever from which he have recover , he review the snare , now that he have escape out of it , but I be not sure that he be not asham of the very satisfaction which he experience . it be pleasant , perhaps , but it be humiliat to own that you love no more . meanwhile the kind smile and tender watchfulness of the mother at he bedside , fill the young man with peace and security . to see that health be return , be all the unwearied nurse demand : to execute any caprice or order of she patient 's , she chiefest joy and reward . he feel himself environ by she love , and think himself almost as grateful for it as he have be when weak and helpless in childhood . some misty notions regard the first part of he illness , and that have nurse he , may have have , but they be so dim that he could not realise they with accuracy , or distinguish they from what he know to be delusion which have occur and be remember during the delirium of he fever . so as he have not think proper on former occasion to make any allusion about to he mother , of course he could not now confide to she he sentiment regard , or make this worthy lady a confidante . it be on both side a unlucky precaution and want of confidence ; and a word or two in time might have spare the good lady , and those connect with she , a deal of pain and anguish . see install as nurse and tender to , I be sorry to say have put the worst construction on the fact of the intimacy of these two unlucky young person , and have settle in she own mind that the accusation against be true . why not have stop to inquire ?-- there be story to a man 's disadvantage that the woman who be fondest of he be always the most eager to believe . be not a man 's wife often the first to be jealous of he ? poor Pen get a good stock of this suspicious kind of love from the nurse who be now watch over he ; and the kind and pure creature think that she boy have go through a malady much more awful and debase than the mere physical fever , and be stain by crime as well as weaken by illness . the consciousness of this she have to bear perforce silently , and to try to put a mask of cheerfulness and confidence over she doubt and despair and inward horror . when , at , read the next number of the , it be to remark to that 's hand be no longer visible in the lead article , and that must be at work there again . " I know the crack of he whip in a hundred , and the cut which the fellow 's thong leave . there be , go to work like a butcher , and mangle a subject . finish a man , and lay he cut neat and regular , straight down the back , and draw blood every line ; " at which dreadful metaphor , say , " law , Charles , how can you talk so ! I always think very high , but a kind gentleman ; and I be sure he be most kind to the child . " upon which say , " yes ; he be kind to the child ; but he be savage to the man ; and to be sure , my dear , you do not understand a word about what I be say ; and it be best you should not ; for it be little good come out of writing for newspaper ; and it be better here , liive easy at , where the wine 's plenty , and the brandy cost but two franc a bottle . mix we another tumbler , , my dear ; we will go back into harness soon . ' Cra ingen iterabimus aequor ' bad luck to it . " in a word , go to work with all he might , in place of he prostrate friend , and do 's portion of the " with a vengeance , " as the saying be . he write occasional article and literary criticism ; he attend theatre and musical performance , and discourse about they with he usual savage energy . he hand be too strong for such small subject , and it please he to tell 's mother , and uncle , and , that there be no hand in all the band of penman more graceful and light , more pleasant and more elegant , than 's . " the people in this country , ma 'am , do not understand what style be , or they would see the merit of we young one , " he say to . " I call he ours , ma 'am , for I breed he ; and I be as proud of he as you be ; and , bat a little wilfulness , and a little selfishness , and a little dandification , I do not know a more honest , or loyal , or gentle creature . he pen be wick sometimes , but he be as kind as a young lady -- as here -- and
and I believe he would not do any liive mortal harm . " at this , , though she heav a deep , deep sigh , and , though she , too , be sadly wounded , nevertheless be most thankful for 's good opinion of , and love he for be so attach to they and be loud in he praise of , -- more loud and enthusiastic than it be the major 's will not to be . " he be a gentleman , my dear creature , " he say to , " every inch a gentleman , my good madam -- the -- the 's baronet :-- what could he be but a gentleman , come out of that family ?-- father ,--Sir ; run away with -- beg you pardon , . be a very well know man in , and a friend of the of , this gentleman be a man of the greatest talents , the very highest accomplishment , -- sure to get on , if he have a motive to put he energie to work . " blush for herself whilst the major be talk and praise 's hero . as she look at 's manly face , and dark , melancholy eye , this young person have be speculat about he , and have settle in she mind that he must have be the victim of a unhappy attachment ; and as she catch herself so speculat , why , blush . get chamber hard by ,-- 's chamber in ; and have execute 's task with great energy in the morning , he delight and pleasure of a afternoon be to come and sit with the sick man 's company in the sunny autumn evening ; and he have the honour more than once of give bell he arm for a walk in the ; to take which pastime , when the frank ask of permission , the major eagerly say , " yes , yes , begad -- of course you go out with he -- it be like the country , you know ; everybody go out with everybody in the , and there be beadle , you know , and that sort of thing -- everybody walk in the . " if the great arbiter of moral do not object , why should simple ? she be glad that she girl should have such fresh air as the river could give , and to see she return with heighten colour and spirit from these harmless excursion . and have come , you must know , to a little explanation . when the news arrive of alarming illness , insist upon accompany the terrified mother to , would not hear of the refusal which the still angry give she , and , when refuse a second time yet more sternly , and when it seem that the poor lose lad 's life be despair of , and when it be know that he conduct be such as to render all thought of union hopeless , have , with many tear , tell she mother a secret with which every observant person who read this story be acquaint already . now she never could marry he , be she to be deny the consolation of own how fondly , how truly , how entirely she have love he ? the mingling tear of the woman appease the agony of they grief somewhat ; and the sorrow and terror of they journey be at least in so far mitigate that they share they together . what could Fanny expect when suddenly bring up for sentence before a couple of such judge ? nothing but swift condemnation , awful punishment , merciless dismissal ! woman be cruel critic in case such as that in which poor Fanny be implicate ; and we like they to be so ; for , besides the guard which a man place round he own harem , and the defences which a woman have in she heart , she faith , and honour , have not she all she own friend of she own sex to keep watch that she do not go astray , and to tear she to piece if she be find erring ? when we Mahmouds or Selims of or visit they Fatima with condign punishment , they mother sow up 's sack for she , and she sister and sister - in - law see she well under water . and this present writer do not say nay . he protest most solemnly he be a , too . he wear a turban and a beard like another , and be all for the sack practice , ! but of you spotless , who have the right of capital punishment ves in you , at least be very cautious that you make away with the proper ( if so she may be call ) person . be very sure of the fact before you order the barge out : and do not pop you subject into the Bosphorus , until you be quite certain that she deserve it . this be all I would urge in poor 's behalf --absolutely all -- not a word more , by the beard of the Prophet . if she be guilty , down with she -- heave over the sack , away with it into the golden horn bubble and squeak , and justice be do , give way , man , and let we pull back to supper . so the major do not in any way object to 's continue promenade with , but , like a benevolent old gentleman , encourage in every way the intimacy of that couple . be there any exhibition in town ? he be for conduct she to they . if have propose to take she to Vauxhall itself , this most complaisant of man would
would have see no harm , -- nor would Hel , if Pendenni the elder have so rule it , -- nor would there have be any harm between two person whose honou be entirely spotless , -- between , who see in intimacy a pure , and high - minded , and artless woman for the first time in he life , -- and , who too for the first time be throw into the constant society of a gentleman of great natural part and power of pleasing ; who possess varied acquirement , enthusiasm , simplicity , humour , and that freshness of mind which he simple life and habit give he , and which contrast so much with dandy indifference of manner and fad sneer . in 's very uncouthness there be a refinement , which the other 's finery lack . in he energy , he respect , he desire to please , he hearty laughter , or simple confid patho , what a difference to Pen's yawn sovereignty and languid acceptance of homage ! what have make Pen at home such a dandy and such a despot ? the woman have spoilead he , as we like they and as they like to do . they have cloy he with obedience , and surfeit he with sweet respect and submission , until he grow weary of the slave who wait upon he , and they caress and cajolery excit he no more . , he be brisk and lively , and eager and impassioned enough -- most man be so constitute and so nurture .-- do this , like the former sentence , run a chance of be misinterpret , and do any one dare to suppose that the writer would incite the woman to revolt ? Nevert , by the whisker of the again , he say . he wear a beard , and he like he woman to be slave . what man do not ? what man would be henpeck , I say ? we will cut off all the head in or rather than that . well , then , yoArthu be so languid , and indifferent , and careless about the favour bestow upon he , how come it that should have such a love and rapturous regard for he , that a mere inadequate expression of it should have keep the girl talk all the way from Fairoaks to , as she and travel in the post -chaise ? as soon as have finish one story about the dear fellow , and narrate , with a hundred sob and ejaculation , and look up to heaven , some thrilling incident which occur about the period when the hero be breech , begin another equally interesting and equally ornamented with tear , and tell how heroically he have a tooth out or would not have it out , or how daringly he rob a bird 's nest or how magnanimously he spare it ; or how he give a shilling to the old woman on the common , or go without he bread - and - butter for the beggar - boy who come into the yard -- and so on one to another the sobbing woman sang lament upon they hero , who , my worthy reader have long since perceive , be no more a hero than one of we . be as he be , why should a sensible girl be so fond of he ? this point have be argue before in a previous unfortunate sentence ( which lately draw down all the wrath of upon the writer 's head ) , and which say that the greatest rascal - cut - throat have have somebody to be fond of they , and if those monster , why not ordinary mortal ? and with whom shall a young lady fall in love but with the person she see ? she be not suppose to lose she heart in a dream , like a princess in the Arabian night ; or to plight she young affections to the portrait of a gentleman in the exhibition , or a sketch in the . you have a instinct within you which incline you to attach yourself to some one : you meet somebody : you hear constantly praise : you walk , or ride , or waltz , or talk or sit in the same pew at church with somebody : you meet again , and again , and -- " marriage be make in , " you dear mamma say , pin you orange - flower wreath on , with she bless eye dim with tear -- and there be a wedding breakfast , and you take off you white satin and retire to you coach - and - four , and you and he be a happy pair .-- or , the affair be break off , and then , poor wounded heart ! why , then you meet , and twine you young affections round number two . it be you nature so to do . do you suppose it be all for the man 's sake that you love , and not a bit for you own ? do you suppose you would drink if you be not thirsty , or eat if you be not hungry ? so then like because she see scarcely anybody else at Fairoak except and , and because he mother constantly praise she Arthur , and because he be gentlemanlike , tolerably good - looking and witty , and because , above all , it be of she nature to like somebody . and have once receive this image into she heart , she there tenderly nurse it and clasp it -- she there , in he long absence and she constant solitude , silently brood over it and fond it -- and when after this she come to ,
, and have a opportunity of become rather intimate with , what on earth be to prevent she from think he a most odd , original , agreeable , and pleasing person ? a long time afterwards , when these day be over , and Fate in its own way have dispose of the various person now assemble in the dingy building in , perhaps some of they look back and think how happy the time be , and how pleasant have be they evening talk and little walk and simple recreation round the sofa of the convalescent . the major have a favourable opinion of in from that time forward , and declare at he club and in society that the dead season in town be often pleasant , doosid pleasant , begad . he use to go home to he lodging in of a night , wonder that it be already so late , and that the evening have pass away so quickly . he make he appearance at the pretty constantly in the afternoon , and tug up the long black staircase with quite a benevolent activity and perseverance . and he make interest with the chef at 's ( that renowne cook , the superintendence of whose work upon compelle the gift author to stay in the metropolis ) , to prepare little jelly , delicate clear soup , aspic , and other trifle good for invalid , which the valet constantly bring down to the little colony . and the permission to drink a glass or two of pure sherry be accord to by , the major tell with almost tear in he eye how he noble friend the of , pass through on he way to the , have order any quantity of he precious , he priceless Amontillado , that have be a present from to the noble , to be place at the disposal of . the widow and taste it with respect ( though they do not in the least like the bitter flavour ) but the invalid be greatly invigorate by it , and pronounce it superlatively good , and propose the major 's health in a mock speech after dinner on the first day when the wine be serve , and that of and the aristocracy in general . major Pendennis return thanks with the utmost gravity and in a speech in which he use the word , ' the present occasion , ' at least the proper number of time . cheer with he feeble voice from he armchair . teach to cry " ! hear ! " and tap the table with he knuckle . Pidgeon the attendant grin , and honest find the party so merrily engage , when he come in to pay he faithful gratuitous visit . know , who liv below and that gallant gentleman , in reply to a letter inform he of the use to which he apartment have be put , write back the most polite and flowery letter of acquiescence he place he chamber at the service of they fair occupant , he be at they disposal , he carpet at they foot . everybody be kindly dispose towards the sick man and he family . he heart ( and he mother 's too , as we may fancy ) melt within he at the thought of so much good - feeling and good - nature . let 's biographer be pardon for alluding to a time not far distant when a somewhat similar mishap bring he a providential friend , a kind physician , and a thousand proof of a most touching and surprising kindness and sympathy . there be a piano in 's chamber ( indeed , this gentleman , a lover of all the arts , perform himself -- and excellently ill too -- upon the instrument ; and have have a song dedicated to he , the word by himself , the air by he devoted friend ) , and at this music - box , as call it , , at first with a great deal of tremor and blushing ( which become she very much ) , play and sang , sometimes of a evening , simple air , and old songs of home . she voice be a rich contralto , and , who scarcely know one tune from another and who have but one tune or bray in he repertoire , -- a most discordant imitation of ' save the King ' -- sit rapt in delight listen to these song . he could follow they rhythm if not they harmony ; and he could watch , with a constant and daily grow enthusiasm , the pure and tender and generous creature who make the music . I wonder how that poor pale little girl in the black bonnet , who use to stand at the lamp - post in sometimes of a evening , look up to the open window from which the music come , like to hear it ? when bedtime come the song be hush . light appear in the upper room : he room , whither the widow use to conduct he ; and then the major and , and sometimes , would have a game at ecarte or backgammon ; or she would sit by work a pair of slipper in worsted -- a pair of gentleman 's slipper -- they might have be for or for or for major Pendennis : one of those three would have give anything for the slipper . whilst such business as this be go on within , a rather shabby old gentleman would come and lead away the pale girl in the black bonnet , who have no right to be abroad in the night air ; and the Temple porter , the few laundress , and other amateur who have be listen to the concert , would also
also disappear . just before ten o'clock there be another musical performance , namely that of the chime of 's clock in the , which play the clear cheerful note of a psalm , before it proceed to ring its ten fatal stroke . as they be ring , begin to fold up the slipper ; from appear with a bed - candle , and a constant smile on she face ; the major say , " God bless my soul , be it so late ? " and he leave they unfinished game , and get up and shake hand with . from light they out of the passage and down the stair , and , as they descende , they could hear she bolting and lock " the sporting door " after they , upon she young mistress and herself . if there have be any danger , grinn say she would have get down " that thar hooky soord which hang up in 's room , " -- mean the scimitar with the name of the prophet engrave on the blade and the red velvet scabbard , which , , bring back from he tour in the , along with a albanian dress , and which he wear with such elegant effect at 's fancy ball , , . it entangle itself in 's train , who appear in the dress in which she , with she mamma , have be present to they sovereign ( the latter by the l-- - nc - ll - r 's lady ) , and lead to event which have nothing to do with this history . be not now ? have not get a county court ?-- good night , and . sleep well and wake happy , pure and gentle lady . sometimes after these evening would walk a little way with major Pendennis -- just a little way just as far as the gate -- as the -- as Char -- as the club -- he be not go into the club ? well , as far as , where he would laughingly shake hand on the major 's own door -step . they have be talk about all the way . it be wonderful how enthusiastic the major , who , as we know , use to dislike she , have grow to be regard the young lady -- " Dev'lish fine girl , begad . Dev'lish well - mannered girl -- my sister - in - law have the manners of a duchess and would bring up any girl well . 's a little countryfied . but the smell of the hawthorn be pleasant , demmy . how she blush ! you girl would give many a guinea for a bouquet like that -- natural flower , begad ! and she be a little money too -- nothing to speak of -- but a pooty little bit of money . " in all which opinion no doubt agree ; and though he laugh as he shook hand with the major , he face fell as he leave he veteran companion ; and he strode back to chamber , and smoke pipe after pipe long into the night , and write article upon article , more and more savage , in lieu of friend disable . well , it be a happy time for almost all party concerned . mende daily . sleep and eat be he constant occupations . he appetite be something frightful . he be asham of exhibit it before , and almost before he mother who laugh and applaude he . as the roast chicken of he dinner go away he eye the departing friend with sad longing , and begin to long for , or tea , or what not . he be like a ogre in devouring . the Doctor cry stop , but would not . nature call out to he more loudly than the Doctor , and that kind and friendly physician hand he over with a very good grace to the other healer . and here let we speak very tenderly and in the strictest confidence of a event which befell he , and to which he never like a allusion . during he delirium the order ice to be put to he head , and all he lovely hair to be cut . it be done in the time of -- of the other nurse , who leave every single hair of course in a paper for the widow to count and treasure up . she never believe but that the girl have take away some of it , but then woman be so suspicious upon these matters . when this direful loss be make visible to major as of course it be the first time the elder see the poor young man 's shorn pate , and when be quite out of danger , and gain daily vigour , the major , with something like blush and a queer wink of he eye , say he know of a -- a person -- a coiffeur , in fact -- a good man , whom he would send down to the Temple , and who would -- a -- apply -- a -- a temporary remedy to that misfortune . look at with the archest sparkle in she eye -- fairly burst out into a boohoo of laughter : even the widow be oblige to laugh : and the major erubescent confound the impudence of the young folk , and say when he have he hair cut he would keep a lock of it for . vote that should wear a barrister 's wig . there be 's down below , which would become he hugely . say " stuff , " and see as confused as he uncle ; and the end be that a gentleman from wait next day upon , and have a private
private interview with he in he bedroom ; and a week afterwards the same individual appear with a box under he arm , and a ineffable grin of politeness on he face , and announce that he have bring ' ome 's ' ead of ' air . it must have be a grand but melancholy sight to see in the recess of he apartment , sadly contemplate he ravage beauty , and the artificial means of hide its ruin . he appear at length in the ' ead of ' air ; but laugh so , that grow sulky , and go back for he velvet cap , a neat turban which the fondest of mamma have work for he . then and get some flower off the ladie 's bonnet and make a wreath , with which they decorate the wig and bring it out in procession , and do homage before it . in fact they indulge in a hundred sport , jularity , waggery , and petit jeux innocen : so that the second and third floor of number 6 , , ring with more cheerfulness and laughter than have be know in those precinct for many a long day . at last , after about ten day of this life , one evening when the little spy of the court come out to take she usual post of observation at the lamp , there be no music from the second - floor window , there be no light in the third - story chamber , the window of each be open , and the occupant be gone . , the laundress , tell what have happen . the lady and all the party have go to for change of air . the antique travelling chariot be bring out again and cushion with many pillow for and he mother ; and go in the most affable manner in the omnibus under the guardianship of . he come back and take possession of he old bed that night in the vacant and cheerless chamber , and to he old book and he old pipe , but not perhaps to he old sleep . the widow have leave a jar full of flower upon he table , prettily arrange , and when he enter they fill the solitary room with odou . they be memorial of the kind , gentle soul who have go away , and who have decorate for a little while that lonely cheerless place . he have have the happiest day of he whole life -- he know it now they be just go : he go and take up the flower and put he face to they , and smelt they -- perhaps kiss they . as he put they down , he rub he rough hand across he eye with a bitter word and laugh . he would have give he whole life and soul to win that prize which reject . do she want fame ? he would have win it for she :-- devotion ?--a great heart full of pent - up tenderness and manly love and gentleness be there for she , if she might take it . but it might not be . Fate have rule otherwise . " even if I could , she would not have I , " thought . " what have a ugly , rough old fellow like I , to make any woman like he ? I be get old , and I have make no mark in life . I have neither good look , nor youth , nor money , nor reputation . a man must be able to do something besides stare at she and offer on he knee he smooth devotion , to make a woman like he . what can I do ? lot of young fellow have pass I in the race -- what they call the prize of life do not seem to I worth the trouble of the struggle . but for she . if she have be mine and like a diamond -- ah ! should not she have wear it ! , what a fool I be to brag of what I would have do ! we be the slave of destiny . we lot be sha for we , and mine be ordain long ago . come , let we have a pipe , and put the smell of these flower out of court , poor little silent flower ! you will be dead to - morrow . what business have you to show you red cheek in this dingy place ? " by he bedside find a new which the widow have place there , with a note inside say that she have not see the book amongst he collection in a room where she have spend a number of hour , and where have vouchsaf to she prayer the life of she son , and that she give to 's friend the best thing she could , and besotch he to read in the volume sometimes , and to keep it as a token of a grateful mother 's regard and affection . poor mournfully kiss the book as he have do the flower ; and the morning find he still read in its awful page , in which so many stricken heart , in which so many tender and faithful soul , have find comfort under calamity , and refuge and hope in affliction . 's be go , ever since she son 's illness , have take , as we have see , entire possession of the young man , of he drawer and closet and all which they contain : whether shirt that want button , or stocking that require mende , or , must it be own ? letter that lay amongst those article of raiment , and which of course it be necessary that somebody
somebody should answer during 's weakened and incapable condition . perhaps be laudably desirous to have some explanation about the dreadful mystery , regard which she have never breathe a word to she son , though it be present in she mind always , and occasion she inexpressible anxiety and disquiet . she have cause the brass knocker to be screw off the inner door of the chamber , where upon the postman 's start double rap would , as she justly argue , disturb the rest of she patient , and she do not allow he to see any letter which arrive , whether from bootmaker who importune he , or hatter who have a heavy account to make up against next , and would be very much obliged if would have the kindness to settle , etc . of these document , , who be always freehanded and careless , of course have he share , and though no great one , one quite enough to alarm he scrupulous and conscientious mother . she have some savings ; Pen's magnificent self - denial , and she own economy , amount from she great simplicity and avoidance of show to parsimony almost , have enable she to put by a little sum of money , a part of which she delightedly consecrate to the pay off the young gentleman 's obligation . at this price , many a worthy youth and respecte reader would hand over he correspondence to he parent ; and perhaps there be no greater test of a man 's regularity and easiness of conscience , than he readiness to face the postman . be he who be make happy by the sound of the rat -tat ! the good be eager for it : but the naughty tremble at the sound thereof . so it be very kind of doubly to spare the trouble of hearing or answer letter during he illness . there could have be nothing in the young man 's chest of drawer and wardrobe which could be consider as inculpat he in any way , nor any satisfactory document regard the affair find there , for the widow have to ask she brother - in -law if he know anything about the odious transaction , and the dreadful intrigue about which she son be engage . when they be at one day , and with have take a seat on a bench on the terrace , the widow keep major Pendennis in consultation , and lay she terror and perplexity before he , such of they at least ( for as be the wont of man and woman , she do not make quite a clean confession , and I suppose no spendthrift ask for a schedule of he debt , no lady of fashion ask by she husband for she dressmaker 's bill , ever send in the whole of they yet ) --such , we say , of she perplexity , at least , as she choose to confide to she Director for the time being . when , then , she ask the major what course she ought to pursue , about this dreadful -- this horrid affair , and whether he know anything regard it ? the old gentleman pucker up he face , so that you could not tell whether he be smile or not ; give the widow one queer look with he little eye ; cast they down to the carpet again , and say , " my dear , good creature , I do not know anything about it ; and I do not wish to know anything about it ; and , as you ask I my opinion , I think you have best know nothing about it too . young man will be young man ; begad , and , my good ma 'am , if you think we boy be a ---- " " pray , spare I this , " Helen break in , look very stately . " my dear creature , I do not commence the conversation , permit I to say , " the major say , bow very blandly . " I can not bear to hear such a sin -- such a dreadful sin -- speak of in such a way , " the widow say , with tear of annoyance start from she eyes . " I can not bear to think that my boy should commit such a crime . I wish he have die , almost , before he have do it . I do not know how I survive it myself ; for it be break my heart , major Pendennis , to think that he father 's son --my child -- whom I remember so good -- oh , so good , and full of honou !-- should be fall so dreadfully low , as to -- as to ---- " " as to flirt with a little grisette , my dear creature ? " say the major . " , if all the mother in be to break they heart because -- , nay ; upon my word and honour , now , do not agitate yourself -- do not cry . I can not bear to see a woman 's tear -- I never wcould -- never . but how do we know that anything serious have happen ? have say anything ? " " he silence confirm it , " sob , behind she pocket - handkerchief . " not at all . there be subject , my dear , about which a young fellow can not surely talk to he mamma , " insinuate the brother - in - law . " she have write to he , " cry the lady , behind the cambric . " what , before he be ill ? nothing more likely . " " no , since , "
" the mourner with the batiste mask gas out ; not before ; that be , I do not think so -- that be , I ---- " " only since ; and you have -- yes , I understand . I suppose when he be too ill to read he own correspondence , you take charge of it , do you ? " " I be the most unhappy mother in the world , " cry out the unfortunate . " the most unhappy mother in the world , because you son be a man and not a hermit ! have a care , my dear sister . if you have suppress any letter to he , you may have do yourself a great injury ; and , if I know anything of 's spirit , may cause a difference between he and you , which you will rue all you life -- a difference that be a dev'lish deal more important , my good madam , than the little -- little -- trumpery cause which originate it . " " there be only one letter , " break out , -- " only a very little one -- only a few word . here it be -- oh -- how can you , how can you speak so ? " when the good soul say " only a very little one , " the major could not speak at all , so inclin be he to laugh , in spite of the agony of the poor soul before he , and for whom he have a hearty pity and like too . but each be look at the matter with he or she peculiar eye and view of moral , and the major 's moral , as the reader know , be not those of a ascetic . " I recommend you , " he gravely continue , " if you can , to seal it up -- those letter be not unfrequently seal with wafer -- and to put it amongst Pen's other letter , and let he have they when he call for they or if we will can not seal it , we mistake it for a bill . " " I can not tell my son a lie , " say the widow . it have be put silently into the letter - box two day previous to they departure from the Temple , and have be bring to Pendennis by . she have never see 's handwriting , of course ; but when the letter be put into she hand she know the author at once . she have be on the watch for that letter every day since have be ill . she have open some of he other letter because she want to get at that one . she have the horrid paper poiso she bag at that moment . she take it out and offer it to she brother - in - law . " , , " he read in a timid little sprawling handwriting , and with a sneer on he face . " no , my dear , I will not read any more . but you who have read it may tell I what the letter contain -- only prayer for he health in bad spelling , you say -- and a desire to see he ? well -- there be no harm in that . and as you ask I -- " here the major begin to look a little queer for he own part , and put on he demure look --" as you ask I , my dear , for information , why , I do not mind tell you that -- ah -- that -- , my man , have make some inquiry regard this affair , and that -- my friend also look into it -- and it appear that this person be greatly smitten with Arthur ; that he pay for she and take she to , as hear from a old acquaintance of Pen' and ours , a irish gentleman , who be very nearly once have the honour of be the -- from a , in fact ; -- that the girl 's father , a violent man of intoxicated habit , have beat she mother , who persist in declare she daughter 's entire innocence to she husband on the one hand , while on the other she tell , that have act like a brute to she child . and so you see the story remain in a mystery . will you have it clear up ? I have but to ask , and he will tell I at once -- he be as honourable a man as ever liv . " " Honourable ! " say the widow with bitter scorn . " oh , brother , what be this you call honou ? if my boy have be guilty , he must marry she . I would go down on my knee and pray he to do so . " " ! be you mad ? " scream out the major ; and remember former passage in 's history and 's , the truth come across he mind that , were Hel to make this prayer to she son , he would marry the girl : he be wild enough and obstinate enough to commit any folly when a woman he love be in the case . " my dear sister , have you lose you sense ? " he continue ( after a agitate pause , during which the above dreary reflection cross he ) ; and in a soften tone , " what right have we to suppose that anything have pass between this girl and he ? let 's see the letter . she heart be break ; pray , pray , write to I -- home unhappy -- unkind father --
-- you nurse -- poor little Fanny -- spelt , as you say , in a manner to outrage all sense of decorum . but , good heaven ! my dear , what be there in this ? only that the little devil be make love to he still . why , she do not come into he chamber until he be so delirious that he do not know she . what - d'you - call -'em , , the laundress , tell , my man , so . she come in company of a old fellow , a old , who come most kindly down to and bring I away -- by the way , I leave he in the cab , and never pay the fare ; and dev'lish kind it be of he . no , there be nothing in the story . " " do you think so ? thank -- thank ! " cry . " I will take the letter to Arthur and ask he now . look at he there . he be on the terrace with . they be talk to some child . my boy be always fond of child . he be innocent , thank -- thank ! let I go to he . " have he own opinion . when he briskly take the not guilty side of the case , but a moment before , very likely the old gentleman have a different view from that which he choose to advocate , and judge of Arthur by what he himself would have do . if she go to , and he speak the truth , as the rascal will , it spoil all , he think . and he try one more effort . " my dear , good soul , " he say , take 's hand and kiss it , " as you son have not acquaint you with this affair , think if you have any right to examine it . as you believe he to be a man of honour , what right have you to doubt he honour in this instance ? who be he accuser ? a anonymous scoundrel who have bring no specific charge against he . if there be any such , would not the girl 's parent have come forward ? he be not call upon to rebutt , nor you to entertain a anonymous accusation ; and as for believe he guilty because a girl of that rank happen to be in he room act as nurse to he , begad you might as well insist upon he marrying that thdey have old irish gin- drink laundress , . " the widow burst out laugh through she tear -- the victory be gain by the old general . " , by , " he continue , tap she slender hand . " no . the boy have tell you nothing about it , and you know nothing about it . the boy be innocent -- of course . and what , my good soul , be the course for we to pursue ? suppose he be attach to this girl -- do not look sad again , it be merely a supposition -- and begad a young fellow may have a attachment , may not he ?-- directly he get well he will be at she again . " " he must come home ! we must go off directly to , " the widow cry out . " my good creature , he will bear himself to death at Fairoaks . he will have nothing to do but to think about he passion there . there be no place in the world for make a little passion into a big one , and where a fellow feed on he own thought , like a dem would lonly country - house where there be nothing to do . we must occupy he : amuse he : we must take he abroad : he be never be abroad except to for a lark . we must travel a little . he must have a nurse with he , to take great care of he , for Goodenough say he have a dev'lish narrow squeak of it ( do not look frightened ) , and so you must come and watch : and I suppose you will take , and I should like to ask to come . yoArthu be dev'lish fond of . he can not do without . 's family be one of the oldest in , and he be one of the best young fellow I ever meet in my life . I like he exceedingly . " " do know anything about this -- this affair ? " ask . " he have be away , I know , for two month before it happen ; write I so . " " not a word -- I -- I have ask he about it . I have pumpe he . he never hear of the transaction , never ; I pledge you my word , " cry out the major , in some alarm . " and , my dear , I think you have much best not talk to he about it -- much best not -- of course not : the subject be most delicate and painful . " the simple widow take she brother 's hand and press it . " thank you , brother , " she say . " you have be very , very kind to I . you have give I a great deal of comfort . I will go to my room , and think of what you have say . this illness and these -- these emotion -- have agitate I a great deal ; and I be not very strong , you know . but I will go and thank that my boy be innocent . he
he be innocent . be not he , sir ? " " yes , my dearest creature , yes , " say the old fellow , kiss she affectionately , and quite overcome by she tenderness . he look after she as she retreate , with a fondness which be render more piquant , as it be , by the mixture of a certain scorn which accompany it . " innocent ! " he say ; " I would swear , till I be black in the face , he be innocent , rather than give that good soul pain . " have achieve this victory , the fatigued and happy warrior lay himself down on the sofa , and put he yellow silk pocket - handkerchief over he face , and indulge in a snug little nap , of which the dream , no doubt , be very pleasant , as he snor with refresh regularity . the young man sate , meanwhile , dawdl away the sunshiny hour on the terrace , very happy , and , at least , very talkative . he be narrat to a plan for a new novel , and a new tragedy . laugh at the idea of he write a tragedy ? by , he would show that he could ; and he begin to spout some of the line of he play . the little solo on the wind instrument which the major be perform be interrupt by the entrance of . she have be on a visit to she old friend , , who have take a summer villa in the neighbourhood ; and who , hearing of 's illness , and he mother 's arrival at , have visit the latter ; and , for the benefit of the former , whom she do not like , have be prodigal of grape , partridge , and other attention . for the old lady have a great fondness , and long that she should come and stay with she ; but could not leave she mother at this juncture . wear out by constant watch over 's health , 's own have suffer very considerably ; and have have reason to prescribe for she as well as for he younger patient . start up on the entrance of the young lady . he slumber be easily break . he make she a gallant speech -- he have be full of gallantry towards she of late . where have she be gather those rose which she wear on she cheek ? how happy he be to be disturb out of he dream by such a charming reality ! have plenty of humour and honesty ; and these two cause she to have on she side something very like a contempt for the old gentleman . it delighte she to draw out he worldliness , and to make the old habitue of club and draw - room tell he twaddling tale about great folk , and expound he view of moral . not in this instance , however , be she dispose to be satirical . she have be to drive with in the , she say ; and she have bring home game for , and flower for mamma . she look very grave about mamma . she have just be with . be very much worn , and she fear she be very , very ill . she large eye fill with tender mark of the sympathy which she feel in she beloved friend 's condition . she be alarm about she . could not that good -- that dear cure she ? " be illness , and other mental anxiety , " the major slowly say , " have , no doubt , shaken . " a burn blush upon the girl 's face show that she understand the old man 's allusion . but she look he full in the face and make no reply . " he might have spa I that , " she think . " what be he aim at in recalling that shame to I ? " that he have a aim in view be very possible . the old diplomatist seldom speak without some such end . have talk to he , he say , about they dear friend 's health , and she want rest and change of scene -- yes , change of scene . painful circumstance which have occur must be forgotten and never allude to ; he beg pardon for even hint at they to -- he never should do so again -- nor , he be sure , would she . everything must be do to soothe and comfort they friend , and he proposal be that they should go abroad for the autumn to a watering - place in the neighbourhood , where Helen might rally she exhaust spirit , and try and become a new man . of course , would not forsake she mother ? of course not . it be about , and Helen only -- that be , about too for she sake , that be anxious . she would go abroad or anywhere with . and have think the matter over for a hour in she room , have by that time grow to be as anxious for the tour as any schoolboy , who have be read a book of voyage , be eager to go to sea . Whither should they go ? the farther the better -- to some place so remite that even recollection could not follow they thither : so delightful that should never want to leave it -- anywhere so that he could be happy . she open she desk with trembling finger and take out she banker 's book , and count up she little savings . if more be want , she have the diamond cross . she would borrow from again .
. " let we go -- let we go , " she think ; " directly he can bear the journey let we go away . come , kind -- come quick , and give we leave to quit . " the good doctor drive over to dine with they that very day . " if you agitate yourself so , " he say to she , " and if you heart beat so , and if you persist in be so anxious about a young gentleman who be get well as fast as he can , we shall have you lay up , and to watch you ; and then it will be she turn to be ill , and I should like to know how the deuce a doctor be to live who be oblige to come and attend you all for nothing ? be already jealous of you , and say , with perfect justice , that I fall in love with my patient . and you must please to get out of the country as soon as ever you can , that I may have a little peace in my family . " when the plan of go abroad be propose , it be receive by that gentleman with the greatest alacrity and enthusiasm . he longe to be off at once . he let he mustachio grow from that very moment , in order , I suppose , that he might get he mouth into training for a perfect french and german pronunciation ; and he be seriously disquiet in he mind because the mustachio , when they come , be of a decidedly red colour . he have look forward to a autumn at Fairoak ; and perhaps the idea of passing two or three month there do not amuse the young man . " there be not a soul to speak to in the place , " he say to . " I can not stand old 's sermon , and pompous after - dinner conversation . I know all old Glanders 's story about the Peninsular war . the Clavering be the only Christian people in the neighbourhood , and they be not to be at home before , my uncle say : besides , , I want to get out of the country . whilst you be away , confound it , I have a temptation , from which I be very thankful to have escape , and which i count that even my illness come very luckily to put a end to . " and here he narrate to he friend the circumstance of the affair , with which the reader be already acquaint . look very grave when he hear this story . put the moral delinquency out of the question , he be extremely glad for 's sake that the latter have escape from a danger which might have make he whole life wretch ; " which certainly , " say , " would have occasion the wretchedness and ruin of the other party . and you mother and -- and you friend -- what a pain it would have be to they ! " urge 's companion , little know what grief and annoyance these good people have already suffer . " not a word to my mother ! " cry out , in a state of great alarm . " she would never get over it . a esclandre of that sort would kill she , I do believe . and , " he add , with a know air , and as if , like a young rascal of a Lovelace , he have be engage in what be call affair de coeur , all he life ; " the best way , when a danger of that sort menace , be not to face it , but to turn one 's back on it and run . " " and be you very much smite ? " ask . " Hm ! " say . " she drop she h , but she be a dear little girl . " of Clarissas of this life , of you poor little ignorant vain foolish maiden ! if you do but know the way in which the Lovelaces speak of you : if you could but hear talk to across the coffee - room of a club ; or see take you poor little letter out of he cigar - case , and hand they over to , and , and across the messroom table , you would not be so eager to write , or so ready to listen ! there be a sort of crime which be not complete unless the lucky rogue boast of it afterwards ; and the man who betray you honour in the first place , be pretty sure , remember that , to betray you secret too . " it be hard to fight , and it be easy to fall , " say Warring gloomily . " and as you say , , when a danger like this be imminent , the best way be to turn you back on it and run . " after this little discourse upon a subject about which would have talk a great deal more eloquently a month back , the conversation revert to the plan for go abroad , and eagerly press he friend to be of the party . be a part of the family - - a part of the cure . yoArthu say he should not have half the pleasure without . but say no , he could not go . he must stop at home and take Pen's place . the other remark that that be needless , for be now come back to , and be entitle to a holiday . " do not press I , " say , " I can not go . I
I have particular engagement . I be best at home . I have not get the money to travel , that be the long and short of it -- for travelling cost money , you know . " this little obstacle seem fatal to . he mention it to he mother : be very sorry ; have be exceedingly kind ; but she suppose he know best about he affair . and then , no doubt , she reproach herself , for selfishness in wishing to carry the boy off and have he to herself altogether . " what be this I hear from , my dear ? " the major ask one day , when the pair be alone and after 's objection have be state to he . " not go with we ? we can not hear of such a thing -- will not get well without you . I promise you , I be not go to be he nurse . he must have somebody with he that be stronger and gayer and better able to amuse he than a rheumatic old fogy like I . I shall go to very likely , when I have see you people settle down . travel cost nothing nowadays -- or so little ! and -- and , pray , , remember that I be you father 's very old friend , and if you and you brother be not on such term as to -- to enable you to -- to anticipate you younger brother 's allowance , I beg you to make I you banker , for have not Pen be get into you debt these three week past , during which you have be do what he inform I be he work , with such exemplary talent and genius , begad ? " still , in spite of this kind offer and unheard - of generosity on the part of the major , refuse , and say he would stay at home . but it be with a falter voice and a irresolute accent which show how much he would like to go , though he tongue persist in say nay . but the major 's persevering benevolence be not to be baulk in this way . at the tea - table that eve , happen to be absent from the room for the moment , look for who have go to roost , old return to the charge and rate for refuse to join in they excursion . " be not it ungallant , ? " he say , turn to that young lady . " be not it unfriendly ? here we have be the happiest party in the world , and this odious selfish creature break it up ! " 's long eyelash look down towards she teacup : and blush hugely but do not speak . neither do bell speak : but when he blush she blush too . " you ask he to come , my dear , " say the benevolent old gentleman , " and then perhaps he will listen to you ---- " " why should listen to I ? " ask the young lady , put the query to she teaspoon seemingly and not to the major . " ask he ; you have not ask he , " say Pen's artless uncle . " I should be very glad , indeed , if would come , " remark to the teaspoon . " would you ? " say . she look up and say , " yes . " they eye meet . " I will go anywhere you ask I , or do anything , " say , lowly , and force out the word as if they give he pain . be delighted ; the affectionate old creature clap he hand and cry " ! bravo ! it be a bargain -- a bargain , begad ! shake hand on it , young people ! " and , with a look full of tender brightness , put out she hand to . he take hers ; he face indicate a strange agitation . he seem to be about to speak , when from neighbour room Helen enter , look at they as the candle which she hold light she pale frightened face . blush more red than ever and withdraw she hand . " what be it ? " ask . " it be a bargain we have be make , my dear creature , " say the major in he most caresse voice . " we have just bound over in a promise to come abroad with we . " " indeed ! " say . in which Fanny engage a new Medical man could Helen have suspect that , with Pen's return strength , he unhappy partiality for little would also reawake ? though she never speak a word regard that young person , after she conversation with the major , and though , to all appearance , she utterly ignore 's existence , yet keep a particularly close watch upon all 's action ; on the plea of ill - health would scarcely let he out of she sight ; and be especially anxious that he should be spare the trouble of all correspondence for the present at least . very likely look at he own letter with some tremor ; very likely , as he receive they at the family table , feel he mother 's watch upon he ( though the good soul 's eye seem fix upon she teacup or she book ) , he expect daily to see a little handwriting , which he would have know , though he have never see it yet , and he heart beat as he receive the letter to he address . be he more pleased or annoyed , that , day after day , he expectation be not realise ;
; and be he mind relieve , that there come no letter from ? though , no doubt , in these matter , when Lovelace be tired of ( or the contrary ) it be best for both party to break at once , and each , after the failure of the attempt at union , to go he own way , and pursue he course through life solitary ; yet we self - love , or we pity , or we sense of decency , do not like that sudden bankruptcy . before we announce to the world that we firm of and can not meet its engagement , we try to make compromise : we have mournful meeting of partner : we delay the put up of the shutter , and the dreary announcement of the failure . it must come : but we pawn we jewel to keep thing go a little longer . on the whole , I dare say , be rather annoyed that he have no remonstrance from . what ! could she part from he , and never so much as once look round ? could she sink , and never once hold a little hand out , or cry , " help , ? " well , well : they do not all go down who venture on that voyage . some few drow when the vessel founder ; but most be only duck , and scramble to shore . and the reader 's experience of . , , of the , will enable he to state whether that gentleman belong to the class of person who be likely to sink or to swim . though be as yet too weak to walk half a mile ; and might not , on account of he precious health , be trust to take a drive in a carriage by himself , and without a nurse in attendance ; yet could not keep watch over too , and have no authority to prevent that gentleman from go to if business call he thither . indeed , if he have go and stay , perhaps the widow , from reason of she own , would have be glad ; but she check these selfish wish as soon as she ascertain or own they ; and , remember 's great regard and service , and constant friendship for she boy , receive he as a member of she family almost , with she usual melancholy kindness and submissive acquiescence . yet somehow , one morning when he affair call he to town , she divine what 's errand be , and that he be go to to get news about for . indeed , yoArthu have have some talk with he friend , and tell he more at large what he adventur have be with Fanny ( adventur which the reader know already ) , and what be he feeling respect she . he be very thankful that he have escape the great danger , to which say heartily : that he have no great fault wherewith to reproach himself in regard of he behaviour to she , but that if they part , as they must , he would be glad to say a bless she , and to hope that she would remember he kindly . in he discourse with he speak upon these matters with so much gravity , and so much emotion , that , who have pronounce himself most strongly for the separation too , begin to fear that he friend be not so well cure as he boast of being ; and that , if the two be to come together again , all the danger and the temptation might have to be fight once more . and with what result ? " it be hard to struggle , , and it be easy to fall , " say : " and the best courage for we poor wretch be to fly from danger . I would not have be what I be now , have I practise what I preach . " and what do you practise , ? " ask , eagerly . " I know there be something . tell we about it , . " " there be something that can not be mende , and that shatte my whole fortune early , " answer . " I say I would tell you about it some day , Pen : and will , but not now . take the moral without the fable now , , my boy ; and if you want to see a man whose whole life have be wreck , by a unlucky rock against which he strike as a boy -- here he be , : and so I warn you . " we have show how , in writing home to he Clavering friend , mention that there be a fashionable club in of which he be a attendant , and that he be there in the habit of meet a irish officer of distinction , who , amongst other news , have give that intelligence regard , which the young surgeon have transmit to . this club be no other than the , where the disciple of be accustom to meet the general , the peculiarity of whose brogue , appearance , disposition , and general conversation , greatly divert many young gentleman who use the as a place of nightly entertainment and refreshment . , who have a fine natural genius for mimicking everything , whether it be a favourite tragic or comic actor , or a cock on a dunghill , a corkscrew go into a bottle and a cork issue thence , or a irish officer of genteel connexion who offer himself as a object of imitation with only too much readiness , talk he talk , and twange he poor old long bow whenever drink ,
, a hearer , and a opportunity occur , study we friend the General with peculiar gusto , and draw the honest fellow out many a night . a bait , consist of sixpennyworth of brandy - and - water , the worthy old man be sure to swallow : and under the influence of this liquor , who be more happy than he to tell he story of he daughter 's triumph and he own , in love , war , drink , and polite society ? thus be enable to present to he friend many picture of : of fight a jewel in the Phaynix -- of and he interview with the of -- of at he sonunlaw 's teeble , surround by the nobilitee of he countree -- of , when cry drunk , at which time he be in the habit of confidentially lament he daughter 's ingratichewd , and state that he grey hair be hasten to a praymachure greeve . and thus we friend be the means of bring a number of young fellows to the , who consum the landlord 's liquor whilst they relish the general 's peculiarity , so that mine host pardon many of the latter 's foible , in consideration of the good which they bring to he house . not the highest position in life be this -- certainly , or one which , if we have a reverence for a old man , we would be anxious that he should occupy : but of this aged buffoon it may be mention that he have no particular idea that he condition of life be not a high one , and that in he whiskied blood there be not a black drop , nor in he muddle brain a bitter feeling , against any mortal being . even he child , he cruel Emily , he would have take to he heart and forgive with tear ; and what more can one say of the charity of a man than that he be actually ready to forgive those who have do he every kindness , and with whom he be wrong in a dispute ! there be some idea amongst the young man who frequent the , and make themselves merry with the society of , that the make a mystery regard he lodging for fear of dun , or from a desire of privacy , and live in some wonderful place . would the landlord of the premise , when question upon this subject , answer any inquiry ; he maxe be that he only know gentleman who frequent that room , in that room ; that when they quit that room , have pay they score as gentleman , and behave as gentleman , he communication with they cease ; and that , as a gentleman himself , he think it be only impertinent curiosity to ask where any other gentleman liv . , in he most intoxicated and confidential moments , also evad any reply to question or hint address to he on this subject : there be no particular secret about it , as we have see , who have have more than once the honour of enter he apartment , but in the vicissitude of a long life he have be pretty often in the habit of residing in house where privacy be necessary to he comfort , and where the appearance of some visitor would have bring he anything but pleasure . hence all sort of legend be form by wag or credulous person respect he place of abode . it be state that he sleep habitually in a watch - box in the city : in a cab at a mew , where a cab - proprietor give he a shelter : in the of 's etc , the wildest of these theory be put abroad by the facetious and imaginative Huxter . for , when not silence by the company of " swell , " and when in the society of he own friend , be a very different fellow to the youth whom we have see cow by impertinent air , and , adore by he family at home , be the life and soul of the circle whom he meet , either round the festive board or the dissect table . on one brilliant morning , as be regal himself with a cup of coffee at a stall in , have spend a delicious night dancing at , he spy the general reel down , with a crowd of hooting blackguard boy at he heel , who have leave they bed under the arch of the river betime , and be prowl about already for breakfast , and the strange livelihood of the day . the poor old General be not in that condition when the sneer and joke of these young beggar have much effect upon he : the cabman and waterman at the cabstand know he and pass they comment upon he : the policeman gaze after he and warn the boy off he , with look of scorn and pity ; what do the scorn and pity of man , the joke of ribald child , matter to the general ? he reel along the street with glazed eye , have just sense enough to know whither he be bound , and to pursue he accustom beat homeward . he go to be not know how he have reach it , as often as any man in . he wake and find himself there , and ask no question , and he be tacke about on this daily though perilous voyage , when , from he station at the coffee - stall , spy he . to note he friend , to pay he twopence ( indeed , he have but eightpence left , or he would have have a cab from to take he home )
) , be with the eager Huxter the work of a instant -- div down the alley by , where gin - shop , oyster - shop , and theatrical wardrobe abound , the proprietor of which be now asleep behind they shutter , as the pink morning light up they chimney ; and through these court follow the general , until he reach , in which be the gate of 's . here , just as he be within sight of home , a luckless slice of orange - peel come between the general 's heel and the pavement , and cause the poor old fellow to fall backwards . run up to he instantly , and after a pause , during which the veteran , giddy with he fall and he previous whisky , gather , as he best might , he dizzy brain together , the young surgeon lift up the limping General , and very kindly and good - naturedly offer to conduct he to he home . for some time , and in reply to the query which the student of medicine put to he , the muzzy General refuse to say where he lodging be and declare that they be hard by , and that he could reach they without difficulty ; and he disengage himself from 's arm , and make a rush as if to get to he own home unattend : but he reel and lurch so , that the young surgeon insiste upon accompany he , and , with many soothing expression and cheering and consolatory phrase , succeed in get the general 's dirty old hand under what he call he own fin , and lead the old fellow , moaning piteously , across the street . he stop when he come to the ancient gate , ornament with the armorial bearing of the venerable shepherd . " here ' tis , " say he , draw up at the portal , and he make a successful pull at the gate bell , which presently bring out old , the porter , scowl fiercely , and grumbl as he be use to do every morning when it become he turn to let in that early bird . try to hold for a moment in genteel conversation , but the other surlily would not . " do not bother I , " say he ; " go to you hown bed Capting , and do not keep honest man out of theirs . " so the tacke across the square and reach he own staircase , up which he stumble with the worthy Huxter at he heel . have a key of he own , which insert into the keyhole for he , so that there be no need to call up little from the sleep into which the old musician have not long since fall , and Huxter have aid to disrobe he tipsy patient , and ascertain that no bone be break , help he to be and apply compress a water to one of he knee and shin , which , with the pair of trousers which encase they , have severely torn in he fall . at the general 's age , and with he habit of body , such wound as he have inflict on himself be slow to heal : a good deal of inflammation ensue , and the old fellow lay ill for some day , suffer both pain and fever . undertake the case of he interesting patient with great confidence and alacrity , and conduct it with become skill . he visit he friend day after day , and consol he with lively rattle and conversation for the absence of the society which need , and of which he be a ornament ; and he give special instruction to the invalid 's nurse about the quantity of whisky which the patient be to take -- instruction which , as the poor old fellow could not for many day get out of he bed or sofa himself , he could not by any means infringe . , , and we little friend , when able to do so , officiate at the 's bedside , and the old warrior be make as comfortable as possible under he calamity . thus Huxter , whose affable manners and social turn make he quickly intimate with person in whose society he fall , and whose over-refinement do not lead they to repulse the familiarity of this young gentleman , become pretty soon intimate in 's , both with we acquaintance in the garret and those in the porter 's lodge . he think he have see somewhere : he feel certain that he have : but it be no wonder that he should not accurately remember she , for the poor little thing never choose to tell he where she have meet he : he himself have see she at a period , when he own view both of person and of right and wrong be cloude by the excitement of drinking and dancing , and also little be very much change and wear by the fever and agitation , and passion and despair , which the past three week have pour upon the head of that little victim . Borne down be the head now , and very pale and want the face ; and many and many a time the sad eye have look into the postman 's , as he come to the , and the sickened heart have sunk as he pass away . when 's accident occur , be rather glad to have a opportunity of be useful and do something kind -- something that would make she forget she own little sorrow perhaps : she feel she bear they better whilst she do she duty , though I dare say many a tear drop into the old 's gruel .
. ah , I ! stir the gruel well , and have courage , little Fanny ! if everybody who have suffer from you complaint be to die of it straightway , what a fine year the undertaker would have ! whether from compassion for he only patient , or delight in he society , find now occasion to visit two or three time in the day at least , and if any of the member of the porter 's lodge family be not in attendance on the general , the young doctor be sure to have some particular direction to address to those at they own place of habitation . he be a kind fellow ; he make or purchase toy for the child ; he bring they apple and brandy - ball ; he bring a mask and frightene they with it , and cause a smile upon the face of pale . he call , and be very intimate , familiar , and facetious with that lady , quite different from that " aughty , artless beast , " as now denominate a certain young gentleman of we acquaintance , and whom she now vow she never could abear . it be from this lady , who be very free in she conversation , that presently learn what be the illness which be evidently prey upon little fan , and what have be Pen's behaviour regard she . 's account of the transaction be not , it may be imagine , entirely a impartial narrative . one would have think from she story that the young gentleman have employ a course of the most persevering and flagitious artifice to win the girl 's heart , have break the most solemn promise make to she and be a wretch to be hate and chastise by every champion of woman . , in he present frame of mind respecte , and suffer under the latter 's contumely , be ready , of course , to take all for grant that be say in the disfavour of this unfortunate convalescent . but why do he not write home to , as he have do previously , give a account of Pen's misconduct , and of the particular regard it , which have now come to he knowledge ? he soon , in a letter to he brother - in - law , announce that that nice young man , , have escape narrowly from a fever , and that no doubt all , where he be so popular , would be pleased at he recovery ; and he mention that he have a interesting case of compound fracture , a officer of distinction , which keep he in town ; but as for , he make no more mention of she in he letter -- no more than himself have make mention of she . of you mother at home , how much do you think you know about you lad ? how much do you think you know ? but with , there be no reason why should not speak he mind , and so , a very short time after he conversation with , talk to the musician about he early acquaintance with ; describe he as a confound conceited blackguard , and express a determination to punch he impudent head as soon as ever he should be well enough to stand up like a man . then it be that Bows on he part speak and tell he version of the story , whereor and little fan be the hero and heroine ; how they have meet by no contrivance of the former , but by a blunder of the old , now in bed with a break shin -- how have act with manliness and self - control in the business -- how be a idiot ; and he relate the conversation which he , , have have with , and the sentiment utter by the young man . perhaps 's story cause some twinge of conscience in the breast of Pen's accuser , and that gentleman frankly own that he have be wrong with regard to , and withdraw he project for punch 's head . but the cessation of he hostility for do not diminish 's attention to , which unlucky mark with he usual jealousy and bitterness of spirit , " I have but to like anybody " the old fellow thought , " and somebody be sure to come and be prefer to I . it have be the same ill - luck with I since I be a lad , until now that I be sixty year old . what can such a man as I be expect better than to be laugh at ? it be for the young to succeed , and to be happy , and not for old fools like I . I have play a second fiddle through life , " he say , with a bitter laugh ; " how can I suppose the luck be to change after it have go against I so long ? " this be the selfish way in which look at the state of affair : though few person would have think there be any cause for he jealousy , who look at the pale and grief - stricken countenance of the hapless little girl , its object . receive 's good - natured effort at consolation and kind attention kindly . she laugh now and again at he joke and game with she little sister , but relapse quickly into a dejection which ought to have satisfied that the new - comer have no place in she heart as yet , have jealous Bows be enable to see with clear eye . but do not . Fanny attribut 's silence somehow to 's interference . hate he . Fanny treat Bow with constant cruelty and injustice . she turn
turn from he when he speak -- she loath he attempt at consolation . a hard life have , and a cruel return for he regard . when come to 's as , it be for 's apartment he inquire ( no doubt upon a previous agreement with the principal for whom he act in this delicate negotiation ) , and he do not so much as catch a glimpse of when he stop at the Inn - gate and make he inquiry . be , of course , direct to the musician 's chamber , and find he ten the patient there , from whose chamber he come out to wait upon he guest . we have say that they have be previously know to one another , and the pair shook hand with sufficient cordiality . after a little preliminary talk , say that he have come from he friend , and from he family , to thank Bows for he attention at the commencement of Pen's illness , and for he kindness in hasten into the country to fetch the major . Bows reply that it be but he duty : he have never think to have see the young gentleman alive again when he go in search of 's relative , and he be very glad of 's recovery , and that he have he friend with he . " be they who have friend , , " say the musician . " I might be up in this garret and nobody would care for I , or mind whether I be alive or dead . " " what ! not the general , ? " ask . " the like he whisky - bottle more than anything in life , " the other answer ; " we live together from habit and convenience ; and he care for I no more than you do . what be it you want to ask I , ? you be not come to visit I , I know very well . nobody come to visit I . it be about Fanny , the porter 's daughter , you be come -- I see that -- very well . be , now he have get well , anxious to see she again ? do he lordship the propose to throw he ' andkerchiefinitely to she ? she have be very ill , sir , ever since the day when turn she out of door -- kind of a lady , be not it ? the poor girl and myself find the young gentleman rave in a fever , know nobody , with nobody to tend he but he drunken laundress -- she watch day and night by he . I set off to fetch he uncle . come and turn to the right - about . uncle come and leave I to pay the cab . carry my compliment to the ladie and gentleman , and say we be both very thankful , very . why , a countess could not have behaved better , and for a apothecary 's lady , as I be give to understand be -- I be sure she behaviour be most uncommon aristocratic and genteel . she ought to have a double - gilt pestle and mortar to she coach . " it be from that have learn Pen's parentage , no doubt , and if he take Pen's part against the young surgeon , and be against , it be because the old gentleman be in so savage a mood , that he humour be to contradict everybody . be curious , and not ill pleased at the musician 's taunt and irascibility . " I never hear of these transaction , " he say , " or get but a very imperfect account of they from major Pendennis . what be a lady to do ? I think ( I have never speak with she on the subject ) she have some notion that the young woman and my friend be on -- on term of -- of a intimacy which could not , of course , recognise ---- " " oh , of course not , sir . speak out , sir ; say what you mean at once , that the young gentleman of the have make a victim of the girl of 's , eh ? and so she be turn to be out of door -- or bray alive in the double - gilt pestle and mortar , by ! no , , there be no such thing : there be no victimising , or if there be , be the victim , not the girl . he be a honest fellow , he be , though he be conceit , and a puppy sometimes . he can feel like a man , and run away from temptation like a man . I own it , though I suffer by it , I own it . he have a heart , he have : but the girl have not , sir . that girl will do anything to win a man , and fl he away without a pang , sir . if she be fling away herself , sir , she will feel it and cry . she have a fever when turn she out of door ; and she make love to the , , who come to cure she . now she have take on with another chap -- another sawbone , ha , ha ! d --- it , sir , she like the pestle and mortar , and hang round the pill - box , she be so fond of th'ey , and she have get a fellow from 's , who grin through a horse - collar for she sister , and charms away she melancholy . go and see , sy : very likely he be in the lodge now .
. if you want news about , you must ask at the Doctor 's shop , sir , not of a old fiddler like I -- good - bye , sir . there be my patient call . " and a voice be hear from the 's bedroom , a well - know voice , which say , " I would loike a dthrop of dthrink , Bows , I be thirstee . " and not sorry , perhaps , to hear that such be the state of thing , and that Pen's forsaken be consol herself , take he leave of the irascible musician . as luck would have it , he pass the lodge door just as be in the act of frighten the child with the mask whereor we have speak , and be smile languidly at he farces . laugh bitterly . " be all woman like that ? " he think . " I think there be one that be not , " he add , with a sigh . at , wait for the omnibus , fell in with , bound in the same direction , and he tell the old gentleman of what he have see and hear respect Fanny . major Pendennis be highly delighted : and as might be expect of such a philosopher , make precisely the same observation as that which have escape from . " all woman be the same , " he say . " petite se console . , when I use to read ' Telemaque ' at school , Calypso ne pouvait se consoler , -- you know the rest , , -- I use to say it be absard . Absard , by , and so it be . and so she be get a new soupirant , have she , the little porteress ? Dayvlish nice little girl . how mad Pen will be -- eh , ? but we must break it to he gently , or he will be in such a rage that he will be go after she again . we must menager the young fellow . " " I think ought to know that act very well in the business . she evidently think he guilty , and accord to , behave like a good fellow , " say . " my dear , " say the major , with a look of some alarm , " in 's agitate state of health and that sort of thing , the best way , I think , be not to say a single word about the subject -- or , stay , leave it to I : and I will talk to she -- break it to she gently , you know , and that sort of thing . I give you my word I will . and so 's consol , be she , " and he snigger over this gratify truth , happy in the corner of the omnibus during the rest of the journey . be very anxious to hear from he envoy what have be the result of the latter 's mission ; and as soon as the two young man could be alone , the ambassador spoke in reply to 's eager query . " you remember you poem , , of in , " say ; " devilish bad poetry it be , to be sure . " " Apres ? " ask , in a great state of excitement . " when leave , do you remember what happen to she , young fellow ? " " it be a lie , it be a lie ! you do not mean that ! " cry out , start up , he face turn red . " sit down , stoopid , " say , and with two finger push back into he seat again . " it be better for you as it be , young one , " he say sadly , in reply to the savage flush in 's face . fulfil he promise to so far as to satisfy he own conscience , and in so far to ease poor Helen with regard to she son , as to make she understand that all connexion between and the odious little gatekeeper be at a end , and that she need have no further anxiety with respect to a imprudent attachment or a degrading marriage on Pen's part . and that young fellow 's mind be also relieved ( after he have recover the shock to he vanity ) by think that be not go to die of love for he , and that no unpleasant consequence be to be apprehend from the luckless and brief connexion . so the whole party be free to carry into effect they project continental trip , and , rentier , voyageant avec and , and , particulier , age de 32 ans , taille 6 pied ( Anglais ) , figure ordinaire , cheveux noir , barbe idem , etc. , procure passport from the consul of the of the at , and pass over from that port to , whence the party take they way leisurely , visit and on they way to Brussels and the Rhine . it be not we purpose to describe this oft -travell tour , or 's delight at the tranquil and ancient city which she see for the first time , or 's wonder and interest at the Beguine convent which they visit , or the almost terror with which she see the black - veile nun with outstretched arm kneeling before the illuminated altar , and beheld the strange pomp and ceremonial of the worship . Barefoote friar in the street ; crown image of Saints and Virgins in the churche before which people be bow down and worship , in direct defiance , as she hold , of the write law ; priest in gorgeous
gorgeous rob , or lurk in dark confessional ; theatre open , and people dance on , -- all these new sight and manners shock and bewilder the simple country lady ; and when the young man after they evening drive or walk return to the widow and she adopt daughter , they find they book of devotion on the table , and at they entrance would commonly cease read some of the psalm or the sacred page which , of all other , love . the late event connect with she son have cruelly shake she ; watch with intense , though hide anxiety , every movement of she dearest friend ; and poor be most constant and affectionate in wait upon he mother , whose wounded bosom year with love towards he , though there be a secret between they , and a anguish or rage almost on the mother 's part , to think that she be dispossess somehow of she son 's heart , or that there be recess in it which she must not or da not enter . she sicken as she think of the sacred day of boyhood when it have not be so -- when she Arthur 's heart have no secret , and she be he all in all : when he pour he hope and pleasure , he childish grief , vanity , triumph into she willing and tender embrace ; when she home be he nest still ; and before fate , selfishness , nature , have drive he forth on wayward wing -- to range he own flight -- to s he own song -- and to seek he own home and he own mate . watch this devour care and rack disappointment in she friend , once say to , " if have love I as you wish , I should have gain he , but I should have lose you , mamma , I know I should ; and I like you to love I best . men do not know what it be to love as we do , I think , " -- and , sigh , agree to this portion of the young lady 's speech , though she protest against the former part . for my part I suppose be right in both statement , and with regard to the latter assertion especially , that it be a old and receive truism -- love be a hour with we : it be all night and all day with a woman . have tax , sermon , parade , tailor ' bill , parliamentary duty , and the deuce know what to think of ; have to think about -- be the oak ( or the post ) and stand up , and be the ivy or the honeysuckle whose arm twine about he . be it not so , ? be it not you nature to creep about he foot and kiss they , to twine round he trunk and hang there ; and 's to stand like a british man with he hand in he breech pocket , while the pretty fond parasite cling round he ? have only accompany we friend to the water 's edge , and leave they on board the boat , give the chief charge of the little expedition to . he himself be bound on a brief visit to the house of a great man , a friend of he , after which sojourn he propose to join he sister - in - law at the german watering - place , whither the party be bound . the major himself think that he long attention to he sick family have earn for he a little relaxation -- and though the best of the partridge be thin off , the pheasant be still to be shoot at , where the noble owner still be ; old Pendennis betake himself to that hospitable mansion and disport there with great comfort to himself . a , some foreigners of note , some illustrious statesman , and some pleasant people visit it : it do the old fellow 's heart good to see he name in the amongst the list of the distinguished company which the of be entertain at he country - house at . he be a very useful and pleasant personage in a country - house . he entertain the young man with queer little anecdote and grivoise story on they shooting - party or in they smoking - room , where they laugh at he and with he . he be obsequious with the lady of a morning , in the room dedicate to they . he walk the new arrival about the park and garden , and show they the carte do pay , and where there be the best view of the mansion , and where the most favourable point to look at the lake : he show , where the timber be to be felle , and where the old road go before the new bridge be build , and the hill cut down ; and where the place in the wood be where old discover on he knee before she ladyship , etc. etc. ; he call the lodge -keeper and gardener by they name ; he know the number of domestic that sit down in the housekeeper 's room , and how many dine in the servants '- hall ; he have a word for everybody , and about everybody , and a little against everybody . he be invaluable in a country - house , in a word : and richly merite and enjoy he vacation after he labour . and perhaps whilst he be thus deservedly enjoy himself with he country friend , the major be not ill pleas at transferring to the command of the family expedition to the continent , and thus perforce keep he in the
the service of the ladie , -- a servitude which be only too willing to undergo , for he friend 's sake , and for that of a society which he find daily more delightful . be a good german scholar , and be willing to give lesson in the language , who be very glad to improve herself , though , for he part , be too weak or lazy now to resume he german study . act as courier and interpreter ; see the baggage in and out of ship , inns and carriage , manage the money matter , and put the little troop into marching order . find out where the english church be , and , if and be inclin to go thither , walk with great decorum along with they . walk by 's donkey , when that lady go out on she evening excursion ; or take carriage for she ; or get ' ' for she ; or devise comfortable seat under the lime - tree for she , when the guest parade after dinner , and the Kursaal band at the bath , where we tired friend stop , perform they pleasant music under the tree . many a fine whisker Prussian or french dandy , come to the bath for the ' Trent - et - quarante , ' cast glance of longe towards the pretty fresh - coloured English girl who accompany the pale widow , and would have long to take a turn with she at the galop or the waltz . but do not appear in the ballroom , except once or twice , when vouchsaf to walk with she ; and as for , that rough diamond have not have the polish of a dancing - master , and he do not know how to waltz , -- though he would have like to learn , if he could have have such a partner as .-- such a partner ! psha , what have a stiff bachelor to do with partner and waltze ? what be he about , dance attendance here ? drink in sweet pleasure at a risk he know not of what after - sadness , and regret , and lonely long ? but yet he stay on . you would have say he be the widow 's son , to watch he constant care and watchfulness of she ; or that he be a adventurer , and want to marry she fortune , or , at any rate , that he want some very great treasure or benefit from she , -- and very likely he do , -- for ours , as the reader have possibly already discover , be a Selfish Story , and almost every person , accord to he nature , more or less generous than , and accord to the way of the world as it seem to we , be occupy about number one . so selfishly devote himself to , who selfishly devote herself to , who selfishly devote himself to himself at this present period , have no other personage or object to occupy he , except , indeed , he mother 's health , which give he a serious and real disquiet ; but though they , sate together , they do not talk much , and the cloud be always between they . every day look for , and receive he with more frank and eager welcome . he find himself talk to she as he do not know himself that he could talk . he find himself perform act of gallantry which astounde he after the performance : he find himself look blankly in the glass at the crow 's foot round he eye , and at some streak of white in he hair , and some intrusive silver bristle in he grim , blue beard . he find himself look at the young buck at the bath -- at the bland , tight - waist Germans -- at the capering , with they lacquered mustachio and trim varnish boot -- at the english dandy , amongst they , with they calm domineer air , and insolent languor : and envy each one of these some excellence or quality of youth , or good look , which he possess , and of which feel the need . and every night , as the night come , he quit the little circle with greater reluctance ; and , retire to he own lodging in they neighbourhood , feel himself the more lonely and unhappy . the widow could not help see he attachment . she understand , now , why major Pendennis ( always a tacit enemy of she darling project ) have be so eager that should be of they party . frankly own she great , she enthusiastic , regard for he : and yoArthu would make no movement . yoArthu do not choose to see what be go on ; or do not care to prevent , or actually encourage , it . she remembe he often have say that he could not understand how a man propose to a woman twice . she be in torture -- at secret feud with she son , of all object in the world the dearest to she -- in doubt , which she da not express to herself , about -- averse to , the good and generous . no wonder that the healing water of do not do she good , or that Doctor von , the bath physician , when he come to visit she , find that the poor lady make no progress to recovery . meanwhile get well rapidly ; sleep with immense perseverance twelve hour out of the twenty - four ; eat huge meal ; and , at the end of a couple of month , have almost get back the bodily strength and weight which
which he have possess before he illness . after they have pass some fifteen day at they place of rest and refreshment , a letter come from announce he speedy arrival at , and , soon after the letter , the major himself make he appearance accompany by he faithful valet , without whom the old gentleman could not move . when the major travel he wear a jaunty and juvenile travel costume ; to see he back still you would have take he for one of the young fellow whose slim waist and youthful appearance be begin to envy . it be not until the worthy man begin to move , that the observer remark that have weaken he ancient knee , and have unkindly interfere to impede the action of the natty little varnished boot in which the gay old traveller still pinch he toe . there be magnate both of we own country and of foreign nation present that autumn at . the elder Pendennis read over the strangers 's list with great gratification on the night of he arrival , be pleased to find several of he acquaintance among the great folk , and would have the honour of present he nephew to a german , a russian princess , and a , before many day be over : nor be Pen by any means averse to make the acquaintance of these great personage , have a liking for polite life , and all the splendour and amenity belong to it . that very even the resolute old gentleman , lean on he nephew 's arm , make he appearance in the hall of the , and lose or win a napoleon or two at the table of ' Trent - et - quarante . ' he do not play to lose , he say , or to win , but he do as other folk do , and bet he napoleon and take he luck as it come . he point out the and gambling for heap of gold , and denounce they eagerness as something sordid and barbarous ; a english gentleman should play where the fashion be play , but should not elate or depress himself at the sport ; and he tell how he have see he friend the of , when , lose eighteen thousand at a sitting , and break the bank three night run at , without ever show the least emotion at he defeat or victory . " and that be what I call be a english gentleman , , my dear boy , " the old gentleman say , warm as he prattle about he recollection --" what I call the great manner only remain with we and with a few family in . " and as russian Princess pass he , whose reputation have long cease to be doubtful , and damage English lady , who be constantly see in company of they faithful attendent for the time be in these gay haunt of dissipation , the old major , with eager garrulity and mischievous relish , tell he nephew wonderful particular regard the life of these heroine ; and divert the young man with a thousand scandal . , he feel himself quite young again , he remark to , as , rouge and grinn , she enormous chasseur behind she bear she shawl , the princess smile and recognise and accost he . he remembe she in ' 14 when she be a actress of the , and the 's aide - de-camp ( a man of great talents , who know a good deal about the 's death , and be a devil to play ) marry she . he most courteously and respectfully ask leave to call upon the princess , and to present to she he nephew , ; and he point out to the latter a half - dozen of other personage whose name be as famous , and whose histories be as satisfying . what would poor Helen have think , could she have hear those tale , or know to what kind of people she brother - in - law be present she son ? only once , lean on 's arm , she have pass through the room where the green table be prepare for play , and the croaking croupier be call out they fatal word of and . she have shrunk terrify out of the pandemonium , implor , extort from he a promise , on he word of honour , that he would never play at those table ; and the scene which so frighten the simple widow , only amuse the worldly old veteran , and make he young again ! he could breathe the air cheerfully which stifle she . she right be not he right : he food be she poison . human creature be constitute thus differently , and with this variety the marvellous world be people . to the credit of , let it be say , that he keep honestly the promise make to he mother , and stoutly tell he uncle of he intention to abide by it . when the major arrive , he presence somehow cast a damp upon at least three of the persons of we little party --upon who have anything but respect for he ; upon , whose manner towards he show a involuntary haughtiness and contempt ; and upon the timid and alarme widow , who dread lest he should interfere with she darling , though almost desperate , project for she boy . and , indeed , the major , unknown to himself , be the bearer of tiding which be to bring about a catastrophe in the affair of all we friend . Pen with he two lady have apartment in the town of ; honest Warrington have lodging hard by ; the major , on arrival at , have
have , as befit he dignity , take he quarter at one of the great hotel , at the or the , where two or three hundred gambler , pleasure - seeker , or invalid , sate down and over -ate themselves daily at the enormous table - d 'hote . to this hotel go on the morning after the major 's arrival , dutifully to pay he respects to he uncle , and find the latter 's sitting - room duly prepare and arrange by , with the major 's hat brush , and he coat lay out : he despatch - box and umbrella - case , he guidebook , passport , map , and other elaborate necessary of the traveller , all as trim and ready as they could be in they master 's own room in . everything be ready , from the medicine - bottle fresh fill from the pharmacien 's , down to the old fellow 's prayer - book , without which he never travel , for he make a point of appear at the church at every place which he honoure with a stay " everybody do it , " he say ; " every gentleman do it , " and this pious man would as soon have think of not call upon the english ambassador in a town , as of not show himself at the national place of worship . the old gentleman have be to take one of the bath for which be famous , and which everybody take , and he after - bath toilet be not yet complete when arrive . the elder call out to in a cheery voice from the inner apartment , in which he and be engage , and the valet presently come in , bear a little packet to Pen's address -- 's letter and papers , say , which he have bring from 's chamber in , and which consist chiefly of number of the , which we friend think he collaborateur would like to see . the papers be ti together : the letter in a envelope , address to , in the last - name gentleman 's handwriting . amongst the letter there be a little note address , as a former letter we have hear of have be , to " , , " which open with a start and a blush , and read with a very keen pang of interest , and sorrow , and regard . she have come to 's house , say -- and find that he be go -- go away to without ever leave a word for she -- or answer to she last letter , in which she pray but for one word of kindness -- or the book which he have promise she in happier time , before he be ill , and which she should like to keep in remembrance of he . she say she would not reproach those who have find she at he bedside when he be in the fever , and know nobody , and who have turn the poor girl away without a word . she think she should have die , she say , of that , but have kindly ten she , and keep she life , when , perhaps , the keeping of it be of no good , and she forgave everybody and as for , she would pray for he for ever . and when he be so ill , and they cut off he hair , she have make so free as to keep one little lock for herself , and that she own . and might she still keep it , or would he mamma order that that should be give up too ? she be willing to obey he in all thing , and could not but remember that once he be so kind , oh ! so good and kind ! to he poor Fanny . when major Pendennis , fresh and smirk from he toilet , come out of he bedroom to he sitting - room , he find , with this note before he , and a expression of savage anger on he face , which surprise the elder gentleman . " what news from , my boy ? " he rather faintly ask ; " be the dun at you that you look so glum ? " " do you know anything about this letter , sir ? " yoArthu ask . " what letter , my good sir ? " say the other dryly , at once perceive what have happen . " you know what i mean -- about , about -- about -- the poor dear little girl , " yoArthu break out . " when she be in my room ? be she there when I be delirious -- I fancie she be -- be she ? who send she out of my chamber ? who intercept she letter to I ? who da to do it ? do you do it , uncle ? " " it be not my practice to tamper with gentleman 's letter , or to answer damn impertinent question , " major Pendennis cry out , in a great tremor of emotion and indignation . " there be a girl in you room when I come up at great personal inconvenience , daymy -- and to meet with a return of this kind for my affection to you , be not pleasant , by , sir -- not at all pleasant . " " that be not the question , sir , " yoArthu say hotly -- " and I beg you pardon , uncle . you be , you always have be , most kind to I : but I say again , do you say anything harsh to this poor girl ? do you send she away from I ?
? " " I never speak a word to the girl , " the uncle say , " and I never send she away from you , and know no more about she , and wish to know no more about she , than about the man in the moon . " " then it be my mother that do it , " yoArthu break out . " do my mother send that poor child away ? " " I repeat I know nothing about it , sir , " the elder say testily . " let 's change the subject , if you please . " " I will never forgive the person who do it , " say , bounce up and seize he hat . the major cry out , " , , for 's sake , stop ; " but before he have utter he sentence have rush out of the room , and at the next minute the major see he strid rapidly down the street that lead towards he home . " get breakfast ! " say the old fellow to , and he wag he head and sigh as he look out of the window . " poor Helen -- poor soul ! there will be a row . I know there would : and begad all the fat 's in the fire . " when reach home he only find in the ladie 's drawing - room , wait they arrival in order to conduct they to the room where the little English colony at hold they church . and have not appear as yet ; the former be ail , and she daughter be with she . 's wrath be so great that he could not defer express it . he fling 's letter across the table to he friend . " look there , , " he say ; " she ten I in my illness , she rescue I out of the jaw of death , and this be the way they have treat the dear little creature . they have keep she letter from I ; they have treat I like a child , and she like a dog , poor thing ! my mother have do this . " " if she have , you must remember it be you mother , " interpose . " it only make the crime the greater , because it be she who have do it , " answer . " she ought to have be the poor girl 's defender , not she enemy : she ought to go down on she knee and ask pardon of she . I ought ! I will ! I be shocked at the cruelty which have be show she . what ? she give I she all , and this be she return ! she sacrifice everything for I , and they spurn she . " " Hush ! " say , " they can hear you from the next room . " " ? let they hear ! " cry out , only so much the louder . " those may overhear my talk who intercept my letter . I say this poor girl have be shamefully use , and I will do my best to right she ; I will . " the door of the neighbour room open , and come forth with a pale and stern face . she look at with glance from which beame pride , defiance , aversion . " Arthur , you mother be very ill , " she say ; " it be a pity that you should speak so loud as to disturb she . " " it be a pity that I should have be oblige to speak at all , " answer . " and I have more to say before I have do . " " I should think what you have to say will hardly be fit for I to hear , " say , haughtily . " you be welcome to hear it or not , as you like , " say . " I shall go in now and speak to my mother . " come rapidly forward , so that she should not be overhear by she friend within . " not now , sir , " she say to . " you may kill she if you do . you conduct have go far enough to make she wretch . " " what conduct ? " cry out , in a fury . " who dare impugn it ? who dare meddle with I ? be it you who be the instigator of this persecution ? " " I say before it be a subject of which it do not become I to hear or to speak , " say . " but as for , if she have act otherwise than she do with regard to -- to the person about whom you seem to take such a interest , it would have be I that must have quit you house , and not that -- that person . " " by heaven ! this be too much , " cry out , with a violent execration . " perhaps that be what you wish , " say , toss she head up . " no more of this , if you please ; I be not accustom to hear such subject speak of in such language , " and with a stately curtsey the young lady pass to she room , look she adversary full in the face as she retreate and close the door upon he . be bewilder with wonder , perplexity , fury , at this monstrous and unreasonable persecution . he burst out into a loud and bitter laugh as quit he , and with sneer and reviling , as a man who jeer under a operation , ridicule at
at once he own pain and he persecutor 's anger . the laugh , which be one of bitter humour , and no unmanly or unkindly expression of suffer under most cruel and unmerited torture , be hear in the next apartment , as some of he unlucky previous expression have be , and , like they , entirely misinterpret by the hearer . it strike like a dagger into the wounded and tender heart of ; it pierce , and inflam the high - spirited girl with scorn and anger . " and it be to this harden libertine , " she think -- " to this boaster of low intrigue , that I have give my heart away . " " he break the most sacred law , " think . " he prefer the creature of he passion to he own mother ; and when he be upbraided , he laugh , and glory in he crime . ' she give I she all ,' I hear he say it , " argue the poor widow , " and he boast of it , and laugh , and break he mother 's heart . " the emotion , the shame , the grief , the mortification almost kill she . she feel she should die of he unkindness . thought of 's speech -- " perhaps that be what you wish . " " she love still , " he say . " it be jealousy make she speak . " -- " come away , . come away , and let we go to church and get calm . you must explain this matter to you mother . she do not appear to know the truth : nor do you quite , my good fellow . come away , and let we talk about it . " and again he mutter to himself , " 'Perhaps that be what you wish . ' yes , she love he . why should not she love he ? whom else would I have she love ? what can she be to I but the dearest and the fairest and the best of woman ? " so , leave the woman similarly engage within , the two gentleman walk away , each occupy with he own thought , and silent for a considerable space . " I must set this matter right , " think honest " as she love he still -- I must set he mind right about the other woman . " and with this charitable thought , the good fellow begin to tell more at large what Bows have say to he regard 's behaviour and fickleness , and he describe how the girl be no better than a little light - minde flirt ; and , perhaps , he exaggerate the good - humour and contentedness which he have himself , as he think , witness in she behaviour in the scene with . now , all 's statement have be colou by a insane jealousy and rage on that old man 's part ; and instead of allay Pen's renascent desire to see he little conquest again , 's account inflam and angere Pendennis , and make he more anxious than before to set himself right , as he persist in phrase it , with . they arrive at the church door presently ; but scarce one word of the service , and not a syllable of 's sermon , do either of they comprehend , probably -- so much be each engage with he own private speculation . the major come up to they after the service , with he well - brush hat and wig , and he jauntiest , most cheerful air . he compliment they upon be see at church ; again he say that every comme - il faut person make a point of attend the service abroad ; and he walk back with the young man , prattl to they in garrulous good - humour , and make bow to he acquaintance as they pass ; and think innocently that and be both highly delighte by he anecdote , which they suffer to run on in a scornful and silent acquiescence . at the time of 's sermon ( a erratic Anglican divine , hire for the season at place of English resort , and addict to debt , drink , and even to , it be say ) , , chaf under the persecution which he womankind inflict upon he , have be meditat a great act of revolt and of justice , as he have work himself up to believe ; and on he part have be think that a crisis in he affair have likewise come , and that it be necessary for he to break away from a connexion which every day make more and more wretched and dear to he . yes , the time be come . he take those fatal word , " perhaps that be what you wish , " as a text for a gloomy homily , which he preach to himself , in the dark pew of he own heart , whilst be feebly give utterance to he sermon . " Fairoak to let " we poor widow ( with the assistance of she faithful of , who laugh and wonder at the german way , and superintend the affair of the simple household ) have make a little feast in honour of major Pendennis 's arrival , of which , however , only the major and he two younger friend partook , for Helen send to say that she be too unwell to dine at they table , and bear she company . the major talk for the party , and do not perceive , or choose to perceive , what a gloom and silence pervad the other two sharer of the modest dinner . it be
be eve before and come into the sitting - room to join the company there . she come in lean on , with she back to the wane light , so that yoArthu could not see how pallid and woe - stricke she face be , and as she go up to , whom she have not see during the day , and place she fond arm on he shoulders and kiss he tenderly , leave she , and move away to another part of the room . remark that he mother 's voice and she whole frame tremble , she hand be clammy cold as she put it up to he forehead , piteously embrace he . the spectacle of she misery only add , somehow , to the wrath and testiness of the young man . he scarcely return the kiss which the suffering lady give he : and the countenance with which he meet the appeal of she look be hard and cruel . " she persecute I , " he think within himself , " and she come to I with the air of a martyr ! " " you look very ill , my child , " she say . " I do not like to see you look in that way . " and she totter to a sofa , still hold one of he passive hand in she thin cold clinging finger . " I have have much to annoy I , mother , " say , with a throbbing breast : and as he speak 's heart begin to beat so , that she sate almost dead and speechless with terror . , , and major Pendennis , all remain breathless , aware that the storm be about to break . " I have have letter from , " yoArthu continue , " and one that have give I more pain than I ever have in my life . it tell I that former letter of mine have be intercept and purloin away from I ; -- that -- that a young creature who have show the greatest love and care for I , have be most cruelly use by -- by you , mother . " " for 's sake stop , " cry out . " she be ill -- do not you see she be ill ? " " let he go on , " say the widow , faintly . " let he go on and kill she , " say , rush up to she mother 's side . " speak on , sir , and see she die . " " it be you who be cruel , " cry , more exasperated and more savage , because he own heart , naturally soft and weak , revolt indignantly at the injustice of the very suffering which be laid at he door . " it be you that be cruel , who attribute all this pain to I : it be you who be cruel with you wicked reproach , you wick doubt of I , you wick persecution of those who love I , -- yes , those who love I , and who brave everything for I , and whom you despise and trample upon because they be of lower degree than you . shall I tell you what I will do , -- what I be resolve to do , now that I know what you conduct have be ?-- I will go back to this poor girl whom you turn out of my door , and ask she to come back and share my home with I . I will defy the pride which persecute she , and the pitiless suspicion which insult she and I . " " do you mean , , that you ---- " here the widow , with eager eye and outstretch hand , be break out , but stop she : " Silence , hush , dear mother , " she cry , and the widow hush . Savagely as speak , she be only too eager to hear what more he have to say . " go on , , go on , , " be all she say , almost swoon away as she speak . " by , I say he sha not go on , or I will not hear he , by , " the major say , trembl too in he wrath . " if you choose , sir , after all we have do for you , after all I have do for you myself , to insult you mother and disgrase you name , by ally yourself with a low - bear kitchen - girl , go and do it , by , -- but let we , ma 'am , have no more to do with he . I wash my hand of you , sir , -- I wash my hand of you . I be a old fellow , -- I be not long for this world . I come of as ancient and honourable a family as any in , by , and I do hope , before I go off the hook , by , that the fellow that I would like , and bring up , and nurse through life , by , would do something to show I that we name -- yes , the name of , by , be leave undishonoured behind we , but if he will not , dammy , I say , amen . by g --, both my father and my brother Jack be the proudest man in , and I never would have think that there would come this disgrace to my name , -- never -- and -- and I be asham that it be . " the old fellow 's voice here break off into a sob : it be the second time
time that have bring tear from those wrinkle lid . the sound of he breaking voice stay Pen's anger instantly , and he stop pace the room , as he have be do until that moment . be by 's sofa ; and have remain hitherto a almost silent , but not uninterested spectator of the family storm . as the party be talk , it have grow almost dark ; and after the lull which succeed the passionate outbreak of the major , 's deep voice , as it here break trembl into the twilight room , be hear with no small emotion by all . " will you let I tell you something about myself , my kind friend ? " he say , --" you have be so good to I , ma 'am , you have be so kind to I , -- I hope I may call you so sometimes -- my dear Pen and I have be such friend that I have long want to tell you my story such as it be , and would have tell it to you earlier but that it be a sad one and contain another 's secret . however , it may do good for Arthur to know it -- it be that every one here should . it will divert you from think about a subject , which , out of a fatal misconception , have cause a great deal of pain to all of you . may I please tell you , ? " " pray speak , " be all Helen say ; and indeed she be not much heeding ; she mind be full of another idea with which Pen's word have supply she , and she be in a terror of hope that what he have hint might be as she wish . fill himself a bumper of wine and empty it , and begin to speak . " you all of you know how you see I , " he say , " a man without a desire to make a advance in the world : careless about reputation ; and live in a garret and from hand to mouth , though I have friend and a name , and I daresay capability of my own , that would serve I if I have a mind . but mind I have none . I shall die in that garret most likely , and alone . I nai myself to that doom in early life . shall I tell you what it be that interest I about Arthur year ago , and make I inclin towards he when first I see he ? the man from we college at brotch up account of that early affair with the actress , about whom have talk to I since ; and who , but for the major 's generalship , might have be you daughter - in - law , ma 'am . I can not see in the dark , but he blush , I be sure ; and I dare say do ; and my friend major Pendennis , I dare say , laugh as he ought to do -- for he win . what would have be 's lot now have he be tie at nineteen to a illiterate woman older than himself , with no qualitie in common between they to make one a companion for the other , no equality , no confidence , and no love speedily ? what could he have be but most miserable ? and when he speak just now and threaten a similar union , be sure it be but a threat occasion by anger , which you must give I leave to say , ma 'am , be very natural on he part , for after a generous and manly conduct -- let I say who know the circumstance well -- most generous and manly and self - deny ( which be rare with he ) , -- he have meet from some friend of he with a most unkind suspicion , and have have to complain of the unfair treatment of another innocent person , towards whom he and you all be under much obligation . " the widow be go to get up here , and , see she attempt to rise , say , " do I tire you , ma 'am ? " " oh no -- go on -- go on , " say , delight , and he continue . " I like he , you see , because of that early history of he , which have come to my ear in college gossip , and because I like a man , if you will pardon I for say so , , who show that he can have a great unreasonable attachment for a woman . that be why we become friend -- and be all friend here -- for always , be not we ? " he add , in a lower voice , lean over to she , " and have be a great comfort and companion to a lonely and unfortunate man . " I be not complain of my lot , you see ; for no man 's be what he would have it ; and up in my garret , where you leave the flower , and with my old book and my pipe for a wife , I be pretty contente , and only occasionally envy other man , whose career in life be more brilliant , or who can solace they ill fortune by what and my own fault have deprive I of -- the affection of a woman or a child . " here there come a sigh from somewhere near in the dark , and a hand be hold out in he direction , which , however , be instantly , withdraw , for the prudery of we
we female be such , that before all expression of feeling , or natural kindness and regard , a woman be ' teach to think of herself and the propriety , and to be ready to blush at the very slightest notice ; ' and check , as , of course , it ought , this spontaneous motion , modesty draw up again , kindly friendship shrank back asham of itself , and resum he history . " my fate be such as I make it , and not lucky for I or for other involved in it . " I , too , have a adventure before I go to college ; and there be no one to save I as major save I , , if I tell this story before you . it be as well that you all of you should hear my confession . before I go to college , as a boy of eighteen , I be at a private tutor 's , and there , like , I become attach , or fancie I be attach , to a woman of a much lower degree and a greater age than my own . you shrink from I ---- " " no , I do not , " say , and here the hand go out resolutely , and lay itself in 's . she have divine he story from some previous hint let fall by he , and he first word at its commencement . " she be a yeoman 's daughter in the neighbourhood , " say , with rather a falter voice , " and I fancie -- what all young man fancy . she parent know who my father be , and encourage I , with all sort of coarse artifice and scoundrel flattery , which I see now , about they house . to do she justice , I own she never care for I , but be force into what happen by the threat and compulsion of she family . would to that I have not be deceive : but in these matters we be deceive because we wish to be so , and I think I love that poor woman . " what could come of such a marriage ? I find , before long , that I be marry to a boor . she could not comprehend one subject that interest I . she dulness pal upon I till I grow to loathe it . and after some time of a wretched , furtive union -- I must tell you all -- I find letter somewhere ( and such letter they be ! ) which show I that she heart , such as it be , have never be mine , but have always belong to a person of she own degree . " at my father 's death , I pay what debt I have contract at college , and settle every shilling which remain to I in a annuity upon -- upon those who bear my name , on condition that they should hide themselves away , and not assume it . they have keep that condition , as they would break it , for more money . if I have earn fame or reputation , that woman would have come to claim it : if i have make a name for myself those who no right to it would have borne it ; and I enter life at twenty , help I -- hopeless and ruin beyond remission . I be the boyish victim of vulgar cheat , and , perhaps , it be only of late I have find out how hard -- ah , how hard -- it be to forgive they . I tell you the moral before , ; and now I have tell you the fable . beware how you marry out of you degree . I be make for a better lot than this , I think : but have award I this one -- and so , you see , it be for I to look on , and see other successful and other happy , with a heart that shall be as little bitter as possible . " " by , sir , " cry the major , in high good - humour , " I intend you to marry here . " " and , by , master shallow , I owe you a thousand pound , " say . " how would 'ye mean a thousand ? it be only a pony , sir , " reply the major simply , at which the other laugh . as for , she be so delighted , that she start up , and say , " bless you -- for ever bless you , ; " and kiss both he hand , and run up to , and fall into he arm . " yes , dearest mother , " he say as he hold she to he , and with a noble tenderness and emotion , embrace and forgave she . " I be innocent , and my dear , dear mother have do I a wrong . " " oh yes , my child , I have wrong you , thank , I have wrong you ! " whisper . " come away , -- not here -- I want to ask my child to forgive I -- and -- and my , to forgive I ; and to bless you , and love you , my son . " he lead she , totter , into she room , and close the door , as the three touched spectator of the reconciliation look on in pleased silence . ever after , ever after , the tender accent of that voice falter sweetly at he ear -- the look of the sacred eye beam with a affection unutterable -- the quiver of the fond
fond lip smile mournfully -- be remember by the young man . and at he best moments , and at he hour of trial and grief , and at he time of success or well - do , the mother 's face look down upon he , and bless he with it be gaze of pity and purity , as he see it in that night when she yet linger with he ; and when she seem , ere she quite leave he , a angel , transfigure and glorify with love -- for which love , as for the greatest of the bounty and wonder of 's provision for we , let we kneel and thank we Father . the moon have risen by this time ; yoArthu recollect well afterwards how it lighte up he mother 's sweet pale face . they talk , or he rather , for she scarcely could speak , be more tender and confidential than it have be for year before . he be the frank and generous boy of she early day and love . he tell she the story , the mistake regard which have cause she so much pain -- he struggle to fly from temptation , and he thankfulness that he have be able to overcome it . he never would do the girl wrong , never ; or wound he own honour or he mother 's pure heart . the threat that he would return be utter in a moment of exasperation , of which he repent . he never would see she again . but he mother say yes he should ; and it be she who have be proud and culpable -- and she would like to give something -- and she beg she dear boy 's pardon for open the letter -- and she would write to the young girl , if , -- if she have time . poor thing ! be it not natural that she should love she ? and again she kiss he , and she bless he . as they be talk the clock struck nine , and remind he how , when he be a little boy , she use to go up to he bedroom at that hour , and hear he say we Father . and once more , oh , once more , the young man fall down at he mother 's sacred knee , and sob out the prayer which the utter for we , and which have be echo by twenty age since by million of sinful and humbled man . and as he speak the last word of the supplication , the mother 's head fall down on she boy 's , and she arm close round he , and together they repeat the word " for ever and ever " and " . " a little time after , it might have be a quarter of a hour , hear 's voice call from withing , " ! ! " she rush into the room instantly and find the young man still on he knee , and hold he mother 's hand . 's head have sink back and be quite pale in the room . look round , scared with a ghastly terror . " help , , help ! " he say , " she be faint -- she be - - - - " scream , and fall by the side of . the shriek bring and major Pendennis and the servants to the room . the sainted woman be dead . the last emotion of she soul here be joy to be henceforth unchequered and eternal . the tender heart beat no more ; it be to have no more pang , no more doubt , no more grief and trial . it be last throb be love ; and 's last breath be a benediction . the melancholy party bend they way speedily homewards , and be laid by she husband 's side at , in the old church where she have pray so often . for a while go to stay with , who read the service over he dear depart sister , amidst he own sob and those of the little congregation which assemble round 's tomb . there be not many who care for she , or who speak of she when go . Scarcely more than of a nun in a cloister do people know of that pious and gentle lady . a few word among the cottager whom she bounty be accustom to relieve , a little talk from house to house at , where this lady tell how they neighbour die of a complaint in the heart ; whilst that speculate upon the amount of a property which the widow have leave ; and a third wonder whether yoArthu would let Fairoaks or live in it , and expect that he would not be long get through he property , -- this be all , and except with one or two who cherish she , the kind soul be forget by the next market - day . would you desire that grief for you should last for a few more week ? and do after - life seem less solitary , provide that we name , when we " go down into silence , " be echo on this side of the grave yet for a little while , and human voice be still talk about we ? she be gone , the pure soul , whom only two or three love and know . the great blank she leave be in 's heart , to whom she love have be everything , and who have now but to worship she memory . " I be glad that she give I she bless before she go away , " say to ; and as for , with a humble acknowledgment and wonder
wonder at so much affection , he hardly da to ask of to make he worthy of it , though he feel that a saint there be interceding for he . all the lady 's affair be find in perfect order , and she little property ready for transmission to she son , in trust for whom she hold it . papers in she desk show that she have long be aware of the complaint , one of the heart , under which she laboure , and know that it would suddenly remove she : and a prayer be find in she handwriting , ask that she end might be , as it be , in the arm of she son . and talk over she saying , all of which the former most fondly remember , to the young man 's shame somewhat , who think how much greater she love have be for than he own . he refer himself entirely to to know what would have wish should be do ; what poor person she would have like to relieve ; what legacy or remembrance she would have wish to transmit . they pack up the vase which in she gratitude have destin to , and duly send it to the kind Doctor ; a silver coffee - pot , which she use , be send off to : a diamond ring , with she hair , be give with affectionate greeting to . it must have be a hard day for poor when she go over to first and to the little room which she have occupi , and which be hers no more , and to the widow 's own blank chamber in which those two have pass so many beloved hour . there , of course , be the clothes in the wardrobe , the cushion on which she pray , the chair at the toilette : the glass that be no more to reflect she dear sad face . after she have be here a while knock and lead she downstair to the parlour again , and make she drink a little wine , and say , " God bless you , " as she touch the glass . " nothing shall ever be change in you room , " he say -- " it be always you room -- it be always my sister 's room . shall it not be so , ? " and say , " yes ! " among the widow 's papers be find a packet , mark by the widow , " letter from 's father , " and which give to she . they be the letter which have pass between the cousin in the early day before the marriage of either of they . the ink be fade in which they be write : the tear dry out that both perhaps have she over they : the grief heal now whose bitterness they chronicle : the friend doubtless unit whose part on earth have cause to both pang so cruel . and learn fully now for the first time what the tie be which have bound she so tenderly to : how faithfully she more than mother have cherish she father 's memory , how truly she have love he , how meekly resign he . one legacy of he mother 's remembe , of which could have no cognisance . it be that wish of 's to make some present to ; and write to she , put he letter under a envelope to , and request that gentleman to read it before he deliver it to . " dear Fanny , " say , " I have to acknowledge two letter from you , one of which be delay in my illness " ( find the first letter in he mother 's desk after she decease and the reading it give he a strange pang ) , " and to thank you , my kind nurse and friend , who watch I so tenderly during my fever . and I have to tell you that the last word of my dear mother who be no more , be word of goodwill and gratitude to you for nurse I : and she say she would have write to you , have she have time -- that she would like to ask you pardon if she have harshly treat you -- and that she would beg you to show you forgiveness by accept some token of friendship and regard from she . " Pen conclude by say that he friend , , , of , , be trustee of a little sum of money , of which the interest would be pay to she until she become of age , or change she name , which would always be affectionately remember by she grateful friend , . . the sum be in truth but small , although enough to make a little heiress of , whose parent be appease , and whose father say have act quite as the gentleman -- though Bows grow out that that to plaster a wounded heart with a banknote be a easy kind of sympathy ; and poor feel only too clearly that letter be one of farewell . " send hundred - pound note to porter 's daughter be all dev'lish well , " old major Pendennis say to he nephew ( whom , as thee proprietor of Fairoaks and the head of the family , he now treat with mark deference and civility ) , " and as there be a little ready money at the bank , and you poor mother wish it , there be perhaps no harm do . but , my good lad , I would have you to remember that you have not above five hundred a year , though , thanks to I the world give you credit for be a
a doosid deal better off ; and , on my knee , I beg you , my boy , do not break into you capital : stick to it , sir ; do not speculate with it , sir ; keep you land , and do not borrow on it . tell I that the branch of the railway may -- will almost certainly pass through , and of it can be bring on this side of the , sir , and through you field , they will be worth a dev'lish deal of money , and you five hundr a year will jump up to eight or nine . whatever it be , keep it , I implore you keep it . and I say , , I think you should give up live in those dirty chamber in the Temple and let a decent lodging . and I should have a man , sir , to wait upon I ; and a horse or two in town in the season . all this will pretty well swallow up you income , and I know you must live close . but remember you have a certain place in society , and you can not afford to cut a poor figure in the world . what be you go to do in the winter ? you do not intend to stay down here , or , I suppose , to go on writing for that -- what - d'ye - call - 'em -- that newspaper ? " " and I be go abroad again , sir , for a little , and then we shall see what be to be do , " yoArthu reply . " and you will let Fairoaks , of course ? good school in the neighbourhood ; cheap country : dev' lish nice place for , or family want to retire . I will speak about it at the club ; there be lot of fellow at the club want a place of that sort . " " I hope will live in it for the winter , at least , and will make it she home , " yoArthu reply : at which the major pish ' and psha' , and say that there ink to be convent , begad , for English lady , and wish that have not be there to interfere with the arrangement of the family , and that she would mope herself to death alone in that place . indeed , it would have be a very dismal abode for poor , who be not too happy either in 's household , and in the town where too many thing remind she of the dear parent whom she have lose . but old , who adore she young friend , as soon as she read in the paper of she loss , and of she presence in the country , rush over from , where the old lady be stay , and insist that should remain six month , twelve month , all she life with she ; and to she ladyship 's house , from , as femme chambre , accompany she young mistress . and see she depart . it be difficult to say which of the young man seem to regard she the most tenderly . " you cousin be pert and rather vulgar , my dear , but he seem to have a good heart , " little say , who say she say about everybody -- " but I like Bluebeard best . tell I , be he touco au coeur ? " " have be long -- engage , " say , drop she eye . " Nonsense , child ! and good heaven , my dear ! that be a pretty diamond cross . what do you mean by wear it in the morning ? " " Arthur -- my brother , give it I just now . it be -- it be ---- " she could not finish the sentence . the carriage pass over the bridge , and by the dear , dear gate of Fairoaks -- home no more . it chance at that great festival , at which all take a holiday upon , that a great number of the personage to whom we have be introduce in the course of this history , be assemble to see the Derby . in a comfortable open carriage , which have be bring to the ground by a pair of horse , might be see , of , attire like in all he glory , and haive by she side modest , for whom , since the commencement of they acquaintance , the worthy publisher 's lady have maintain a steady friendship . , have recreate himself with a copious luncheon , be madly shie at the stick hard by , till the perspiration run off he bald pate . be shambl about among the drinking tenant and gipsy : Finucane constant in attendance on the two lady , to whom gentleman of they acquaintance , and connect with the publishing house , come up to pay a visit . among other , come up to make she he bow , and tell who be on the course . Yonder be the : he lordship have just tell he to back for the race ; but think the better horse . he point out countless duke and grandee to the delighted . " look yonder in the , " he say . " there sit the chinese ambassador with the of he suite , Fou - choo - foo bring I over letter of introduction from the governor- General of , my most intimate friend , and I be for some time very kind to he , and he have he chopstick laid for he at my table whenever he choose to come and dine . but he bring he
he own cook with he , and -- would you believe it , Bungay ?-- one day , when I be out , and the ambassador be with in we garden eat gooseberry , of which the chinese be passionately fond , the beast of a cook , see my wife 's dear little spaniel ( that we have from the of himself , whose ancestor 's life 's great - great - grandfather save at the battle of ) , seize upon the poor little , cut he throat , and skin he , and serve he up stuff with force - meat in the second course . " " law ! " say . " you may fancy my wife 's agony when she know what have happen ! the cook come scream upstairs , and tell we that she have find poor 's skin in the area , just after we have all of we taste of the dish ! she never would speak to the again -- never ; and , upon my word , he have never be to dine with we since . the , who do I the honour to dine , like the dish very much ; and , eat with green pea , it taste rather like duck . " " you do not say so , now ! " cry the astonished publisher 's lady . " fact , upon my word . look at that lady in blue , seat by the ambassador : that be , and they say she be go to be marry to he , and return to with he Excellency . she be get she foot squeeze down on purpose . but she will only cripple herself , and will never be able to do it -- never . my wife have the smallest foot in , and wear shoe for a six - year - old child ; but what be that to a chinese lady 's foot , ? " " who be that carriage as be with , ? " presently ask . " he and be here jest now . he be 's aughty in he manners , that , and well he may be , for I be tell he keep tip - top company . ' as he 'ad a large fortune leave he , ? he be in black still , I see . " " hundr a year in land , and twenty - two thousand five hundred in the - and - a - half per cents ; that be about it , " say . " Law ! why , you know everything , .! " cry the lady of Paternoster row . " I happen to know , because I be call in about poor 's , " reply . " Pendennis 's uncle , the major , seldom do anything without I ; and as he be likely to be extravagant we have tie up the property , so that he can not make duck and drake with it .-- how do you do , my lord ?-- do you know that gentleman , lady ? you have read he speech in the ; it be . " " , " cry out , from the box . " sure it be , of the , . " " be it ? " say , simply . " well I be very short -sighted , and upon my word I think it be . that gentleman with the double opera -glass ( another nod ) be ; and the tall man with he , do not you know he ? be . " " you know th'ey because you see th'ey in the , " grow . " I know they because they be kind enough to allow I to call they my most intimate friend , " continue . " look at the of ; what a pattern of a fine old English gentleman ! he never miss ' the . ' ' ,' he say to I only yesterday , 'I have be at sixty - five Derby ! appear on the field for the first time on a piebald pony when I be seven year old , with my father , the of , and ; and only miss two races -- one when I have the measle at , and one in the year , when I be with my friend in Flanders . " " and who be that yellow carriage , with the pink and yellow parasol , that be talk to , and ever so many gentleman ? " ask . " that be , of , next estate to my friend Pendennis . that be the young son and heir upon the box ; he be awfully tipsy , the little scamp ! and the young lady be , 's daughter by a first marriage , and uncommonly sweet upon my friend Pendennis ; but I have reason to think he have he heart fix elsewhere . you have hear of young -- the great brewer , Foker , you know -- he be go to hang himself in consequence of a fatal passion for who refuse he , but be cut down just in time by he valet , and be now abroad , under a keeper . " " how happy that young fellow be ! " sigh . " who would have think when he come so quiet and demure to dine with we , three or four year ago , he would turn out such a grand character ! why , I see he name at the other day , and present by the of and all ; and in every party of the nobility he name 's down as sure as a gun . " " I introduce he a good deal when he first come up to town ,
, " say , " and he uncle , major , do the rest . Hallo ! there be here , of all man in the world ! I must go and speak to he . good - bye , . good morning , . " a hour previous to this time , and at a different part of the course , there might have be see a old stage - coach , on the batter roof of which a crowd of shabby raff be stamp and halloo , as the great event of the day -- the race -- rush over the greensward , and by the shouting million of people assemble to view that magnificent scene . this be 's ( the 's ) drag , which have bring down a company of choice spirit from , with a slap - up luncheon in the boot . as the whirling race flash by , each of the choice spirits bellow out the name of the horse or the colour which he think or he hope might be foremost . " the ! " " it be ! " " it be blue sleeve ! " " Yallow cap ! yallow cap ! yallow cap ! " and so forth , yell the gentleman sportsman during that delicious and thrill minute before the contest be decide ; and as the fluttering signal blow out , show the number of the famious horse Podasokus as winner of the race , one of the gentleman on the 's drag spring up off the roof , as if he be a pigeon and about to fly away to or with the news . but he elation do not lift he many inch from he standing - place , to which he come down again on the instant , cause the board of the crazy old coach - roof to crack with the weight of he joy . " Hurray , hurray ! " he bawl out , " be the horse ! for ten , , my boy . ask you all round of course , and damn the expense . " and the gentleman on the carriage , the shabby swaggerer , the dubious buck , say , " thank you -- congratulate you , Colonel ; sup with you with pleasure : " and whisper to one another , " the stand to win fifteen hundred , and he get the odd from a good man , too . " and each of the shabby buck and dusky dandy begin to eye he neighbour with suspicion , lest that neighbour , take he advantage , should get the Colonel into a lonely place and borrow money of he . and the winner on could not be alone during the whole of that afternoon , so closely do he friend watch he and each other . at another part of the course you might have see a vehicle certainly more modest , if not more shabby than that batter coach which have bring down the choice spirit from the 's ; this be cab no. 2002 , which have convey a gentleman and two lady from the cabstand in the : whereor one of the ladie , as she sate on the box of the cab enjoy with she mamma and they companion a repast of lobster salad and bitter ale , look so fresh and pretty that many of the splendid young dandy who be stroll about the course , and enjoy themselves at the noble diversion of , and talk to the beautifully dress lady in the beautiful carriage , on the hill , forsook these fascination to have a glance at the smiling and rosy - cheek lass on the cab . the blush of youth and good - humour mantle on the girl 's cheek , and play over that fair countenance like the pretty shining cloudlet on the serene sky overhead ; the elder lady 's cheek be red too ; but that be a permanent mottle rose , deepen only as it receive free draught of pale ale and brandy - and - water , until she face emulate the rich shell of the lobster which she devoure . the gentleman who escort these two lady be most active in attendance upon they : here on the course , as he have be during the previous journey . during the whole of that animated and delightful drive from , he joke have never cease . he speak up undauntedly to the most awful drag full of the biggest and most solemn guardsman ; as to the humblest donkey - chaise in which the dustman be drive to the race . he have fire astonish volley of what be call " chaff " into endless window as he pass ; into line of grinning girl ' school ; into little regiment of shouting urchin hurray behind the railing of they classical and commercial Academie ; into casement whence smile maid - servants , and nurse tossing baby , or demure old maiden lady with dissenting countenance , be look . and the pretty girl in the straw bonnet with pink ribbon , and she mamma the devourer of lobsters , have both agree that when he be in " spirit " there be nothing like that . he have cramm the cab with trophy win from the bankrupt proprietor of the hard by , and with countless pincushion , wooden apple , backy - box , - in - the - box , and little soldier . he have brotch up a gipsy with a tawny child in she arm to tell the fortune of the ladie : and the only cloud which momentarily obscur the sunshine of that happy party , be when the teller of fate inform the young lady that have have reason to beware of a fair man , who be false to
to she : that she have have a bad illness , and that she would find that a man would prove true . the girl look very much abash at this news : she mother and the young man interchange sign of wonder and intelligence . perhaps the conjurer have use the same word to a hundred different carriage on that day . make he way solitary amongst the crowd and the carriage , and note , accord to he wont , the various circumstance and character which the animated scene present , a young friend of ours come suddenly upon cab 2002 , and the little group of person assemble on the outside of the vehicle . as he catch sight of the young lady on the box , she start and turn pale : she mother become redder than ever : the heretofore gay and triumphant immediately assume a fierce and suspicious look , and he eye turn savagely from ( whom the reader , no doubt , have recognise in the young lady of the cab ) to , advance to meet she . , too , look dark and suspicious on perceive in company with he old acquaintance : he suspicion be that of alarme morality , and , I dare say , highly creditable to : like the suspicion of , when she see and talk together , or when she remark lamb twice or thrice in a handsome opera - box . there may be no harm in the conversation of and j.: and 's opera - box ( though she notoriously can not afford one ) may be honestly come by : but yet a moralist like have a right to the little precautionary fright : and be no doubt justify in adopt that severe demeanour of he . 's heart begin to patter violently : 's fist , plunge into the pocket of he paletot , clench themselves involuntarily and arm themselves , as it be , in ambush : begin to talk with all she might , and with a wonderful volubility : and ! she be so ' apply to see , and how well he be a - lookin ' , and we have be talk ' about only jest before ; have not we , ? and if this be the famous Epsom races that they talk so much about , she do not care , for she part , if she never see they again . and how be major Pendennis , and that kind , who bring P.'s great kindness to ? and she never would forget it , never : and be so tall , he almost break he ' ead up against they lodge door . you recollect a - knock ' of he head -- do not you , ? whilst be so discoursing , I wonder how many thousand of thought pass through 's mind , and what dear time , sad struggle , lonly grief , and subsequent shamefaced consolation be recal to she ? what pang have the poor little thing , as she think how much she have love he , and that she love he no more ? there he stand , about whom she be go to die ten month since , dandified , supercilious , with a black crape to he white hat , and jet button in he shirt - front and a pink in he coat , that some one else have probably give he : with the tightest lavender - coloured glove sewn with black and the smallest of cane . and wear no glove , and great Blucher boot , and smelt very much of tobacco certainly ; and look , oh , it must be own , he look as if a bucket of water would do he a great deal of good ! all these thought , and a myriad of other , rush through 's mind as she mamma be deliver herself of she speech , and as the girl , from under she eye , survey Pendennis -- survey he entirely from head to foot , the circle on he white forehead that he hat leave when he lift it ( he beautiful , beautiful hair have grow again ) , the trinket at he watch - chain , the ring on he hand under he glove , the neat shining boot , so , so unlike 's high - low ! -- and after she hand have give a little twittering pressure to the lavender - coloured kid grasp which be hold out to it , and after she mother have deliver herself of she speech , all could find to say be , " this be whom you know formerly , I believe , sir ; , you know you know formerly -- and -- and , will you take a little refreshment ? " these little word , tremulous and uncoloured as they be , yet be understand by in such a manner as to take a great load of suspicion from off he mind -- of remorse , perhaps , from he heart . the frown on the countenance of the of disappear , and a good - natured smile and a know twinkle of the eye illuminate he highness 's countenance . " I be very thirsty , " he say , " and I will be glad to drink you health , Fanny ; and I hope Huxter will pardon I for have be very rude to he the last time we meet , and when I be so ill and out of spirit , that indeed I scarcely know what I say . " and herewith the lavender - colou kid - glove be hand out , in token of amity , to . the dirty fist in the young surgeon 's pocket be oblige to undoable itself , and come out
out of its ambush disarm . the poor fellow himself feel , as he lay it in Pen's hand , how hot he own was , and how black -- it leave black mark on Pen's glove ; he see they , -- he would have like to have clench it again and dash it into the other 's good - humoure face ; and have see , there upon that round , with , with all look on , which be the best man -- he of 's , or that grinn dandy . Pen with ineffable good - humwe take a glass -- he do not mind what it be -- he be content to drink after the ladie ; and he fill it with frothing lukewarm beer , which he pronounce to be delicious , and which he drank cordially to the health of the party . as he be drink and talk on in a engage manner , a young lady in a shot dove - colou dress , with a white parasol line with pink , and the prettiest dove - colou boot that ever step , pass by , lean on the arm of a stalwart gentleman with a military moustache . the young lady clench she little fist , and give a mischievous side - look as she pass . he of the mustachio burst out into a jolly laugh . he have take off he hat to the ladie of cab no. 2002 . you should have see 's eye watch after the dove - coloured young lady . immediately perceive the direction which they take , they cease look after the dove - coloured nymph , and they turn and look into 's orb with the most artless good - humoured expression . " what a beautiful creature ! " say . " what a lovely dress ! do you remark , , such little , little hand ? " " it be Capting strong , " say : " and who be the young woman , I wonder ? " " a neighbour of mine in the country -- ' , ' " yoArthu say , -- " 's daughter . you have see often in 's , . " as he speak , build up a perfect romance in three volume love -- faithlessness -- splendid marriage at 's , -- break - heart maid -- and be not the hero of that story -- poor , who by this time have get out a exceedingly rank Cuba cigar , and be smoke it under 's little nose . after that confound prig Pendennis join and leave the party , the sun be less bright to , the sky less blue -- the have no attraction for he -- the bitter beer hot and undrinkable -- the world be change . he have a quantity of pea and a tin pea-shooter in the pocket of the cab for amusement on the homeward route . he do not take they out , and forget they existence until some other wag , on they return from the races , fire a volley into 's sad face ; upon which salute , after a few oath indicative of surprise , he burst into a savage and sardonic laugh . but be charme all the way home . she coax , and snuggle , and smile . she laugh pretty laugh ; she admire everything ; she take out the darling little - in - the - box , and be so oblige to . and when they get home , and , still with darkness on he countenance , be take a frigid leave of she -- she burst into tear , and say he be a naughty unkind thing . upon which , with a burst of emotion almost as emphatic as hers , the young surgeon hold the girl in he arm -- swore that she be a angel , and that he be a jealous brute ; own that he be unworthy of she , and that he have no right to hate Pendennis ; and ask she , implor she , to say once more that she ---- that she what ?-- the end of the question and 's answer be pronounce by lip that be so near each other , that no bystander could hear the word . only say , " come , come , .-- no nonsense , if you please ; and I think you have act like a wicked wretch , and be most uncommon cruel to , that I do . " when yoArthu leave no. 2002 , he go to pay he respects to the carriage to which , and to the side of she mamma , the dove - colou author of Larmes have by this time return . Indefatigable old major Pendennis be in waiting upon , and have occupy the back seat in she carriage ; the box be in possession of young , under the care of . a number of dandy , and man of a certain fashion -- of military buck , of young rake of the public office , of those who may be style man 's man rather than lady ' -- have come about the carriage during its station on the hill -- and have exchange a word or two with , and a little talk ( a little " chaff , " some of the most elegant of the man style they conversation ) with . they have offer she sportive bet , and exchange with she all sort of free - talk and know innuendoe . they point out to she who be on the course : and the " who " be not always the person a young lady should know . when come up to 's carriage , he have to push he way through a crowd of these
these young buck who be pay they court to , in order to arrive as near that young lady , who beckon he by many pretty signal to she side . " lay vue , " she say ; " a bien beaux yeux ; vous etes un monster ! " " why monster ? " say , with a laugh ; " Hone suit qui mal y peens . my young friend , yonder , be as well protect as any young lady in . she have she mamma on one side , she pretend on the other . could any harm happen to a girl between those two ? " " one do not know what may or may not arrive , " say , in , " when a girl have the mind , and when she be pursue by a wicked monster like you . figure to yourself , major , that I come to find , you nephew , near to a cab , by two lady , and a man , oh , such a man ! and who eat lobster , and who laugh , who laugh ! " " it do not strike I that the man laugh , " say , " and as for lobster , I think he would have like to eat I after the lobster . he shook hand with I , and grip I so , that he bruise my glove black - and - blue . he be a young surgeon . he come from . do not you remember the gilt pestle and mortar in ? " " if he attend you when you be sick , " continue , " he will kill you . he will serve you right ; for you be a monster . " the perpetual recurrence to the word " monster " jar upon . " she speak about these matter a great deal too lightly , " he think . " if I have be a monster , as she call it , she would have receive I just the same . this be not the way in which a english lady should speak or think . would not speak in that way , thank ; " and as he think so , he own countenance fell . " of what be you think ? be you go to bouder I at present ? " Blanco ask . " major , scold you mechant nephew . he do not amuse I at all . he be as bete as . " " what be you say about I , ? " say the guardsman , with a grin . " if it be anything good , say it in , for I do not understand when it be spoke so devilish quick . " " it be not anythe good , crack , " say 's fellow , . " let 's come away , and do not spoil sport . they say be sweet upon she . " " I be tell he be a devilish clever fellow , " sigh . " say he be a devilish clever fellow . he write a work , or a poem , or something ; and he write those devilish clever thing in the -- in the papers , you know . Dammy , I wish I be a clever fellow , . " " that be past wish for , , my boy , " the other say . " I can not write a good book , but I think I can make a pretty good one on the Derby . what a flat Clavering be ! and the ! I like that old . she be worth ten of she daughter . how please the old girl be at win the lottery ! " " Clavering 's safe to pay up , be not he ? " ask . " I hope so , " say he friend ; and they disappear , to enjoy themselves among the . before the end of the day 's amusement , many more gentleman of 's acquaintance come up to she carriage , and chat with the party which it contain . the worthy lady be in high spirit and good - humour , laugh and talk accord to she wont , and offer refreshment to all she friend , until she ample basket and bottle be empty , and she servants and postillion be in such a royal state of excitement as servants and postillion commonly be upon the day . the major remark that some of the visitor to the carriage appear to look with rather queer and mean glance towards its owner . " how easily she take it ! " one man whisper to another . " the 's made of money , " the friend reply . " how easily she take what ? " think old Pendennis . " have anybody lose any money ? " say she be happy in the morning because have promise she not to bet . , the country neighbour of the Claverings , be pass the carriage , when he be call back by the , who rally he for wishing to cut she . " why do not he come before ? why do not he come to lunch ? " she ladyship be in great delight , she tell he -- she tell everybody , that she have win five pound in a lottery . as she convey this piece of intelligence to he , look so particularly know , and withal melancholy , that a dismal apprehension seize upon major Pendennis . " he would go and look after the horse and those rascal of postillion , who be so long in come round . " when he come back to the carriage , he usually benign and smirk countenance be obscure by some
some sorrow . " what be the matter with you now ? " the good - nature ask . the major pretend a headache from the fatigue and sunshine of the day . the carriage wheel off the course and take its way , not the least brilliant equipage in that vast and picturesque procession . the tipsy drivers dash gallantly over the turf , amidst the admiration of foot-passenger , the ironical cheer of the little donkey - carriage and spring vans , and the loud objurgation of horse - and - chaise man , with whom the reckless post -boy come in contact . the look the picture of good - humour as she recline on she splendid cushion ; the lovely Sylphide smile with languid elegance . many a honest holiday - maker with he family wad into a tax - cart , many a cheap dandy work he way home on he weary hack , admire that brilliant turn - out , and think , no doubt , how happy those " swell " must be . strong sit on the box still , with a lordly voice call to the post -boy and the crowd . master have be put inside of the carriage and be asleep there by the side of the major , do away the effect of the constant luncheon and champagne of which he have freely partaken . the major be revolve in he mind meanwhile the news the receipt of which have make he so grave . " if go on in this way , " Pendenni the elder thought , " this little tipsy rascal will be as bankrupt as he father and grandfather before he . the 's fortune can not stand such drain upon it : no fortune can stand they : she have pay he debt half a dozen time already . a few year more of the turf , and a few coup like this , will ruin she . " " do not you think we could get up races at , ? " ask . " yes , we must have they there again . there be races there in the old time , the good old time . it be a national amusement , you know : and we could have a Clavering ball : and we might have dance for the tenantry , and rustic sport in the park -- oh , it would be charme . " " capital fun , " say mamma . " would not it , major ? " " the turf be a very expensive amusement , my dear lady , " major Pendennis answer , with such a rueful face , that the rally he , and ask laughingly whether he have lose money on the race ? after a slumber of about a hour and a half , the heir of the house begin to exhibit symptom of wakefulness , stretch he youthful arm over the major 's face , and kick he sister 's knee as she sate opposite to he . when the amiable youth be quite restore to consciousness , he begin a sprightly conversation . " I say , ma , " he say , " I have go and do it this time , I have . " " what have you go and do , dear ? " ask . " how much be seventeen half - crown ? two pound and half - a crown , be not it ? I draw in we lottery , but I buy and man - milliner of for two open tart and a bottle of ginger - beer . " " you little wicked gambling creature , how dare you begin so soon ? " cry . " hold you tongue , if you please . who ever ask you leave , miss ? " the brother say . " and I say , ma ---- " " well , Franky dear ? " " you will tip I all the same , you know , when I go back ---- " and here he break out into a laugh . " I say , ma , shall I tell you something ? " the express she desire to hear this something , and she son and here continue : " when I and be down at the grand stand after the race , and I be talk to , who be there with he governor , I see look as savage as a bear . and I say , Ma , minor tell I that he hear he governor say that have lose seven thousand back the favourite . I will never back the favourite when I be of age . no , no --hang I if I do : leave I alone , strong , will you ? " " ! ! be this true ? " cry out the unfortunate . " have be bett again ? he promise I he would not . he give I he word of honour he would not . " strong , from he place on the box , have overheard the end of young 's communication , and be try in vain to stop he unlucky tongue . " I be afraid it be true , ma 'am , " he say , turn round , " I deplore the loss as much as you can . he promise I as he promise you ; but the play be too strong for he ! he can not refrain from it . " Claver at this sad news burst into a fit of tear . she deplor she wretch fate as the most miserable of woman , she declare she would separate , and pay no more debt for the ungrateful man . she narrate with tearful volubility a score of story only too authentic , which show how she husband
husband have deceive , and how constantly she have befriend he : and in this melancholy condition , whilst young be think about the two guinea which he himself have win ; and the major revolve , in he darken mind , whether certain plan which he have be form have better not be abandon ; the splendid carriage drive up at length to the 's house in ; the idler and boy linger about the place to witness , accord to public wont , the close of the Day , cheer the carriage as it draw up , and envy the happy folk who descende from it . " and it be for the son of this man that I be make a beggar ! " Blanche say , quiver with anger , as she walk upstairs lean on the major 's arm -- " for this cheat -- for this blackleg -- for this liar -- for this robber of woman . " " calm yourself , my dear , " the old gentleman say ; " I pray calm yourself . you have be hardly treat , most unjustly . but remember that you have always a friend in I , and trust to a old fellow who will try and serve you . " and the young lady , and the heir of the hopeful house of , have retire to they bed , the remain three of the remain for some time in deep consultation . almost a year , as the reader will perceive , have pass since a event describe a few page back . be black coat be about to be exchange for a blue one . he person have undergone other more pleasing and remarkable change . he wig have be lay aside , and he hair , though somewhat thinner , have return to public view . and he have have the honour of appear at in the uniform of a Cornet of the troop of the ---- shire , be present to the by the of . this be a measure strongly and pathetically urge by 's uncle . the major would not hear of a year passing before this ceremony of gentlemanhood be go through . the old gentleman think that he nephew should belong to some rather more select club than the Megatherium ; and have announce everywhere in the world he disappointment that the young man 's property have turn out not by any means as well as he could have hope , and be under fifteen hundr a year . that be the amount at which 's property be set down in the world -- where he publisher begin to respect he much more than formerly , and where even mammas be by no means uncivil to he . for if the pretty daughter be , naturally , to marry people of very different expectation -- at any rate , he will be eligible for the plain one : and if the brilliant and fascinating be to hook a , poor little Beatrice , who have one shoulder higher than the other , must hang on to some boor through life , and why should not be she support ? in the very first winter after the accession to he mother 's fortune , . Hawxby in a country - house cause she to learn billiards from and would be drive by nobody but he in the pony carriage , because he be literary and she Beatrice be literary too , and declare that the young man , under the instigation of he horrid old uncle , have behave most infamously in trifling with 's feeling . the truth be the old gentleman , who know 's character , and how desperately that lady would practise upon unwary young man , have come to the country - house in question and carry out of the danger of she immediate claw , though not out of the reach of she tongue . the elder Pendennis would have have he nephew pass a part of the at , whither the family have return ; but have not the heart for that . Clavering be too near poor old Fairoak ; and that be too full of sad recollection for the young man . we have lose sight of the Clavering , too , until they reappearance upon the race -ground , and must give a brief account of they in the interval . during the past year , the world have not treat any member of the family very kindly ; Lady Clavering , one of the best - natured woman that ever enjoy a good dinner , or make a slip in grammar , have have she appetite and good - nature sadly try by constant family grievance , and dispute such as make the effort of the best french cook unpalatable , and the most delicately - stuffe sofa-cushion hard to lie on . " I would rather have a turnip , strong , for dessert , than that pineapple , and all they grape , from , " say poor , look at she dinner - table , and confid she grief to she faithful friend , " if I could but have a little quiet to eat it with . oh , how much happier I be when I be a widow and before all this money fall in to I ! " the family have indeed make a false start in life , and have get neither conduct , nor position , nor thanks for the hospitality which they administer , nor a return of kindness from the people whom they entertaine . the success of they first season be doubtful ; and they failure afterwards notorious . " human patience be not great enough to put up with , " people say . " he be too hopelessly low , dull ,
, and disreputable . you could not say what , but there be a taint about the house and its entourage . who be the , with she money , and without she h , and where do she come from ? what a extraordinary little piece of conceit the daughter be , with she Gallicise graces and da affectation , not fit for well - breed English girl to associate with ! what strange people be those they assemble round about they ! Clavering be a gambler , live notoriously in the society of blackleg and profligate . Hely , who be in he regiment , say that he not only cheat at card , but show the white feather . what could have mean by take she up ? after the first season , indeed , , who have take up , put she down ; the great lady would not take they daughter to she party ; the young man who attend they behave with the most odious freedom and scornful familiarity ; and poor herself avow that she be oblige to take what she call ' the canal ' into she parlour , because the tip - top would not come . " she have not the slightest ill - will towards " the canal , " the poor dear lady , or any pride about herself , or idea , that she be better than she neighbour ; but she have take implicitly the order which on she entry into the world she social godmother have give she : she have be willing to know whom they know , and ask whom they ask . the " canal , " in fact , be much pleasanter than what be call " society ; " but , as we say before , that to leave a mistress be easy , while , on the contrary , to be leave by she be cruel : so you may give up society without any great pang , or anything but a sensation of relief at the parting ; but severe be the mortification and pain you have if society give up you . one young man of fashion we have mention , who at least it might have be expect would have be find faithful amongst the faithless , and , , be indeed that young man . but he have not manage matter with prudence , and the unhappy passion at first confide to become notorious and ridiculous to the town , be carry to the ear of he weak and fond mother ; and finally bring under the cognisance of the bald - head and inflexible Foker senior . when learn this disagreeable news , there take place between he and he son a violent and painful scene , which end in the poor little gentleman 's banishment from for a year , with a positive order to return at the expiration of that time and complete he marriage with he cousin , or to retire into private life and three hundr a year altogether , and never see parent or brewery more . go away then , carry with he that grief and care which pass free at the strictest custom - house , and which proverbially accompany the exile ; and with this crape over he eye , even the parisian look melancholy to he , and the sky of black . to , that year be a most unfortunate one . the event describe in the last chapter come to complete the ruin of the year . it be that year of in which , as we sporting reader may remember , 's horse ( he be a classical young nobleman , and name he stud out of the ) -- when win the , to the dismay of the know one , who pronounce the win horse 's name in various extraordinary way , and who back , who be nowhere in the race . , who be intimate with some of the most rascally characters of the turf , and , of course , have " valuable information , " have laid heavy odd against the winning horse , and back the favourite freely , and the result of he dealings be , as he son correctly state to poor , a loss of seven thousand pound . indeed , it be a cruel blow upon the lady , who have discharge she husband 's debt many time over ; who have receive as many time he oath and promise of amendment ; who have pay he money - lender and horse - dealer ; who have furnish he town and country house , and who be call upon now instantly to meet this enormous sum , the penalty of she cowardly husband 's extravagance . it have be describe in former page how the elder Pendennis have become the adviser of the family , and , in he quality of intimate friend of the house , have go over every room of , and even see that ugly closet which we all of we have , and in which , accord to the proverb , the family skeleton be lock up . about the 's pecuniary matter , if the major do not know , it be because Claver himself do not know they , and hide they from himself and other in such a hopeless entanglement of lie that it be impossible for adviser or attorney or principal to get a accurate knowledge of he affair . but , concern , the major be much better inform ; and when the unlucky mishap of the arose , he take upon himself to become completely and thoroughly acquaint with all she mean , whatsoever they be ; and be now accurately inform of the vast and repeat sacrifice which the widow have make in behalf of she present husband . he
he do not conceal -- and he have win no small favour from by avow it -- he opinion , that 's daughter have be hardly treat at the expense of she son , by she second marriage : and in he conversation with have fairly hinte that he think miss Blanche ought to have a better provision . we have say that he have already give the widow to understand that he know all the particular of she early and unfortunate history , have be in at the time when -- when the painful circumstance occur which have end in she part from she first husband . he could tell she where to find the newspaper which contain the account of 's trial , and he show , and the be not a little grateful to he for he forbearance , how , be aware all along of this mishap which have befall she , he have keep all knowledge of it to himself , and be constantly the friend of she family . " interest motives , my dear , " he say , " of course I may have have . we all have interested motive , and mine , I do not conceal from you , be to make a marriage between my nephew and you daughter . " to which , perhaps with some surprise that the major should choose she family for a union with he own , say she be quite willing to consent . but frankly he say , " my dear lady , my boy have but five hundred a year , and a wife with ten thousand pound to she fortune would scarcely better he . we could do better for he than that , permit I to say , and he be a shrewd , cautious young fellow who have sow he wild oat now -- who have very good part and plenty of ambition -- and whose object in marrying be to better himself . if you and chose -- and , take my word for it , will refuse you nothing -- you could put in a way to advance very considerably in the world , and show the stuff which he have in he . of what use be that seat in parliament to Claver , who scarcely ever show he face in the house , or speak a word there ? I be tell by gentleman who hear my boy at , that he be famous as a orator , begad !-- and once put he foot into the stirrup and mount he , I 've no doubt he will not be the last of the field , ma 'am . I have test the chap , and know he pretty well , I think . he be much too lazy , and careless , and flighty a fellow , to make a jog - trot journey , and arrive , as you lawyer do , at the end of they life ! but give he a start and good friend , and a opportunity , and take my word for it , he will make himself a name that he son shall be proud of . I do not see any way for a fellow like he to parvenir , but by make a prudent marriage -- not with a beggarly heiress -- to sit down for life upon a miserable fifteen hundr a year -- but with somebody whom he can help , and who can help he forward in the world , and whom he can give a good name and a station in the country , begad , in return for the advantages which she bring he . it would be better for you to have a distinguished son - in - law , than to keep you husband on in parliament , who be of no good to himself or to anybody else there , and that be , I say , why I have be interested about you , and offer you what I think a good bargain for both . " " you know I look upon as one of the family almost now , " say the good - nature ; " he come and go when he like ; and the more I think of he dear mother , the more I see there be few people so good -- none so good to I . and I be sure I cry when I hear of she death , and would have go into mourning for she myself , only black do not become I . and I know who he mother want he to marry -- , I mean -- whom old have take such a fancy to , and , no wonder . she be a better girl than my girl . I know both . and my -- Blanche , I mean -- be not be a comfort to I , major . it be ought to marry . " on five hundred a year ! my dear good soul , you be mad ! " major Pendennis say . " think over what I have say to you . do nothing in you affair with that unhappy husband of yours without consult I ; and remember that old be always you friend . " for some time previous , Pen's uncle have hold similar language to . he have point out to she the convenience of the match which he have at heart , and be bound to say , that mutual convenience be of all thing the very best in the world to marry upon -- the only thing . " look at you love -marriage , my dear young creature . the love -match people be the most notorious of all for quarrelling afterwards ; and a girl who run away with to , constantly run away with to afterwards .
. the great point in marriage be for people to agree to be useful to one another . the lady bring the means , and the gentleman avail himself of they . my boy 's wife bring the horse , and begad Pen go in and win the plate . that be what I call a sensible union . a couple like that have something to talk to each other about when they come together . if you have Cupid himself to talk to -- if Blanche and be Cupid and Psyche , begad -- they would begin to yaw after a few evening , if they have nothing but sentiment to speak on . " as for , she be content enough with as long as there be nobody better . and how many other young lady be like she ?-- and how many love -marriage carry on well to the last ?-- and how sentimental firm do not finish in bankruptcy ?-- and how many heroic passion do not dwindle down into despicable indifference , or end in shameful defeat ? these views of life and philosophy the major be constantly , accord to he custom , inculcat to , whose mind be such that he could see the right on both side of many question , and , comprehend the sentimental life which be quite out of the reach of the honest major 's intelligence , could understand the practical life too , and accommodate himself , or think he could accommodate himself , to it . so it come to pass that during the spring succeed he mother 's death he become a good deal under the influence of he uncle 's advice , and domesticate in 's house ; and in a measure be accept by without be a suitor , and be receive without be engage . the young people be extremely familiar , without be particularly sentimental , and meet and part with each other in perfect good - humour . " and I , " think , " be the fellow who eight year ago have a grand passion , and last year be rage in a fever about ! " yes , it be the same Pendennis , and time have brotch to he , as to the rest of we , its ordinary consequence , consolation , development . we alter very little . when we talk of this man or that woman be no longer the same person whom we remember in , and remark ( of course to deplore ) change in we friend , we do not , perhaps , calculate that circumstance only bring out the latent defect or quality , and do not create it . the selfish languor and indifference of to - day 's possession be the consequence of the selfish ardour of yesterday 's pursuit : the scorn and weariness which cry vanita vanitatum be but the lassitude of the sick appetite pal with pleasure : the insolence of the successful parvenu be only the necessary continuance of the career of the needy struggler : we mental change be like we grey hair or we wrinkle -- but the fulfilment of the plan of mortal growth and decay : that which be snow - white now be glossy black once ; that which be sluggish obesity to - day be boisterous rosy health a few year back ; that calm weariness , benevolent , resign , and disappoint , be ambition , fierce and violent , but a few year since , and have only settle into submissive repose after many a battle and defeat . lucky he who can bear he failure so generously , and give up he broken sword to Fate the Conqueror with a manly and humble heart ! be you not awestricke , you , friendly reader , who , take the page up for a moment 's light reading , lay it down , perchance , for a graver reflection , -- to think how you , who have consummate you success or you disaster , may be hold mark station , or a hopeless and nameless place , in the crowd -- who have pass through how many struggle of defeat , success , crime , remorse , to yourself only know !-- who may have love and grow cold , wept and laugh again , how often ! -- to think how you be the same , you , whom in childhood you remember , before the voyage of life begin ? it have be prosperous , and you be ride into port , the people huzza and the gun salut , -- and the lucky captain bow from the ship 's side , and there be a care under the star on he breast which nobody know of : or you be wreck , and lash , hopeless , to a solitary spar out at sea :-- the sink man and the successful one be think each about home , very likely , and remember the time when they be child ; alone on the hopeless spar , drown out of sight ; alone in the midst of the crowd applaud you . we good - natured be at first so much enrage at this last instance of she husband 's duplicity and folly , that she refuse to give Claver any aid in order to meet he debt of honour , and declare that she would separate from he , and leave he to the consequence of he incorrigible weakness and waste . after that fatal day 's transaction at the , the unlucky gambler be in such a condition of mind that he be dispose to avoid everybody ; alike he turf - associate with whom he have make the debt which he tremble lest he should not have the means of paying , and he wife , he long - suffering
suffering banker , on whom he reasonably doubt whether he should be allow any longer to draw . when ask the next morning whether be in the house , she receive answer that he have not return that night , but have send a messenger to he valet , order he to forward clothes and letter by the bearer . know that he should have a visit or a message from he in the course of that or the subsequent day , and accordingly get a note beseech he to call upon he distracted friend at , , and ask for there . for the be a gentleman of that peculiarity of mind that he would rather tell a lie than not , and always begin a contest with fortune by run away and hide himself . the of 's establishment , who carry 's message to , and bring back he carpet - bag , be instantly aware who be the owner of the bag , and he impart he information to the footman who be lay the breakfast - table , who carry down the news to the servants '- hall , who take it to , my lady 's housekeeper and confidential maid , who carry it to my lady . and thus every single person in the Place establishment know that be in hiding , under the name of , at a inn in the . and 's coachman tell the news to other gentleman 's coachman , who carry it to they master , and to the neighbour 's , where very gloomy anticipation be form that be about to make a tour in the . in the course of that day the number of letter address to , . , which find they way to he hall - table , be quite remarkable . the french cook send in he account to my lady ; the tradesman who supply she ladyship 's table , and . and , the mercer and ornamental dealer , and , the eminent milliner , also forward they little bill to she ladyship , in company with 's private , and by no means inconsiderable , account at each establishment . in the afternoon of the day after the , when strong ( after a colloquy with he principal at 's , whom he find cry and drink ) call to transact business accord to he custom at place , he find all these suspicious document range in the 's study ; and begin to open they and examine they with a rueful countenance . , my lady 's maid and housekeeper , come down upon he whilst engage in this occupation . , a part of the family and as necessary to she mistress as the be to , be of course on 's side in the dispute between she and she husband , and as by duty bound even more angry than she ladyship herself . " she will not pay , if she take my advice , " say . " you will please to go back to , -- and he lurk about in a low public - house and do not dare to face he wife like a man !-- and say that we will not pay he debt no longer . we make a man of he , we take he out of gaol ( and other folk too perhaps ) , we have pay he debt over and over again -- we set he up in parliament and give he a house in town and country , and where he do not dare show he face , the shabby sneak ! we have give he the horse he ride and the dinner he eat and the very clothes he have on he back ; and we will give he no more . we fortune , such as be leave of it , be leave to ourselves , and we will not waste any more of it on this ungrateful man . we will give he enough to live upon and leave he , that be what we will do : and that be what you may tell he from . " 's mistress hearing of 's arrival send for he at this juncture , and the go up to she ladyship not without hope that he should find she more tractable than she factotum . many a time before have he plead he client 's cause with and cause she good - nature to relent . he try again once more . he paint in dismal colour the situation in which he have find : and would not answer for any consequence which might ensue if he could not find means of meet he engagement . " kill hisself , " laugh , " kill hisself , will he ? 's the best thing he could do . " strong vow that he have find he with the razor on the table ; but at this , in she turn , laugh bitterly . " he will do himself no harm , as long as there be a shilling left of which he can rob a poor woman . he life 's quite safe , : you may depend upon that . ah ! it be a bad day that ever I set eye on he . " " he be worse than the first man , " cry out my lady 's aide - de - camp . " he be a man , he be -- a wild devil , but he have the courage of a man -- whereas this fellow -- what be the use of my lady pay he bill , and sell she diamonds , and forgive he ? he will be as bad again next year . the very next chance he have he will be a - cheating of she , and robbing of she
she ; and she money will go to keep a pack of rogue and swindler -- I do not mean you , -- you have be a good friend to we enough , bat we wish we have never set eye on you . " the see from the word which have let slip regard the diamonds , that the kind be dispose to relent once more at least , and that there be hope still for he principal . " upon my word , ma 'am , " he say , with a real feeling of sympathy for 's trouble , and admiration for she untiring good - nature , and with a show of enthusiasm which advance not a little he graceless patron 's cause -- " anything you say against , or here cry out against I , be no better than we deserve , both of we , and it be a unlucky day for you when you see either . he have behave cruelly to you and if you be not the most generous and forgive woman in the world , I know there would be no chance for he . but you can not let the father of you son be a disgrace man , and send little into the world with such a stain upon he . tie he down ; bind he by any promise you like : I vouch for he that he will subscribe they . " " and break 'em , " say . " and keep th'ey this time , " cry out Strong . " he must keep they . if you could have see how he weep , ma 'am ! 'Oh , strong ,' he say to I , ' it be not for myself I feel now : it be for my boy -- it be for the best woman in , whom I have treat basely -- I know I have . ' he do not intend to bet upon this race , ma 'am -- indeed he do not . he be cheat into it : all the ring be take in . he think he might make the bet quite safely , without the least risk . and it will be a lesson to he for all he life long . to see a man cry -- oh , it be dreadful . " " he do not think much of make my dear missus cry , " say -- " poor dear soul !-- look if he do , . " * * * * * * " if you have the soul of a man , Claver , " say to he principal , when he recount this scene to he , " you will keep you promise this time : and , so help I ! if you break word with she , I will turn against you , and tell all . " " what all ? " cry , to whom he ambassador bring the news back at 's , where strong find the Baronet cry and drink curacoa . " ! do you suppose I be a fool ? " burst out Strong . " do you suppose I could have live so long in the world , , without have my eye about I ? you know I have but to speak and you be a beggar to - morrow . and I be not the only man who know you secret . " " who else do ? " gas . " do , or I be very much mistaken . he recognise the man the first night he see he , when he come drink into you house . " " he know it , do he ? " shriek out . " damn he -- kill he . " " you would like to kill we all , would not you , old boy ? " say strong , with a sneer , puffe he cigar . the dash he weak hand against he forehead ; perhaps the other have interpret he wish rightly . " oh , strong ! " he cry , " if I da , I would put a end to myself , for I be the ----- est miserable dog in all . it be that that make I so wild and reckless . it be that which make I take to drink " ( and he drank , with a trembling hand , a bumper of he fortifier -- the curacoa ) , " and to live about with these thief . I know they be thieve , every one of th'ey , ---- thieve . and -- and how can I help it ?-- and I do not know it , you know -- and , by , I be innocent -- and until I see the d ----d scoundrel first , I know no more about it than the dead -- and I will fly , and I will go abroad out of the reach of the confounded hells , and I will bury myself in a forest , by ! and hang myself up to a tree -- and , oh -- I be the most miserable beggar in all ! " and so with more tear , shriek , and curse , the impotent wretch vent he grief and deplor he unhappy fate ; and , in the midst of groan and despair and blasphemy , vow he miserable repentance . the honoure proverb which declare that to be a ill wind which blow good to nobody , be verify in the case of , and another of the occupant of 's chamber in 's . the man be " good , " by a lucky hap , with whom not make he bet ; and on the settling day of the -- as , who be appoint to settle 's book
book for he ( for Clavering by the advice of major Pendennis , would not allow the Baronet to liquidate he own money transaction ) , pay over the note to the 's many creditor -- not have the satisfaction of receive the odd of thirty to one in fifty , which he have take against the win horse of the day . number of the 's friend be present on the occasion to congratulate he on he luck -- all 's own set , and the gent who meet in the private parlour of the convivial wheeler , my host of the 's , come to witness they comrade 's good fortune , and would have like , with a generous sympathy for success , to share in it . " now be the time , " have suggest to the , " to have up the specire ship that be sunk in the gulf of , with the three hundred and eighty thousand dollar on board , besides bar and doubloon . " " the be very low -- to be buy for a old song -- never be such a opportunity for buy share , " insinuate ; and presse forward he tobacco -smuggling scheme , the audacity of which please the more than any other of the speculation propose to he . then of the 's boy : there be , who know of a pair of horse which the Colonel must buy ; , whose satirical paper , the , want but two hundred pound of capital to be worth a thousand a year to any man --" with such a power and influence , , you rogue , and the entree of the green - room in , " urge ; whilst little entreate the not to listen to these absurd fellow with they humbugging speculation , but to invest he money in some good bill which could get for he , and which would return he fifty per cent as safe as the of . each and all of these worthy come round the Colonel with they various blandishment ; but he have courage enough to resist they , and to button up he note in the pocket of he coat , and go home to , and " sport " the outer door of the chamber . Honest strong have give he fellow - lodger good advice about all he acquaintance ; and though , when press , he do not mind frankly take twenty pound himself out of the 's winnings , be a great deal too upright to let other cheat he . he be not a bad fellow when in good fortune , this Altamont . he order a smart livery for , and make poor old she tear of quickly dry gratitude by give he a five - pound note after a snug dinner at the , and he buy a green shawl for , and a yellow one for : the most brilliant " sacrifice " of a haberdasher 's window . and a short time after this , upon she birthday , which happen in the month of , receive from " a friend " a parcel contain a enormous brass inlay writing - desk , in which there be a set of amethyst , the most hideous eye ever look upon , -- a musical snuff - box , and two Keepsake of the year before last , and accompany with a couple of gown piece of the most astounding colour , the receipt of which goods make the laugh and wonder immoderately . now it be a fact that not have make a purchase of cigar and french silk from some duffer in about this period ; and he be find by in the open auction room in , have invest some money in two desk , several pair of richly - plate candlestick , a dinner epergne , and a bagatelle - board . the dinner epergne remain at chamber , and figure at the banquet there , which the give pretty freely . it seem beautiful in he eye , until say it look as if it have be take " in a bill . " and certainly know . the dinner be pretty frequent at chamber , and condescende to partake of they constantly . he own house be shut up : the successor of , who have send in he bill so prematurely , be dismiss by the indignant lady Claver : the luxuriance of the establishment be greatly prune and reduce . one of the large footman be cashier , upon which the other give warning , not like to serve without he mate , or in a family where on 'y one footman be kep ' . General and severe economical reform be practise by the in she whole household , in consequence of the extravagance of which she graceless husband have be guilty . the major , as she ladyship 's friend ; strong , on the part of poor Clavering ; she ladyship 's lawyer , and the honest herself , execute these reform with promptitude and severity . after pay the Baronet 's debt , the settlement of which occasion considerable public scandal , and cause the to sink even lower in the world 's estimation than he have be before , quit for in high dudgeon , refuse to see she reprobate husband , whom nobody pitie . remain in patiently , by no means anxious to meet he wife 's just indignation , and sneak in and out of the of , whence he and and would go to have a game at billiards and a cigar or show in the sporting public - house ; or might be see lurking about 's and he lawyer ' , where the principal keep he for hour wait , and the clerk wink at each other
other , as he sate in they office . no wonder that he relish the dinner at 's , and be perfectly resign there : resign ? he be so happy nowhere else ; he be wretch amongst he equal , who scorn he -- but here he be the chief guest at the table , where they continually address he with " yes , " and " no , , " where he tell he wretch joke , and where he quaver he dreary little french song , after Strong have sng he chorus , and honest have pipe he irish ditty . such a jolly menage as 's , with 's irish - stew , and the 's brew of punch after dinner , would have be welcome to many a better man than , the solitude of whose great house at home frightene he , where he be attend only by the old woman who keep the house , and he valet who sneer at he . " yes , dammit , " say he to he friend in 's , " that fellow of mine , I must turn he away , only I owe he two year ' wage , curse he , and can not ask my lady . he bring I my tea cold of a morning , with a dem would leae teaspoon , and he say my lady 's send all the plate to the banker 's because it be not safe .-- now be not it hard that she will not trust I with a single teaspoon ; be not it ungentlemanlike , ? you know my lady 's of low birth -- that be -- I beg you pardon -- hem -- that be , it be most cruel of she not to show more confidence in I . and the very servant begin to laugh -- the damn scoundrel ! I break every bone in they great hulking body , curse 'em , I will .-- they do not answer my bell : and -- and my man be at Vauxhall last night with one of my dress - shirt and my velvet waistcoat on , I know it be mine -- the confound impudent blackguard -- and he go on dancing before my eye confound he ! I be sure he will live to be hang -- he deserve to be hang -- all those infernal rascal of valets . " he be very kind to not now : he listen to the 's loud story when not describe how -- when he be work he way home once from , where he have be on a whaling expedition -- he and he comrade have be oblige to slink on board at night , to escape from they wife , by -- and how the poor devils put out in they canoe when they see the ship under sail , and paddle madly after she : how he have be lose in the bush once for three month in , when he be there once on a trading speculation : how he have see at , and be present to he with the rest of the officer of the of which he be a mate -- to all these tale ( and over he cup not tell many of they ; and , it must be own , lie and brag a great deal ) now listen with great attention ; make a point of drinking wine with not at dinner and of treat he with every distinction . " leave he alone , I know what he be a - come to , " not say , laugh to , who remonstrate with he , " and leave I alone ; I know what i be a - telling , very well . I be officer on board a , so I be ; I trade to , so I do , in a ship of my own , and lose she . I become officer to the , so I do ; only I and my royal master have have a difference , Strong -- that be it . who be the better or the worse for what I tell ? or know anything about I ? the other chap be dead -- shot in the bush , and he body reckonise at . if I think anybody would split , do you think I would not wr he neck ? I have do as good before now , strong -- I tell you how I do for the overseer before I take leave -- but in fair fight , I mean -- in fair fight ; or , rayther , he have the best of it . he have he gun and bay'net , and I have only a axe . fifty of th'ey see it -- ay , and cheer I when I do it -- and I would do it again , -- he , would not I ? I be not afraid of anybody ; and I would have the life of the man who split upon I . that be my maxim , and pass I the liquor .-- you would not turn on a man . I know you . you be a honest feller , and will stand by a feller , and have look death in the face like a man . but as for that lily - livere sneak -- that poor lyin ' swindlin ' cringin ' cur of a Clavering -- who stand in my shoe -- stand in my shoe , hang he ! I will make he pull my boot off and clean 'em , I will . , ha ! " here he burst out into a wild laugh , at which strong get up and put away the brandy - bottle . the other still laugh good - humouredly . "
" you be right , old boy , " he say ; " you always keep you head cool , you do -- and when I begin to talk too much -- I say , when I begin to pitch , I authorise you , and order you , and command you , to put away the rum-bottle . " " take my counsel , , " Strong say , gravely , " and mind how you deal with that man . do not make it too much he interest to get rid of you ; or who know what he may do ? " the event for which , with cynical enjoyment , not have be on the look - out , come very speedily . one day , strong be absent upon a errand for he principal , make he appearance in the chamber , and find the envoy of the alone . he abuse the world in general for be heartless and unkind to he : he abuse he wife for be ungenerous to he ; he abuse strong for be ungrateful -- hundred of pound have he give -- be he friend for life and keep he out of gaol , by , -- and now be take she ladyship 's side against he and abett she in she infernal unkind treatment of he . " they have enter into a conspiracy to keep I penniless , Altamont , " the say : " they do not give I as much pocket money as have at school , " " why do not you go down to and borrow of he , Clavering ? " not break out with a savage laugh . " he would not see he poor old beggar of a father without pocket - money , would he ? " " I tell you , I have be oblige to humiliate myself cruelly " Clavering say . " look here , sir -- look here , at these pawn - ticket ! fancy a member of parliament and a old , by ! oblige to put a drawing - room clock and a buhl inkstand up the spout ; and a gold duck 's - head paper - holder , that I dare say cost my wife five pound , for which they would only give I fifteen - and - six ! oh , it be a humiliating thing , sir , poverty to a man of my habits ; and it be make I she tear , sir , -- tear ; and that would ---- d valet of mine -- curse he , I wish he be hang !-- he have the confounded impudence to threaten to tell my lady : as the thing in my own house be not my own , to sell or to keep , or fl out of window if I choose -- by ! the confound scoundrel . " cry a little ; do not mind cryin ' before I -- it will relieve you Claver , " the other say . " why , I say , old feller , what a happy feller I once think you , and what a miserable son of a gun you really be ! " " it be a shame that they treat I so , be not it ? " go on , -- for , though ordinarily silent and apathetic , about he own grief the could whine for a hour at a time . " and -- and , by , sir , I have not get the money to pay the very cab that be wait for I at the door ; and the porteress , that , lent I three shillin 's , and I do not like to ask she for any more : and i ask that ---- d old , the confound old penniless irish miscreant , and he have not get a shillin ' , the beggar ; and be out of town , or else he would do a little bill for I , I know he would . " " I think you swore on you honour to you wife that you would not put you name to paper , " say , puffe at he cigar . " why do she leave I without pocket - money , then ? , I must have money , " cry out the Baronet . " oh , ----, oh , , I be the most miserable beggar alive . " " you would like a chap to lend you a twenty - pound note , would not you now ? " the other ask . " if you would , I would be grateful to you for ever -- for ever , my dearest friend , " cry . " how much would you give ? will you give a fifty - pound bill , at six month , for half down and half in plate ? " ask . " yes , I would , so help I ----, and pay it on the day , " scream . " I will make it payable at my banker 's : I will do anything you like . " " well , I be only chaff you . I will give you twenty pound . " " you say a pony , " interpose Clavering ; " my dear fellow , you say a pony , and I will be eternally oblige to you ; and I will not take it as a gift -- only as a loan , and pay you back in six month . I take my oath , I will . " " well -- well -- there be the money , . I be not a bad fellow . when I have money in my pocket , dammy , I spend it like a man . here be five -
- and - twenty for you . do not be lose it at the hells now . do not be make a fool of yourself . go down to , and it will keep you ever so long . you need not ' ave butchers ' meat : there be pig , I dare say , on the premise : and you can shoot rabbit for dinner , you know , every day till the game come in . besides , the neighbour will ask you about to dinner , you know , sometimes : for you be a Baronet , though you have outrun the constable . and you have get this comfort , that I be off you shoulders for a good bit to come -- p'rap this two year -- if I do not play ; and I do not intend to touch the confounded black and red : and by that time my lady , as you call she -- , I use to say -- will have come round again ; and you will be ready for I , you know , and come down handsomely to yours truly . " at this juncture of they conversation strong return , nor do the care much about prolonge the talk , have get the money : and he make he way from 's , and go home and bully he servant in a manner so unusually brisk and insolent that the man conclude he master must have pawn some more of the house furniture , or , at any rate , have come into possession of some ready money . * * * * * * " and yet I have look over the house , , and I do not thin he have take any more of the thing , " 's valet say to 's man , as they meet at they club soon after . " my lady lock up a'most all the bejew afore she go away , and he could not take away the picter and look - glass in a cab and he would not spout the fender and fire - iron -- he be not so bad as that . but he be get money somehow . he be so dam would imperent when he have . a few night ago I sor he at , where I be a - polkin with 's gal -- a wery pleasant room that be , and a uncommon good lot in it , hall except the ' ousekeeper , and she be methodisticle -- I be a - polkin -- you be too old a cove to polk , -- and ' ere be you ' ealth -- and I ' appen to ' ave on some of 's abberdashery , and he sor it too : and he do not dare so much as speak a word . " " how about the house in 's ? " ask . " execution in it .-- sell up heverythin : pony , and pianna , and brougham , and all . be hoff to , -- non est inwentus , . it be my belief she put the execution in herself : and be tired of he . " " play much ? " ask . " not since the smash . when you , and the lawyer , and my lady and he have that tremendous scene : he go down on he knee , my lady tell , as tell I , -- and swear as he never more would touch a card or a dice , or put he name to a bit of paper ; and my lady be a - goin ' to give he the note down to pay he liability after the race : only you say ( which he write it on a piece of paper , and pass it across the table to the lawyer and my lady ) that some one else have better book up for he , for he would have kep ' some of the money . he be a sly old cove , you . " the expression of " old cove , " thus flippantly apply by the younger gentleman to himself and he master , displease exceedingly . on the first occasion , when use the obnoxious expression , he comrade 's anger be only indicate by a silent frown ; but on the second offence , , who be smoke he cigar elegantly , and hold it on the tip of he penknife , withdraw the cigar from he lip , and take he young friend to task . " do not call major Pendennis a old cove , if you will ' ave the goodness , , and do not call I a old cove , nether . such word be not use in society ; and we have live in the fust society , both at ' ome and for . we have be intimate with the fust statesman of . when we go abroad we dine with and reg'lar . we go here to the best house , the tip - top , I tell you . we ride with and the noble Whycount at the edd of Foring affair . we dine with the of , and be consult by the of in . we ought to know a thing or two , . you be a young man , I be a old cove , as you say . we have both see the world , and we both know that it be not money , nor bein' a , nor ' avin ' a town and country ' ouse , nor a paltry five or six thousand a year . " " it be ten , , " cry , with great animation . " it may have be , sir , " say , with calm severity ;
; " it may have be , , but it be not six now , nor five , sir . it be be doosedly dip and cut into , sir , by the confounded extravygance of you master , with he helbow shakin ' , and he bill discountin ' , and he cottage in the , and he many wickedness . he be a bad un , , -- a bad lot , sir , and that you know . and it be not money , sir -- not such money as that , at any rate , come from a attorney , and I dussay wring out of the pore starve blacks -- that will give a pusson position in society , as you know very well . we have no money , but we go everywhere ; there be not a housekeeper 's room , sir , in this town of any consiquince , where be not welcome . and it be I who get you into this , , as you very well know , though I be a old cove , and they would have blackball you without I as sure as you name be Frederic . " " I know they would , , " say the other , with much humility . " well , then , do not call I a old cove , sir . it be not gentlemanlike , , which I know you when you be a cab - boy , and when you father be in trouble , and get you the place you have now when the go away . and if you think , sir , that because you be make up to , who may have save she two thousand pound -- and I dare say she have in five - and - twenty year as she have liv confidential maid to -- yet , sir , you must remember who put you into that service ; and who know what you be before , sir , and it do not become you , , to call I a old cove . " " I beg you pardon , -- I can not do more than make a apology -- will you have a glass , sir , and let I drink you ' ealth ? " " you know I do not take sperrit . Lightfoot , " reply , appease . " and so you and be go to put up together , be you ? " " she be old , but two thousand pound be a good bit , you see , . and we will get the ' Clavering Arms ' for a very little ; and that will be no bad thing when the railroad run through . and when we be there , I hope you will come and see we , . " " it be a stoopid place , and no society , " say . " I know it well . in 's time we use to go down , reg'lar , and the hair refresh I after the racket . " " the railroad will improve 's property , " remark . " what be about the figure of it , should you say , sir ? " " Under fifteen hundred , sir , " answer ; at which the other , who know the extent of poor 's acre , thrust he tongue in he cheek , but remain wisely silent . " be he man any good , ? " Lightfoot resume . " Pidgeon be not use to society as yet ; but he be young and have good talents , and have read a good deal , and I dessay he will do very well , " reply . " he would not quite do for this kind of thing , Lightfoot , for he be not see the world yet . " when the pint of sherry for which call , upon 's announcement that he eclin to drink spirit , have be discuss by the two gentleman , who hold the wine up to the light , and smack they lip , and wink they eye at it , and rally the landlord as to the vintage , in the most approve manner of connoisseur , 's ruffle equanimity be quite restore , and he be prepare to treat he young friend with perfect good - humour . " what d' you think about , -- tell we in confidence , now -- do you think we should do well -- you understand -- if we make into . , comprendy vous ? " " she and she ma 's always quarrellin ' , " say . " Bonner be more than a match for the old lady , and treat like that -- like this year spill , which I fl into the grate . but she dare not say a word to . no more dare none of we . when a visitor come in , she smile and languish , you would think that butter would not melt in she mouth : and the minute he be gone , very likely , she flare up like a little demon , and say thing fit to send you wild . if come , it be 's do let 's s that there delightful ! ' or , ' come and write I they pooty verse in this halbum ! ' and very likely she be be a - rilin' she mother , or stick pin into she maid , a minute before . she do stick pin into she and pinch she . show I one of she arm quite black and blue ; and I recklect , who be as jealous of I as a old cat , box she ear for show I . and then you should see at luncheon , when there
there be nobody but the family ! she make b'leave she never heat , and my ! you should only jest see she . she have to bring she up plum -cake and creams into she bedroom ; and the cook 's the only man in the house she be civil to . Bonner say , how , the second season in , be a - goin ' to propose for she , and actially come one day , and sor she fl a book into the fire , and scold she mother so , that he go down softly by the back droring - room door , which he come in by ; and next thing we hear of he be , he be marry to miss rider . oh , she be a devil , that little Blanche , and that be my candig apinium , . " " Apinion , not apinium , , my good fellow , " say , with parental kindness , and then ask of he own bosom with a sigh , why the deuce do my want to marry such a girl as this ? and the tete - a - tete of the two gentleman be break up by the entry of other gentleman , member of the -- when fashionable town - talk , politics , cribbage , and other amusement ensue , and the conversation become general . the 's be hold in the parlour of the of public - house , in a snug little by - lane , lead out of one of the great street of , and frequent by some of the most select gentleman about town . they master 's affair , debt , intrigue , adventure ; they lady 's good and bad quality and quarrel with they husband ; all the family secret be here discuss with perfect freedom and confidence , and here , when about to enter into a new situation , a gentleman be enable to get every requisite information regard the family of which he propose to become a member . Livery it may be imagine be exclude from this select precinct ; and the powder head of the largest metropolitan footman might bow down in vain entreating admission into the 's . these outcast giant in plush take they beer in a outer apartment of the of , and could no more get a entry into the Clubroom than a Pall mall tradesman or a 's attorney could get admission into 's or 's . and it be because the conversation which we have permit to overhear here , in some measure explain the character and bearing of we story , that we have venture to introduce the reader into a society so exclusive . the of the a short time after the piece of good fortune which befell at , that gentleman put into execution he project foreign tour , and the chronicler of the polite world who go down to for the purpose of take leave of the people of fashion who quit this country , announce that among the company on board the to Antwerp last , be " , , and the ; , and and ; , major Coddy , etc . " the Colonel travel in state , and as become a gentleman : he appear in a rich travelling costume ; he drank brandy - and - water freely during the passage , and be not sick , as some of the other passenger were ; and he be attend by he body - servant ; the faithful irish legionary who have be for some time in waiting upon himself and in they chamber of 's . the partook of a copious dinner at with he departing friend the , and one or two other , who drank many healt to not at that liberal gentleman 's expense . " strong , old boy , " the 's worthy chum say , " if you want a little money , now be you time . I be you man . you be a good feller , and have be a good feller to I , and a twenty - pound note , more or less , will make no odd to I , " but say , no , he do not want any money ; he be flush , quite flush -- " that be , not flush enough to pay you back you last loan , , but quite able to carry on for some time to come , " and so , with a not uncordial greeting between they , the two part . have the possession of money really make not more honest and amiable than he have hithertoo be , or only cause he to seem more amiable in 's eye ? perhaps he really be better , and money improve he . perhaps it be the beauty of wealth strong see and respecte . but he argue within himself , " this poor devil , this unlucky outcast of a return convict , be ten time as good a fellow as my friend , . he have pluck and honesty in he way . he will stick to a friend , and face a enemy . the other never have courage to do either . and what be it that have put the poor devil under a cloud ? he be only a little wild , and sign he father - in - law 's name . many a man have do worse , and come to no wrong , and hold he head up . Clavering do . no , he do not hold he head up : he never do in he best day . " and strong , perhaps , repent he of the falsehood which he have tell to the free - hand , that he be not in want of
of money ; but it be a falsehood on the side of honesty , and the could not bring down he stomach to borrow a second time from he outlawed friend . besides , he could get on . Clavering have promise he some : not that 's promise be much to be believe , but the be of a hopeful turn , and trust in many chance of catch he patron , and waylay some of those stray remittance and supplies , in the procuring of which for he principal lay 's chief business . he have grumble about 's companionship in the Shepherd 's chamber ; but he find those lodging more glum now without he partner than with he . the solitary life be not agreeable to he social soul ; and he have get into extravagant and luxurious habit , too , have a servant at he command to run he errand , to arrange he toilets , and to cook he meal . it be rather a grand and touch sight now to see the portly and handsome gentleman pain he own boot , and broil he own mutton chop . it have be before state that the have a wife , a spanish lady of , who have go back to she friend , after a few month ' union with the captain , whose head she break with a dish . he begin to think whether he should not go back and see he . the be grow melancholy after the departure of he friend the Colonel ; or , to use he own picturesque expression , be " down on he luck . " these moments of depression and interval of ill fortune occur constantly in the life of heroe ; at , in the , before . what great man have not be call upon to face evil fortune ? from Claver no supplies be to be have for some time , the five - and - twenty pound or the " pony , " which the exemplary have receive from , have fle out of 's keeping as swiftly as many previous pony . he have be down the river with a choice party of sporting gent , who dodge the police and land in , where they put up to fight the cabman whom the Baronet back , and who have it all he own way for thirteen round , when , by a unlucky blow in the windpipe , kill he . " it be always my luck , strong , " say ; " the betting be three to one on the cabman , and I think myself as sure of thirty pound , as if I have it in my pocket . and dammy , I owe my man Lightfoot fourteen pound now which he be lent and pay for I : and he dun I -- the confound impudent blackguard : and I wish to I know any way of get a bill do , or of screw a little out of my lady ! I will give you half , , upon my soul and honour , I will give you half if you can get anybody to do we a little fifty . " but say sternly that he have give he word of honour , as a gentleman , that he would be no party to any future bill transaction in which she husband might engage ( who have give he word of honour too ) , and the say that he , at least , would keep he word , and would black he own boot all he life rather than break he promise . and what be more , he vow he would advise Claver that be about to break he faith towards she upon the very first hint which he could get that such be 's intention . upon this information , accord to he custom , cry and curse very volubly . he spoke of death as he only resource . he besotch and implor he dear strong , he best friend , he dear old , not to throw he over : and when he quit he dearest Ned , as he go down the stair of 's , swore and blasphem at as the most infernal villain , and traitor , and blackguard , and coward under the sun , and wish be in he grave , and in a worse place , only he would like the confound ruffian to live , until have have he revenge out of he . in 's chamber the meet a gentleman whose visit be now , as it have be show , very frequent in 's , , of . that young fellow , who have poach the walnuts in in he youth , and have see the drive through the street at home with four horse , and prance up to church with powdered footman , have a immense respect for he , and a prodigious delight in make he acquaintance . he introduce himself with much blushing and trepidation , as a Clavering man -- son of , of the market - place -- father attend 's keeper , , when he gun burst and take off three finger -- proud to make 's acquaintance . all of which introduction receive affably . and honest talk about to the chap at 's : and tell , in the lodge , that , after all , there be nothing like a thoroughbred un , a regular good old gentleman , one of the olden time ! to which Fanny reply , that she think be a ojous creature -- she do not know why -- but she could not abear he -- she be sure he be wick , and low , and mean -- she know he be ; and when to this reply that be very
very affable , and have borrowed half a sovg of he quite kindly , Fanny burst into a laugh , pull 's long hair ( which be not yet of irreproachable cleanliness ) , pat he ching , and call he a stoopid , stoopid , old foolish stoopid , and say that be always borrer money of everybody , and that have actially refuse he twice , and have have to wait three month to get seven shilling which he have borrowed of 'er . " do not say 'er but she , borrer but borrow , actially but actually , Fanny , " reply -- not to a fault in she argument , but to grammatical error in she statement . " well then , she , and borrow , and hactually -- there then , you stoopid , " say the other ; and the scholar make such a pretty face that the grammar master be quickly appease , and would have willingly give she a hundr more lesson on the spot at the price which he take for that one . of course be by , and I suppose that and be on exceedingly familiar and confidential term by this time , and that time have bring to the former certain consolation , and soothe certain regret , which be deucedly bitter when they occur , but which be , no more than tooth - pull , or any other pang , eternal . as you sit , surround by respect and affection ; happy , honoure , and flatter in you old age ; you foible gently indulge ; you least word kindly cherish ; you garrulous old story receive for the hundredth time with dutiful forbearance , and never - fail hypocritical smile ; the woman of you house constant in they flattery ; the young man hush and attentive when you begin to speak ; the servants awestricke ; the tenant cap in hand , and ready to act in the place of you worship 's horse when you honour take a drive -- it have often strike you , of thoughtful Dive ! that this respect , and these glory , be for the main part transferr , with you fee - simple , to you successor -- that the servants will bow , and the tenant shout , for you son as for you ; that the butler will fetch he the wine ( improve by a little keeping ) that be now in you cellar ; and that , when you night be come , and the light of you life be go down , as sure as the morning rise after you and without you , the sun of prosperity and flattery shine on you heir . come and bask in the halo of consol and acre that beam round about he : the reverence be transfer with the estate ; of which , with all its advantage , pleasure , respect , and good - will , he in turn become the life - tenant . how long do you wish or expect that you people will regret you ? how much time do a man devote to grief before he begin to enjoy ? a great man must keep he heir at he feast like a living memento mori . if he hold very much by life , the presence of the other must be a constant sting and warning . " make ready to go , " say the successor to you honour ; " I be wait : and I could hold it as well as you . " what have this reference to the possible reader , to do with any of the character of this history ? do we wish to apologise for because he have get a white hat , and because he mourn for he mother be fainter ? all the lapse of year , all the career of fortune , all the event of life , however strongly they may move or eagerly excite he , never can remove that saint image from he heart , or banish that bless love from its sanctuary . if he yield to wrong , the dear eye will look sadly upon he when he dare to meet they ; if he do well , endure pain , or conquer temptation , the ever present love will greet he , he know , with approval and pity ; if he fall , plead for he ; if he suffer , cheer he ; -- be with he and accompany he always until death be past ; and sorrow and sin be no more . be this mere dream , or , on the part of a idle story - teller , useless moralising ? may not the man of the world take he moment , too , to be grave and thoughtful ? ask of you own heart and memory , brother and sister , if we do not live in the dead ; and ( to speak reverently ) prove by love ? of these matter and often speak in many a solemn and friendly converse in after day ; and 's mother be worship in he memory , and canonise there , as such a saint ought to be . lucky he in life who know a few such woman ! a kind provision of it be , that send we such ; and give we to admire that touch and wonderful spectacle of innocence , and love , and beauty . but as it be certain that if , in the course of these sentimental conversation , any outer stranger , major Pendennis for instance , have walk into Pen's chamber , and would have stop they talk , and choose another subject , and discourse about the , or the last debate in parliament , or 's marriage with , or
or what not ,-- so , let we imagine that the public step in at this juncture , and stop the confidential talk between author and reader , and beg we to resume we remark about this world , with which both be certainly better acquaint than with that other one into which we have just be pee . on come into he property , at first comport himself with a modesty and equanimity which obtain he friend 's praise , though 's uncle be a little inclin to quarrel with he nephew 's meanness of spirit , for not assume greater state and pretension now that he have enter on the enjoyment of he kingdom . he would have have install in handsome quarter , and ride on showy park hack , or in well - build cabriolet , every day . " I be too absent , " yoArthu say , with a laugh , " to drive a cab in ; the omnibus would cut I in two , or I should send my horse 's head into the ladie ' carriage - window ; and you would not have I drive about by my servant like a apothecary , uncle ? " no , major Pendennis would on no account have he nephew appear like a apothecary ; the august representative of the house of Pendennis must not so demean himself . and when , pursue he banter , say , " and yet , I dare say , sir , my father be proud enough when he first set up he gig , " the old major hem and ha' , and he wrinkle face redden with a blush as he answer , " you know what say , sir , ' faut laver son linge sale en famille . ' there be no need , sir , for you to brag that you father be a -- a medical man . he come of a most ancient but fallen house , and be obliged to reconstruct the family fortune as many a man of good family have do before he . you be like the fellow in , sir -- the who come to demand he sword again . you father get back yours for you . you be a man of landed estate , by , sir , and a gentleman -- never forget you be a gentleman . " then slily turn on he uncle the argument which he have hear the old gentleman often use regarde himself . " in the society which I have the honour of frequenting through you introduction , who care to ask about my paltry mean or my humble gentility , uncle ? " he ask . " it would be absurd of I to attempt to compete with the great folk ; and all that they can ask from we be , that we should have a decent address and good manners . " " but for all that , sir , I should belong to a better club or two , " the uncle answer : " I should give a occasional dinner , and select my society well ; and I should come out of that horrible garret in the Temple , sir . " and so Arthur compromis by descende to the second floor in : still occupy he old quarter , and the two friend be determine not to part one from the other . Cultivate kindly , reader , those friendship of you youth : it be only in that generous time that they be form . how different the intimacy of after day be , and how much weaker the grasp of you own hand after it have be shake about in twenty year ' commerce with the world , and have squeeze and drop a thousand equally careless palm ! as you can seldom fashion you tongue to speak a new language after twenty , the heart refuse to receive friendship pretty soon : it get 's too hard to yield to the impression . so have many acquaintance , and be of a jovial and easy turn , get more daily : but no friend like ; and the two man continue to live almost as much in common as the of the Temple , ride upon one horse ( for Pen's be at 's service ) , and have they chamber and they servitor in common . have make the acquaintance of Pen's friend of during they last unlucky season in , and have express himself no better satisfied with and and she ladyship 's daughter than be the public in general . " the world be right , " say , " about those people . the young man laugh and talk freely before those lady , and about they . the girl see people whom she have no right to know , and talk to man with whom no girl should have a intimacy . do you see those two reprobate lean over 's carriage in the the other day , and leer under 's bonnet ? no good mother would let she daughter know those man , or admit they within she door . " " the be the most innocent and good - natured soul alive , " interpose . " she never hear any harm of , or read that trial in which figure . do you suppose that honest lady read and remember the Scandaleuse as well as you , you old grumbler ? " " would you like to know those fellow ? " ask , he face turn rather red . " would you let any woman you love be contaminate by they company ? I have no doubt that the poor Begum be ignorant of they histories . it seem to I she be ignorant of a great number of better thing . it seem to I that
that you honest be not a lady , . it be not she fault , doubtless , that she have not have the education , or learn the refinement of a lady . " " she be as moral as , who have all the world at she ball , and as refin as , who break the 's . and have half a dozen duke at she table , " answer , rather sulkily . " why should you and I be more squeamish than the rest of the world ? why be we to visit the sins of she father on this harmless kind creature ? she never do anything but kindness to you or any mortal soul . as far as she know she do she best . she do not set up to be more than she be . she give you the best dinner she can buy , and the best company she can get . she pay the debt of that scamp of a husband of hers . she spoil she boy like the most virtuous mother in . she opinion about literary matter , to be sure , be not much ; and I daresay she never read a line of , or heard of in she life . " " no more have the laundress , " grow out 's ; " no more have the housemaid ; and I have no word of blame against they . but a high - souled man do not make friend of these . a gentleman do not choose these for he companion , or bitterly rue it afterwards if he do . be you , who be set up to be a man of the world and a philosopher , to tell I that the aim of life be to guttle three course and dine off silver ? do you dare to own to yourself that you ambition in life be good claret , and that you will dine with any , provide you get a stalled ox to feed on ? you call I a Cynic -- why , what a monstrous Cynicism it be , which you and the rest of you man of the world admit ! I would rather live upon raw turnip and sleep in a hollow tree , or turn backwoodsman or savage , than degrade myself to this civilisation , and own that a french cook be the thing in life best worth live for . " " because you like a raw beefsteak and a pipe afterwards , " break out , " you give yourself air of superiority over people whose taste be more dainty , and be not asham of the world they live in . who go about professe particular admiration , or esteem , or friendship , or gratitude even , for the people one meet every day ? if . ask I to he house , and give I he best , I take he good thing for what they be worth and no more . I do not profess to pay he back in friendship , but in the conventional money of society . when we part , we part without any grief . when we meet , we be tolerably glad to see one another . if I be only to live with my friend , you black muzzle , old , be the only face I should see . " " you be you uncle 's pupil , " say , rather sadly ; and you speak like a worldling . " " and why not ? " ask ; " why not acknowledge the world I stand upon , and submit to the condition of the society which we live in and live by ? I be older than you , , in spite of you grizzled whisker , and have see much more of the world than you have in you garret here , shut up with you book and you revery and you idea of one - and - twenty . I say , I take the world as it be , and be of it , will not be asham of it . if the time be out of joint , have I any calling or strength to set it right ? " " indeed , I do not think you have much of either , " grow interlocutor . " if I doubt whether I be better than my neighbour , " yoArthu continue , " if I concede that I be no better , -- I also doubt whether he be better than I . I see man who begin with idea of universal reform , and who , before they beard be grow , propound they loud plan for the regeneration of mankind , give up they scheme after a few year of bootless talking and vainglorious attempt to lead they fellow ; and after they have find that man will no longer bear they , as indeed they never be in the least worthy to be hear , sink quietly into the rank - and - file ,-- acknowledge they aim impracticable , or thankful that they be never put into practice . the fiercest reformer grow calm , and be faire to put up with thing as they be : the loudest radical orator become dumb , quiescent placeman : the most fervent liberals when out of power , become humdrum conservatives or downright tyrants or despot in office . look at the Thier , look at , in opposition and in place ! look at the appeal to the country , and the Whig in power ! would you say that the conduct of these man be a act of treason , as the bawl , -- who would give way in they turn , be they turn ever to come ? no , only that they submit to
to circumstance which be stronger than they , -- march as the world march towards reform , but at the world 's pace ( and the movement of the vast body of mankind must need be slow ) , forgo this scheme as impracticable , on account of opposition , -- that as immature , because against the sense of the majority , -- be force to calculate drawback and difficulty , as well as to think of reform and advance , -- and compelle finally to submit , and to wait , and to compromise . " " the could not speak better , or be more satisfied with himself , if he be of the and of the , " say . " self - satisfied ? why self - satisfied ? " continue . " it seem to I that my scepticism be more respectful and more modest than the revolutionary ardour of other folk . many a patriot of eighteen , many a - orator , would turn the Bishop out of the house of Lords to - morrow , and throw the Lord out after the Bishop , and throw the into the after the Per and the bench . be that man more modest than I , who take these institution as I find they , and wait for time and truth to develop , or fortify , or ( if you like ) destroy they ? a college tutor , or a nobleman 's toady , who appear one fine day as my right reverend lord , in a silk apron and a shovel - hat , and assume benedictory air over I , be still the same man we remember at , when he be truck to the tuft , and bully the poor undergraduates in the lecture -room . a hereditary legislator , who pass he time with jockey and black - leg and ballet - girl , and who be call to rule over I and he other betters because he grandfather make a lucky speculation in the fund , or find a coal or tin mine on he property , or because he stupid ancestor happen to be in command of ten thousand man as brave as himself , who overcome twelve thousand , or fifty thousand -- such a man , I say , inspire I with no more respect than the bitterest democrat can feel towards he . but , such as he be , he be a part of the old society to which we belong and I submit to he lordship with acquiescence ; and he take he place above the best of we at all dinner - party , and there bide he time . I do not want to chop he head off with a guillotine , or to fl mud at he in the street . when they call such a man a disgrace to he order ; and such another , who be good and gentle , refin and generous , who employ he great means in promote every kindness and charity , and art and grace of life , in the kindest and most gracious manner , a ornament to he rank -- the question as to the use and propriety of the order be not in the least affect one way or other . there it be , extant among we , a part of we habits , the creed of many of we , the growth of centurie , the symbol of a most complicated tradition -- there stand my lord the bishop and my lord the hereditary legislator -- what the french call transaction both of they ,-- represent in they present shape mail - clad baron and double - sword chiefs ( from whom they lordship the hereditary , for the most part , do not descmend ) , and priest , professe to hold a absolute truth and a divinely inherited power , the which truth absolute we ancestor burn at the stake , and deny there ; the which divine transmissible power still exist in print -- to be believe , or not , pretty much at choice ; and of these , I say , I acquiesce that they exist , and no more . if you say that these scheme , devise before printing be know , or steam be bear ; when thought be a infant , scared and whipped ; and truth under its guardian be gag , and swath , and blindfold , and not allow to lift it be voice , or to look out or to walk under the sun ; before man be permit to meet , or to trade , or to speak with each other -- if any one say ( as some faithful soul do ) that these scheme be for ever , and have be change and modify constantly be to be subject to no further development or decay , I laugh , and let the man speak . but I would have toleration for these , as I would ask it for my own opinion ; and if they be to die , I would rather they have a decent and natural than a abrupt and violent death . " " you would have sacrifice to , " say , " have you live in the time of the persecution . " " perhaps I would , " say , with some sadness . " perhaps I be a coward , -- perhaps my faith be unsteady ; but this be my own reserve . what I argue here be that I will not persecute . make a faith or a dogma absolute , and persecution become a logical consequence ; and burn a , or Calvin a , or a , or or a Papist or Protestant ; or they father both or either , accord to he humour ; and
and act without any pang of remorse , -- but , on the contrary , notion of duty fulfil . make dogma absolute , and to inflict or to suffer death become easy and necessary ; and 's soldier shouting , ' paradise ! Paradise ! ' and die on the Christian spear , be not more or less praiseworthy than the same man slaughter a townful of , or cut off the head of all prisoner who would not acknowledge that there be but one Prophet of . " " a little while since , young one , " say , who have be listen to he friend 's confession neither without sympathy nor scorn , for he mood lead he to indulge in both , " you ask I why I remain out of the strife of the world , and look on at the great labour of my neighbour without take any part in the struggle ? why , what a mere dilettante you own yourself to be , in this confession of general scepticism , and what a listless spectator yourself ! you be six - and - twenty year old ; and as blase as a rake of sixty . you neither hope much nor care much , nor believe much . you doubt about other man as much as about yourself . be it make of such pococuranto as you , the world would be intolerable ; and I have rather live in a wilderness of monkey , and listen to they chatter , than in a company of man who deny everything . " " be the world compose of or , it would be equally odious , " say , " and at the end of a few score of year would cease to exist altogether . would you have every man with he head shaved , and every woman in a cloister , -- carry out to the full the ascetic principle ? would you have conventicle hymn twange from every lane in every city in the world ? would you have all the bird of the forest se one note and fly with one feather ? you call I a sceptic because I acknowledge what be ; and in acknowledge that , be it linnet or lark , or priest or parson , be it , I mean , any single one of the infinite variety of the creature of ( whose very name I would be understand to pronounce with reverence , and never to approach but with distant awe ) , I say that the study and acknowledgment of that variety amongst man especially increase we respect and wonder for the Creator , , and Ordainer of all these mind , so different and yet so united , -- meet in a common adoration , and offer up , each accord to he degree and means of approach the centre , he acknowledgment of praise and worship , each singe ( to recur to the bird simile ) he natural song . " " and so , , the hymn of a saint , or the ode of a poet , or the chant of a Newgate thief , be all pretty much the same in you philosophy , " say . " even that sneer could be answer be it to the point , " Pendennis reply ; " but it be not ; and it could be reply to you , that even to the wretched outcry of the thief on the tree , the wisest and the best of all teacher we know of , the untiring and , promise a pitiful hearing and a certain hope . Hymn of saint ! ode of poets ! who be we to measure the chance and opportunity , the means of do , or even judge , right and wrong , award to man ; and to establish the rule for mete out they punishment and reward ? we be as insolent and unthink in judging of man 's moral as of they intellect . we admire this man as be a great philosopher , and set down the other as a dullard , not know either , or the amount of truth in either , or be certain of the truth anywhere . we se for this hero who have win a battle , and for that other one who have break out of prison , and have be catch afterwards by the policeman . we measure of reward and punishment be most partial and incomplete , absurdly inadequate , utterly worldly , and we wish to continue it into the next world . into that next and awful world we strive to pursue man , and send after they we impotent party verdict of condemnation or acquittal . we set up we paltry little rod to measure heaven immeasurable , as if , in comparison to that , 's mind or 's or 's be any loftier than mine ; as if the ray which travel from the sun would reach I sooner than the man who black my boot . measure by that altitude , the tallest and the smallest among we be so alike diminutive and pitifully base , that I say we should take no count of the calculation , and it be a meanness to reckon the difference . " " you figure fail there , , " say the other , better pleased ; " if even by common arithmetic we can multiply as we can reduce almost infinitely , the great Reckoner must take count of all ; and the small be not small , or the great great , to he infinity . " " I do not call those calculation in question , " yoArthu say ; " I only say that yours be incomplete and premature ; false in consequence , and , by every operation ,
, multiply into wider error . I do not condemn the man who murder and damne . I say that they damne and murder . " " and yet but a moment since you admit the propriety of acquiescence in the present , and , I suppose , all other tyranny ? " " no : but that if a opponent menace I , of whom and without cost of blood and violence I can get rid , I would rather wait he out , and starve he out , than fight he out . fight sceptically . who be he coadjutor , whom we read of in when we be boy , who scoff at the other 's procrastination and doubt he courage , and engage the enemy and be beat for he pain ? " in these speculation and confession of , the reader may perhaps see allusion to question which , no doubt , have occupy and discompose himself , and which he have answer by very different solution to those come to by we friend . we be not pledge ourselves for the correctness of he opinion , which reader will please to consider be deliver dramatically , the writer be no more answerable for they , than for the sentiment utter by any other character of the story : we endeavour be merely to follow out , in its progress , the development of the mind of a worldly and selfish , but not ungenerous or unkind or truth - avoid man . and it will be see that the lamentable stage to which he logic at present have bring he , be one of general scepticism and sneer acquiescence in the world as it be ; or if you like so to call it , a belief qualified with scorn in all thing extant . the taste and habits of such a man prevent he from be a boisterous demagogue , and he love of truth and dislike of cant keep he from advancing crude proposition , such as many loud reformer be constantly ready with ; much more of uttering downright falsehood in argue question or abuse opponent , which he would die or starve rather than use . it be not in we friend 's nature to be able to utter certain lie ; nor be he strong enough to protest against other , except with a polite sneer ; he maxim be , that he owe obedience to all act of parliament , as long as they be not repeal . and to what do this easy and sceptical life lead a man ? be a Sadducee , and the Baptist might be in the Wilderness shout to the poor , who be listen with all they might and faith to the preacher 's awful accent and denunciation of wrath or woe or salvation ; and we friend the would turn he sleek mule with a shrug and a smile from the crowd , and go home to the shade of he terrace , and muse over preacher and audience , and turn to he roll of , or he pleasant greek songbook babbling of honey and , and nymph and fountain and love . to what , we say , do this scepticism lead ? it lead a man to a shameful loneliness and selfishness , so to speak -- the more shameful , because it be so good - humoured and conscienceless and serene . conscience ! what be conscience ? why accept remorse ? what be public or private faith ? Mythuse alike envelope in enormous tradition . if see and acknowledge the lie of the world , , as see they you can with only too fatal a clearness , you submit to they without any protest further than a laugh : if , plunge yourself in easy sensuality , you allow the whole wretched world to pass groan by you unmove : if the fight for the truth be take place , and all man of honou be on the ground arm on the one side or the other , and you alone be to lie on you balcony and smoke you pipe out of the noise and the danger , you have better have die , or never have be at all , than such a sensual coward . " the truth , friend ! " yoArthu say , imperturbably ; " where be the truth ? show it I . that be the question between we . I see it on both side . I see it on the Conservative side of the house , and amongst the radical , and even on the ministerial benche . I see it in this man , who worship by act of parliament , and be reward with a silk apron and five thousand a year ; in that man , who , drive fatally by the remorseless logic of he creed , give up everything , friend , fame , dearest tie , closest vanity , the respect of a army of churchman , the recognise position of a leader , and pass over , truth - impell , to the enemy , in whose rank he will serve henceforth as a nameless private soldier :--I see the truth in that man , as I do in he brother , whose logic drive he to quite a different conclusion , and who , after have pass a life in vain endeavour to reconcile a irreconcilable book , fling it at last down in despair , and declare , with tearful eye , and hand up to heaven , he revolt and recantation . if the truth be with all these , why should I take side with any one of they ? some be call upon to preach : let they preach . of these preacher there be somewhat too many , methink , who fancy they
they have the gift . but we can not all be parson in church , that be clear . some must sit silent and listen , or go to sleep mayhap . have we not all we duty ? the head charity - boy blow the bellow ; the master cane the other boy in the organ - loft ; the clerk sings out Amen from the desk ; and the beadle with the staff open the door for he Reverence , who rustle in silk up to the cushion . I will not cane the boy , nay , or say always , or act as the church 's champion and warrior , in the shape of the beadle with the staff ; but I will take off my hat in the place , and say my prayer there too , and shake hand with the clergyman as he step on the grass outside . do not I know that he be there be a compromise , and that he stand before I a act of parliament ? that the church he occupy be build for other worship ? that the chapel be next door ; and that Bunyan the tinker be bawl out the tiding of damnation on the common hard by ? yes , I be a ; and I take thing as I find they , and the world , and the act of parliament of the world , as they be ; and as I intend to take a wife , if I find one -- not to be madly in love and prostrate at she foot like a fool -- not to worship she as a angel , or to expect to find she as such -- but to be good - natured to she , and courteous , expect good - nature and pleasant society from she in turn . and so , , if ever you hear of my marrying , depend on it , it will not be a romantic attachment on my side : and if you hear of any good place under government , I have no particular scruple that I know of , which would prevent I from accept you offer . " " of , you scoundrel ! I know what you mean , " here break out . " this be the meaning of you scepticism , of you quietism , of you atheism , my poor fellow . you be go to sell yourself , and heaven help you ! you be go to make a bargain which will degrade you and make you miserable for life , and there be no use talk of it . if you be once bend on it , the will not prevent you . " " on the contrary , he be on my side , be not he , ? " say with a laugh . " what good cigar these be ! come down and have a little dinner at the club ; the chef 's in town , and he will cook a good one for I . no , you will not ? do not be sulky , old boy , I be go down to -- to the country to - morrow . " accounts perhaps for the information regard the affair of the family , which major Pendennis have acquire through , and by he own personal interference as the friend of the house , be such as almost make the old gentleman pause in any plan which he might have once entertaine for he nephew 's benefit . to bestow upon Arthur a wife with two such fathers - in - law , as the two worthy whom the guileless and unfortunate have draw in she marriage venture , be to benefit no man . and though the one , in a manner , neutralise the other , and the appearance of or not in public would be the signal for he instantaneous withdrawal and condign punishment , -- for the fugitive convict have cut down the officer in charge of he , -- and a rope would be inevitably he end ; if he come again under british authority ; yet , no guardian would like to secure for he ward a wife , whose parent be to be get rid of in such a way ; and the old gentleman 's notion always have be that Altamont , with the gallow before he eye , would assuredly avoid recognition ; while , at the same time , by hold the threat of he discovery over , the latter , who would lose everything by 's appearance , would be a slave in the hand of the person who know so fatal a secret . but if the pay 's debt many time more , she wealth would be expend altogether upon this irreclaimable reprobate ; and she heir , whoever they might be , would succeed but to a empty treasury ; and , instead of bring she husband a good income and a seat in parliament , would bring to that individual she person only , and she pedigree with that lamentable note of sus . per coll . at the name of the last male of she line . there be , however , to the old schemer revolve these thing in he mind , another course yet open ; the which will appear to the reader who may take the trouble to peruse a conversation , which presently ensue , between major Pendennis and the honourable , the for . when a man , under pecuniary difficulty , disappear from among he usual friend and equals ,-- dive out of sight , as it be , from the flock of bird in which he be accustom to sail , it be wonderful at what strange and distant nook he come up again for breath . I have
have know a and buck , of no inconsiderable fashion , vanish from amongst he comrade of the club and the , and be discover , very happy and affable , at a eighteenpenny ordinary in Billingsgate : another gentleman , of great learning and wit , when outrunn the constable ( be I to say he be a literary man , some critic would vow that I intend to insult the literary profession ) , once send I he address at a little public - house call the " fox under the , " down a most darksome and cavernous archway in the . such a man , under such misfortune , may have a house , but he be never in he house ; and have a address where letter may be left ; but only simpletond go with the hope of see he .-- only a few of the faithful know where he be to be find , and have the clue to he hiding - place . so , after the dispute with he wife , and the misfortune consequent thereon , to find Claver at home be impossible . " ever since I hast he for my book , which be fourteen pound , he do not come home till three o'clock , and purtend to be asleep when I bring he water of a mornin ' , and dodge hout when I be downstairs , " remark to he friend ; and announce that he should go down to my , and be butler there , and marry he old woman . in like manner , after he altercation with , the do not come near he , and fle to other haunt , out of the reach of the 's reproach ; -- out of the reach of conscience , if possible , which many of we try to dodge and leave behind we by change of scene and other fugitive stratagem . so , though the elder Pendennis , have he own ulterior object , be bent upon see Pen's country neighbour and representative in , it take the major no inconsiderable trouble and time before he could get he into such a confidential state and conversation , as be necessary for the end which the major have in view . for since the major have be call in as family friend , and have cognisance of 's affair , conjugal and pecuniary , the avoid he : as he always avoid all he lawyer and agent when there be a account to be render , or a affair of business to be discuss between they ; and never keep any appointment but when its object be the raising of money . thus , previous to catch this most shy and timorous bird , the major make more than one futile attempt to hold he ; -- on one day it be a most innocent - look invitation to dinner at , to meet a few friend ; the Baronet accept , suspect something , and do not come ; leave the major ( who indeed propose to represent in himself the body of friend ) to eat he whitebait alone :-- on another occasion the major wrote and ask for ten minute ' talk , and the instantly acknowledge the note , and make the appointment at four o'clock the next day at 's precisely ( he carefully underlin the " precisely " ) ; but though four o'clock come , as in the course of time and destiny it could not do otherwise , no Clavering make he appearance . indeed , if he have borrow twenty pound of , he could not have be more timid , or desirous of avoid the major ; and the latter find that it be one thing to seek a man , and another to find he . before the close of that day in which 's patron have give the the benefit of so many blessing before he face and curse behind he back , , who have pledge he word and he oath to he wife 's adviser to draw or accept no more bill of exchange , and to be content with the allowance which he victimise wife still award he , have manage to sign he respectable name to a piece of stamped paper , which the Baronet 's friend , , have carry off , promise to have the bill " do " by a party with whose intimacy be favour . and it chance that Strong heard of this transaction at the place where the writing have be draw , -- in the back - parlour , namely , of 's cigar - shop , where the be constantly in the habit of spend a hour in the evening . " he be at he old work again , " tell he customer . " he and be in my parlour . send out my boy for a stamp . it must have be a bill for fifty pound . I hear the tell to date it two month back . he will pretend that it be a old bill , and that he forget it when he come to a settlement with he wife the other day . I dare say they will give he some more money now he be clear . " a man who have the habit of put he unlucky name to " promise to pay " at six month , have the satisfaction of knowing , too , that he affair be known and canvassed , and he signature hand round among the very worst knave and rogue of . 's shop be close by 's and , where we have have the honour of visit we friend major Pendennis in he lodging . the major be walk daintily towards he apartment , as Strong , burn with wrath and redolent of
of , strode along the same pavement opposite to he . " Confound these young man : how they poison everything with they smoke , " think the major . " here come a fellow with mustachio and a cigar . every fellow who smoke and wear mustachio be a low fellow . oh ! it be strong .-- I hope you be well , ? " and the old gentleman , make a dignified bow to the , be about to pass into he house ; direct towards the lock of the door , with trembl hand , the polished door -key . we have say that , at the long and weary dispute and conference regard the payment of 's last debt , and have both be present as friend and adviser of the 's unlucky family . strong stop and hold out he hand to he brother negotiator , and old Pendennis put out towards he a couple of ungracious finger . " what be you good news ? " say major Pendennis , patronise the other still further , and condescende to address to he a observation ; for old Pendennis have keep such good company all he life , that he vaguly imagine he honoure common man by speak to they . " still in town , ? I hope I see you well . " " my news be bad news , sir , " answer ; " it concern we friend at , and I should like to talk to you about it . Clavering be at he old trick again , major Pendennis . " " indeed ! pray do I the favour to come into my lodging , " cry the major with awakened interest ; and the pair enter and take possession of he drawing - room . here seat , unburthen himself of he indignation to the major , and speak at large of 's recklessness and treachery . " no promise will bind he , sir , " he say . " you remember when we meet , sir , with my lady 's lawyer , how he would not be satisfied with give he honour , but want to take he oath on he knee to he wife , and ring the bell for a , and swore perdition on he soul if he ever would give another bill . he have be sign one this very day , sir : and will sign as many more as you please for ready money : and will deceive anybody , he wife or he child , or he old friend , who have back he a hundred time . why , there be a bill of he and mine will be due next week " " I think we have pay all . " " not that one , " say , blush . " he ask I not to mention it , and -- and -- I have half the money for that , major ; and they will be down on I . but I do not care for it ; I be use to it . it be Lady Claver that rile I . it be a shame that that good - natured woman , who have pay he out of gaol a score of time , should be ruin by he heartlessness . a parcel of bill - stealer boxer , any rascal , get he money ; and he do not scruple to throw a honest fellow over . would you believe it , sir , he take money of -- you know whom i mean . " " indeed ? of that singular man , who I think come tipsy once to 's house ? " major Pendennis say , with impenetrable countenance . " who be , ? " " I be sure I do not know , if you do not know , " the answer , with a look of surprise and suspicion . " to tell you frankly , " say the major , " I have my suspicions -- I suppose -- mind , I only suppose -- that in we friend Claver 's a life -- who , between you and I , , we must own about as loose a fish as any in my acquaintance -- there be , no doubt , some queer secret and story which he would not like to have know : none of we would . and very likely this fellow , who call himself , know some story against , and have some hold on he , and get money out of he on the strength of he information . I know some of the best man of the best family in who be pay through the nose in that way . but they private affair be no business of mine , ; and it be not to be suppose that because I go and dine with a man , I pry into he secret , or be answerable for all he past life . and so with we friend Clavering , I be most interested for he wife 's sake , and she daughter 's , who be a most charming creature : and when she ladyship ask I , I look into she affair , and try to set they straight ; and shall do so again , you understand , to the best of my humble power and ability , if I can make myself useful . and if I be call upon -- you understand , if I be call upon -- and -- by the way , this , ? how be this not ? I believe you be acquaint with he . be he in town ? " " I do not know that I be call upon to know where he be , Major Pendennis , " say strong , rise and
and take up he hat in dudgeon , for the major 's patronising manner and impertinence of caution offend the honest gentleman not a little . 's manner alter at once from a tone of hauteur to one of know good - humour . " ah , , you be cautious too , I see ; and quite right , my good sir , quite right . we do not know what ear wall may have , sir , or to whom we may be talk ; and as a man of the world , and a old soldier , -- a old and distinguished soldier , I have be tell , , -- you know very well that there be no use in throw away you fire ; you may have you idea , and I may put two and two together and have mine . but there be thing which do not concern he that many a man have better not know , eh , ? and which I , for one , will not know until I have reason for know they : and that I believe be you maxim too . with regard to we friend the , I think with you , it would be most advisable that he should be check in he imprudent course ; and most strongly reprehend any man 's departure from he word , or any conduct of he which can give any pain to he family , or cause they annoyance in any way . that be my full and frank opinion , and I be sure it be yours . " " certainly , " say , drily . " I be delighted to hear it ; delight that a old brother soldier should agree with I so fully . and I be exceedingly glad of the lucky meeting which have procure I the good fortune of you visit . good evening . thank you . , show the door to . " and strong , proceed by , take he leave of major Pendennis ; the not a little puzzle at the old fellow 's prudence ; and the valet , to say the truth , to the full as much perplex at he master 's reticence . for , in he capacity of accomplished valet , move here and there in a house as silent as a shadow ; and , as it so happen , during the latter part of he master 's conversation with he visitor , have be stand very close to the door , and have overhear not a little of the talk between the two gentleman , and a great deal more than he could understand . " who be that not ? know anything about he and strong ? " ask of , on the next convenient occasion when they meet at the club . " strong be he man of business , draw the 's bill , and indoss th'ey , and do he odd job and that ; and I suppose 's in it too , " reply . " that kite - fly , you know , , always take two or three on th'ey to set the paper go . not put the pot on at the , and win a good bit of money . I wish the could get some somewhere , and I could get my book pay up . " " do you think my Lady would pay he debt again ? " ask . " find out that for I , , and I will make it worth you while , my boy . " * * * * * * major Pendennis have often say with a laugh , that he vale be a much richer man than himself : and , indeed , by long course of careful speculation , this wary and silent attendent have be amasse a considerable sum of money , during the year which he have pass in the major 's service , where he have make the acquaintance of many other valets of distinction , from whom he have learn the affair of they principal . when come into he property , but not until then , have surprise the young gentleman , by say that he have a little sum of money , some fifty or a hundred pound , which he want to lay out to advantage ; perhaps the gentleman in the Temple , know about affair and business and that , could help a poor fellow to a good investment ? would be very much oblige to , most grateful and oblige indeed , if yoArthu could tell he of one . when laughingly reply , that he know nothing about money matter , and know no earthly way of help , the latter , with the utmost simplicity , be very grateful , very grateful indeed , to , and if should want a little money before he rent be pay , perhaps he would kindly remember that he uncle 's old and faithful servant have some a he would like to put out : and be most proud if he could be useful anyways to any of the family . the of , who be tolerably prudent and have no need of ready money , would as soon have think of borrowing from he uncle 's servant as of steal the valet 's pocket -handkerchief , and be on the point of make some haughty reply to 's offer , but be check by the humour of the transaction . a capitalist ! offer to lend to he -- the joke be excellent . on the other hand , the man might be quite innocent , and the proposal of money a simple offer of good - will . so yoArthu withheld the sarcasm that be rise to he lip , and contente himself by decline 's kind proposal
proposal . he mention the matter to he uncle , however , and congratulate the latter on have such a treasure in he service . it be then that the major say that he believe have be get devilish rich for a devilish long time ; in fact , he have buy the house in , in which he master be a lodger and have actually make a considerable sum of money , from he acquaintance with the Clavering family and he knowledge obtain through he master that the would pay all she husband 's debt , by buy up as many of the 's acceptance as he could raise money to purchase . of these transaction the major , however , know no more than most gentleman do of they servants , who live with we all we day and be stranger to we , so strong custom be , and so pitiless the distinction between class and class . " so he offer to lend you money , do he ? " the elder remark to he nephew . " he be a dev'lish sly fellow , and a dev'lish rich fellow ; and there be many a nobleman would like to have such a valet in he service , and borrow from he too . and he be not a bit change , . he do he work just as well as ever -- he be always ready to my bell -- steal about the room like a cat -- he be so dev'lishly attach to I , ! " on the day of 's visit , the major bethotch he of story , and that might help he , and rally the valet regard he wealth with that free and insolent way which so high - place a gentleman might be dispose to adopt towards so unfortunate a creature . " I hear that you have get some money to invest , , " say the major . " it be have be tell , hang he , " think the valet . " I be glad my place be such a good one . " " thank you , sir -- I 've no reason to complain of my place , nor of my master , " reply , demurely . " you be a good fellow : and I believe you be attach to I ; and I be glad you get on well . and I hope you will be prudent , and not be take a public - house or that kind of thing . " a public - house , think -- I in a public - house !-- the old fool !-- , if I be ten year younger I would set in Parlyment before I die , that I would .-- " no , thank you kindly , sir . I do not think of the public line , sir . and I have get my little savings pretty well put out , sir . " " you do a little in the discounting way , eh , ? " " yes , sir , a very little -- I -- I beg you pardon , sir -- might I be so free as to ask a question ---- " " speak on , my good fellow , " the elder say , graciously . " 's paper , sir ? do you think he be any longer any good , sir ? will my pay on th'ey , any more , sir ? " " what , you have do something in that business already ? " " yes , sir , a little , " reply , drop down he eye . and I do not mind own , sir , and I hope I may take the liberty of saying , sir , that a little more would make I very comfortable if it turn out as well as the last . " " why , how much have you net by he , in 's name ? " ask the major . " I have do a good bit , sir , at it : that I own , sir . have some information , and make acquaintance with the fam 'ly through you kindness , I put on the pot , sir . " " you do what ? " " I lay my money on , sir -- I get all I could , and borrowed , and buy 's bill ; many of th'ey have he name , and the gentleman 's as be just go out , , , sir : and of course I know of the blow - hup and shindy as be take place in place , sir : and as I may as well make my money as another , I would be very much obleege to you if you would tell I whether my lady will come down any more . " although be as much surprise at this intelligence regard he servant , as if he have hear that be a disguise , about to throw off he mask and assume he seat in the house of Peers ; and although he be of course indignant at the audacity of the fellow who have da to grow rich under he nose , and without he cognisance ; yet he have a natural admiration for every man who represent money and success , and find himself respecte , and be rather afraid of that worthy , as the truth begin to daw upon he . " well , , " say he , " I must not ask how rich you be ; and the richer the better for you sake , I be sure . and if I could give you any information that could serve you , I would speedily help you . but frankly , if ask I whether she shall pay any more
more of 's debt , I shall advise and I hope she will not , though I fear she will -- and that be all I know . and so you be aware that be begin again in he -- eh -- reckless and imprudent course ? " " at he old game , sir -- can not prevent that gentleman . he will do it . " " be say that a be the holder of one of 's note . do you know anything of this ; or the amount of the bill ? " " do not know the bill , know Abrams quite well , sir . " " I wish you would find out about it for I . and I wish you would find out where I can see , . " and say , " thank you , sir , yes , sir , I will , sir ; " and retire from the room , as he have enter it , with he usual stealthy respect and quiet humility ; leave the major to muse and wonder over what he have just hear . the next morning the valet inform major Pendennis that he have see ; what be the amount of the bill that gentleman be desirous to negotiate ; and that the Baronet would be sure to be in the back - parlour of the of that day at one o'clock . to this appointment be punctual , and as at one o'clock he sate in the parlour of the tavern in question , surround by spittoon , chair , cheerful print of boxer , trot horse , and pedestrian , and the lingering of last night 's tobacco fume -- as the descendant of a ancient line sate in this delectable place accommodate with a old copy of 's in , much blot with beer , the polite major Pendennis walk into the apartment . " so it be you , old boy ? " ask the Baronet , think that have arrive with the money . " how do you do , ? I want to see you , and follow you here , " say the major , at sight of whom the other 's countenance fell . now that he have he opponent before he , the major be determined to make a brisk and sudden attack upon he , and go into action at once . " I know , " he continue , " who be the exceedingly disreputable person for whom you take I , Clavering ; and the errand which bring you here . " " it be not you business , be it ? " ask the , with a sulky and deprecatory look . " why be you follow I about and take the command , and meddl in my affair , major Pendennis ? I have never do you any harm , have I ? I have never have you money . and I do not choose to be dodge about in this way , and domineer over . I do not choose it , and I will not have it . if have any proposal to make to I , let it be do in the regular way , and through the lawyer . I would rather not have you . " " I be not come from , " the major say , " but of my own accord , to try and remonstrate with you , Claver , and see if you can be keep from ruin . it be but a month ago that you swore on you honour , and want to get a to strengthen the oath , that you would accept no more bill , but content yourself with the allowance which give you . all you debt be pay with that proviso , and you have break it ; this have a bill of yours for sixty pound . " " it be a old bill . I take my solemn oath it be a old bill , " shriek out the Baronet . " you draw it yesterday , and you date it three month back purposely . by , , you sicke I with lie , I can not help tell you so . I have no patience with you , by . you cheat everybody , yourself include . I have see a deal of the world , but I never meet you equal at humbugging . it be my belief you have rather lie than not . " " have you come here , you old -- old beast , to tempt I to -- to pitch into you , and -- and knock you old head off ? " say the , with a poisonous look of hatre at the major . " what , sir ? " shoute out the old major , rise to he foot and clasp he cane , and look so fiercely , that the Baronet 's tone instantly change towards he . " no , no , " say Clavering , piteously , " I beg you pardon . I do not mean to be angry , or say anything unkind , only you be so damn harsh to I , major Pendennis . what be it you want of I ? why have you be hunt I so ? do you want money out of I too ? by , you know I have not get a shilling , " -- and so Clavering , accord to he custom , pass from a curse into a whimper . major Pendennis see , from the other 's tone , that know he secret be in the major 's hand . " I have no errand from anybody , or no design upon you , " Pendennis say , " but a endeavour , if it be not too late , to
to save you and you family from utter ruin , through the infernal recklessness of you course . I know you secret ---- " " I do not know it when I marry she ; upon my oath I do not know it till the ----d scoundrel come back and tell I himself ; and it be the misery about that which make I so reckless , Pendennis ; indeed it be , " the Baronet cry , clasp he hand . " I know you secret from the very first day when I see come drink into you dining - room in . I never forget face . I remember that fellow in a convict , and he remember I . I know he trial , the date of he marriage , and of he report death in the bush . I could swear to he . and I know that you be no more marry to Lady Clavering than I be . I have keep you secret well enough , for I have not tell a single soul that I know it , -- not you wife , not yourself till now . " " poor , it would cut she up dreadfully , " whimper ; " and it be not my fault , major ; you know it be not . " " Rather than allow you to go on ruin she as you do ; I will tell she , Claver , and tell all the world too ; that be what I swear I will do , unless I can come to some term with you , and put some curb on you infernal folly . by play , debt , and extravagance of all kind , you have get through half you wife 's fortune , and that of she legitimate heir , mind -- she legitimate heir . here it must stop . you can not live together . you be not fit to live in a great house like Clavering ; and before three year ' more be over would not leave a shilling to carry on . I have settle what must be do . you shall have six hundred a year ; you shall go abroad and live on that . you must give up parliament , and get on as well as you can . if you refuse , I give you my word I will make the real state of thing know to - morrow ; I will swear to , who , when identify , will go back to the country from whence he come , and will ry the widow of you and himself together . and so that boy of yours lose at once all title to old 's property , and it go to you wife 's daughter . be not I make myself pretty clearly understand ? " " you would not be so cruel to that poor boy , would you , ? " ask the father , plead piteously ; " hang it , think about he . he be a nice boy : though he be dev'lish wild , I own he be dev'lish wild . " " it be you who be cruel to he , " say the old moralist . " why , sir , you will ruin he yourself inevitably in three year . " " yes , but perhaps I will not have such dev'lish bad luck , you know ; -- the luck must turn : and I will reform , by , I will reform . and if you be to split on I , it would cut up my wife so ; you know it would , most infernally . " " to be part from you , " say the old major , with a sneer ; " you know she will not live with you again . " " but why can not Lady live abroad , or at , or at , or at the doose , and I go on here ? " continue . " I like be here better than abroad , and I like be in parliament . it be dev'lish convenient be in parliament . there be very few seat like mine leave ; and if I give it to th'ey , I should not wonder the ministry would give I a island to govern , or some dev'lish good thing ; for you know I be a gentleman of dev'lish good family , and have a handle to my name , and -- and that sort of thing , major Pendennis . Eh , do not you see ? do not you think they would give I something dev'lish good if I be to play my card well ? and then , you know , I would save money , and be keep out of the way of the confound hells and rouge et noir -- and -- and so I would rather not give up parliament , please . " for at one instant to hate and defy a man , at the next to weep before he , and at the next to be perfectly confidential and friendly with he , be not a unusual process with we versatile - mind Baronet . " as for you seat in parliament , " the major say , with something of a blush on he cheek , and a certain tremor , which the other do not see , " you must part with that , , to -- to I . " " what ! be you go into the house , major Pendennis ? " " no -- not I ; but my nephew , , be a very clever fellow and would make a figure there : and when Clavering have two member , he father might very likely have be one ; and -- and should like to be
be there , " the major say . " , do he know it , too ? " cry out . " nobody know anything out of this room , " Pendennis answer ; and if you do this favour for I , I hold my tongue . " if not , I be a man of my word , and will do what I have say . " " I say , major , " say , with a peculiarly humble smile " you -- you could not get I my first quarter in advance , could you , like the best of fellow ? you can do anything with Lady Clavering ; and , upon my oath , I will take up that bill of ' . the little dam scoundrel , I know he will do I in the business -- he always do ; and if you could do this for I , we would see , major . " " and I think you best plan would be to go down in to Claver to shoot , and take my nephew with you , and introduce he . yes , that will be the best time . and we will try and manage about the advance . " ( yoArthu may lend he that , think old Pendennis . Confound he , a seat in parliament be worth a hundred and fifty pound . ) " and , Claver , you understand , of course , my nephew know nothing about this business . you have a mind to retire : he be a Clavering man and a good representative . for the borough ; you introduce he , and you people vote for he -- you see . " " when can you get I the hundred and fifty , major ? when shall I come and see you ? will you be at home this evening or to - morrow morning ? will you have anything here ? they have get some dev'lish good bitter in the bar . I often have a glass of bitter , it set one up so . " the old major would take no refreshment ; but rise and take he leave of the , who walk with he to the door of the of , and then stroll into the bar , where he take a glass of gin and bitter with the landlady there : and a gentleman connect with the ring ( who board at the of ) come in , he and and the landlord talk about the fight and the news of the sporting world in general ; and at length arrive with the proceed of the 's bill , from which he own handsome commission be deduct , and out of the remainder " stood " a dinner at to he distinguished friend , and pass the evening gaily at . meanwhile major Pendennis , call a cab in , drive to , , where he speedily be close with he nephew in deep conversation . after they talk they part on very good term , and it be in consequence of that unreported conversation , whereor the reader nevertheless can pretty well guess the bearing , that express himself as we have hear in the colloquy with , which be report in the last chapter . when a man be tempt to do a tempting thing , he can find a hundred ingenious reason for gratify he liking ; and think very much that he would like to be in parliament , and that he would like to distinguish himself there , and that he need not care much what side he take , as there be falsehood and truth on every side . and on this and on other matter he think he would compromise with he conscience , and that be a very convenient and good - humoured profession of faith . and on a picturesque common in the neighbourhood of , have find a pretty villa , whither she retire after she conjugal dispute at the end of that unlucky season . , of course , accompany she mother , and come home for the holiday , with whom 's chief occupation be to fight and quarrel . but this be only a home pastime , and the young schoolboy be not fond of home sport . he find cricket , and horse , and plenty of friend at . the good - nature 's house be fill with a constant society of young gentleman of thirteen , who eat and drank much too copiously of tart and champagne , who ride races on the lawn , and frighten the fond mother , who smoke and make themselves sick , and the dining - room unbearable to . she do not like the society of young gentleman of thirteen . as for that fair young creature , any change as long as it be change be pleasant to she ; and for a week or two she would have like poverty and a cottage , and bread - and - cheese ; and , for a night , perhaps , a dungeon and bread - and - water , and so the move to be by no means unwelcome to she . she wandere in the wood , and sketch tree and farmhouse ; she read french novel habitually ; she drive into pretty often , and to any play , or ball , or conjurer , or musician who might happen to appear in the place ; she sleep a great deal ; she quarrell with and during the morning ; she find the little village school and attend it , and first fond the girl and thwart the mistress , then scold the girl and laugh at the teacher ; she be constant at church , of course . it be a pretty little church ,
, of immense antiquity -- a little Anglo- , build the day before yesterday , and decorate with all sort of pain window , carve saint ' head , gild scripture text , and open pew . Blanche begin forthwith to work a most correct high - church altar -cover for the church . she pass for a saint with the clergyman for a while , whom she quite take in , and whom she coax , and wheedle , and fond so artfully , that poor , who at first be charme with she , then bear with she , then would hardly speak to she , be almost mad with jealousy . be the wife of we old friend , tutor and poor 's suitor . he have console himself for she refusal with a young lady from whom he mamma provide . when the latter die , we friend 's view become every day more and more pronounced . he cut off he coat collar , and let he hair grow over he back . he rigorously give up the curl which he use to sport on he forehead , and the tie of he neckcloth , of which he be rather proud . he go without any tie at all . he go without dinner on . he read the , and intimate that he be ready to receive confession in the vestry . the most harmless creature in the world , he be denounce as a black and most dangerous and , by of the chapel , and at the old church . have build he chapel - of - ease with the money leave he by he mother at . ! lord ! what would she have say to hear a table call a altar ! to see candlestick on it ! to get letter sign on the of so - and - so , or the of what - do - you - call - 'em ! all these thing do the boy of Clapham practise ; he faithful wife follow he . but when Blanche have a conference of near two hour in the vestry with , pace up and down on the grass , where there be only two little grave - stone as yet ; she wish that she have a third there : only , only he would offer very likely to that creature , who have infatuate he in a fortnight . no , she would retire ; she would go into a convent , and profess and leave he . such bad thought have 's wife and he neighbour regard he ; these , think he in direct correspondence with the Bishop of ; that , bewail error to she even more odious and fatal ; and yet we friend mean no earthly harm . the post-office never bring he any letter from the Pope ; he think Blanche , to be sure , at first , the most pious , gift , right - think , fascinate person he have ever meet ; and she manner of singe the delighte he -- but after a while he begin to grow rather tired of , she way and graces grow stale somehow ; then he be doubtful about ; then she make a disturbance in he school , lose she temper , and rap the child 's finger . Blanche inspire this admiration and satiety , somehow , in many man . she try to please they , and fling out all she graces at once ; come down to they with all she jewel on , all she smile , and cajolery , and coaxing , and ogles . then she grow tired of they and of try to please they , and never have care about they , drop they : and the man grow tired of she , and droppe she too . it be a happy night for when Blanche go away ; and she husband , with rather a blush and a sigh , say " he have be deceive in she ; he have think she endow with many precious gift , he fear they be mere tinsel ; he think she have be a right - think person , he fear she have merely make religion a amusement -- she certainly have quite lose she temper to the schoolmistress , and beat 's knuckle cruelly . " fly to he arm , there be no question about the grave or the veil any more . he tenderly embrace she on the forehead . " there be none like thee , my , " he say , throw he fine eye up to the ceiling , " precious among woman ! " as for , from the instant she lose sight of he and , she never think or car about either any more . but when yoArthu go down to pass a few day at with the , this stage of indifference have not arrive on 's part or on that of the simple clergyman . believe she to be a angel and wonder of a woman . such a perfection he have never see , and sate listen to she music in the summer evening , open - mouthed , rapt in , tea - less , and bread - and - butter-less . Fascinate as he have hear the music of the opera to be -- he have never but once attend a exhibition of that nature ( which he mention with a blush and a sigh -- it be on that day when he have accompany and she son to the play at ) -- he could not conceive anything more delicious , more celestial , he have almost say , than 's music . she be a most gifted being : she have a precious soul : she have the most remarkable talents -- to all outward
outward seeming , the most heavenly disposition , etc. etc . it be in this way that , be then at the height of he own fever and bewitchment for , discourse to Arthur about she . the meeting between the two old acquaintance have be very cordial . yoArthu love anybody who love he mother ; could speak on that theme with genuine feeling and emotion . they have a hundred thing to tell each other of what have occur in they life . " yoArthu would perceive , " say , " that he -- he view on matter have develop themselves since they acquaintance . " , a most exemplary person , seconde they with all she endeavour . he have build this little church on he mother 's demise , who have leave he provide with a sufficiency of worldly mean . though in the cloister himself , he have hear of 's reputation . he speak in the kindest and most sadden tone ; he hold he eyelid down , and bow he fair head on one side . yoArthu be immensely amuse with he ; with he air ; with he folly and simplicity ; with he blank stock and long hair ; with he real goodness , kindness , friendliness of feeling . and he praise of Blanche please and surprise we friend not a little , and make he regard she with eye of particular favour . the truth be , Blanche be very glad to see ; as one be glad to see a agreeable man in the country , who bring down the last news and story from the great city ; who can talk better than most country - folk , at least can talk that darl , so dear and indispensable to people , so little understood by person out of the world . the first day come down , he keep Blanco laugh for hour after dinner . she sang she song with redoubled spirit . she do not scold she mother ; she fond and kiss she , to the honest 's surprise . when it come to be bedtime , she say , " ! " with the prettiest air of regret possible ; and be really quite sorry to go to bed , and squeeze 's hand quite fondly . he on he side give she pretty palm a very cordial pressure . we young gentleman be of that turn , that eyes very moderately bright dazzl he . " she be very much improve , " think , look out into the night , " very much . I suppose the will not mind my smoking with the window open . she be a jolly good old woman , and Blanche be immensely improve . I like she manner with she mother tonight . I like she laugh way with that stupid young cub of a boy , whom they ought not to allow to get tipsy . she sang those little verse very prettily ; they be devilish pretty verse too , though I say it who should not say it . " and he hum a tune which Blanche have put to some verse of he own . " ah ! what a fine night ! how jolly a cigar be at night ! how pretty that little church look in the moonlight ! I wonder what old 's do ? yes , she be a dayvlish nice little thing , as my uncle say . " " oh , heavenly ! " here break out a voice from a clematis - cover casement near -- a girl 's voice : it be the voice of the author of ' . ' burst into a laugh . " do not tell about my smoking , " he say , lean out of he own window . " oh ! go on ! I adore it , " cry the lady of ' . ' " Heavenly night ! heavenly , heavenly moon ! but I must shut my window , and not talk to you on account of les moeur . how droll they be , le moeur ! . " and begin to s the to . the next day they be walk in the field together , laugh and chatter -- the gayest pair of friend . they talk about the day of they youth , and Blanche be prettily sentimental . they talk about , dearest -- Blanche have love she as a sister : be she happy with that odd ? would not she come and stay with they at ? oh , what walk they would take together ! what songs they would se -- the old , old song ! 's voice be splendid . -- she must call he -- remember the song they sang in the happy old day , now he be grow such a great man , and have such a succe ? etc. etc . and the day after , which be enliven with a happy ramble through the wood to , and a sight of that pleasant park and hall , come that conversation with the curate which we have narrate , and which make we young friend think more and more . " be she all this perfection ? " he ask himself . " have she become serious and religious ? do she tend school , and visit the poor ? be she kind to she mother and brother ? yes , I be sure of that , I have see she . " and walk with he old tutor over he little parish , and go to visit he school , it be with inexpressible delight that find Blanche seat instruct the child , and fancie to himself how patient she must be , how good - natured , how ingenuous , how really simple in she
she taste , and unspoil by the world . " and do you really like the country ? " he ask she , as they walk together . " I should like never to see that odious city again . of -- that be , Mr.-- well , , then -- one be good thought grow up in these sweet wood and calm solitude , like those flower which will not bloom in , you know . the gardener come and change we balcony once a week . I do not think I shall bear to look in the face again -- its odious , smoky , brazen face ! but , heigho ! " " why that sigh , Blanche ? " " never mind why . " " yes , I do mind why . tell I , tell I everything . " " I wish you have not come down ; " and a second edition of ' ' come out . " you do not want I , Blanche ? " " I do not want you to go away . I do not think this house will be very happy without you , and that be why I wish that you never have come . " ' ' be here laid aside , and ' ' have begin . ah ! what answer be give to those in the eyes of a young woman ? what be the method employ for dry they ? what take place ? of ringdove and ros , of dew and wildflower , of waive greenwood and balmy air of summer ! here be two batter rake , take themselves in for a moment , and fancie that they be in love with each other , like and ! when one think of country house and country walk , one wonder that any man be leave unmarried . and frank - speak as commonly be with , how come it that do not inform the friend and depository of all he secret , of the little circumstance which have take place at the villa near ? he talk about the discovery of he old tutor , freely enough , and of he wife , and of he anglo- church , and of he departure from to ; but , when ask about , he answer be evasive or general : he say she be a good - nature clever little thing , that rightly guide she make no such bad wife after all , but that he have for the moment no intention of marriage , that he day of romance be over , that he be contente with he present lot , and so forth . in the meantime there come occasionally to , , pretty little satin envelope , superscribe in the neatest handwriting , and seal with one of those admirable cipher , which , if have be curiious enough to watch he friend 's letter , or indeed if the cipher have be decipherable , would have show that be in correspondence with a young lady whose initial be b . . to these pretty little composition reply in he best and gallantest manner ; with joke , with news of the town , with point of wit , nay , with pretty little verse very likely , in reply to the versicle of the Muse of ' . ' Blanche we know rhymes with " branch , " and " stanch , " and " launch , " and no doubt a gentleman of Pen's ingenuity would not forgo these advantage of position , and would ring the pretty little change upon these pleasing note . indeed we believe that those love -verse of , which have such a pleasing success in the ' , ' that charme edit by , and illustrate by portrait of the female nobility by the famious artist , be compose at this period of we hero 's life ; and be first address to Blanche per post , before they figure in print , cornet as it be to 's pictorial garland . " Verse be all very well , " the elder Pendennis say , who find scratch down one of these artless effusion at the club as he be wait for he dinner ; " and letter -writ if allow it , and between such old country friend of course there may be a correspondence , and that sort of thing -- but mind , , and do not commit yourself , my boy . for who know what the doose may happen ? the best way be to make you letter safe . I never write a letter in all my life that would commit I , and demmy , sir , I have have some experience of woman . " and the worthy gentleman , grow more garrulous and confidential with he nephew as he grow older , tell many affect instance of the evil result consequent upon this want of caution to many persons in " ; " -- how from use too ardent expression in some poetical note to the , young have subject himself to a visit of remonstrance from the widow 's brother , ; and thus have be force into a marriage with a woman old enough to be he mother : how when have at length succeed in secure young , , of the Blues , produce some letter which have write to he , and cause a withdrawal on 's part , who afterwards be to , of , etc . the major , if he have not read , have plenty of observation , and could back he wise saws with a multitude of modern instance , which he have acquire in a long and careful perusal of the great book of the world . laugh at the example , and blush a little at he uncle 's
's remonstrance , say that he would bear they in mind and be cautious . he blush , perhaps , because he have borne they in mind ; because he be cautious : because in he letter to he have from instinct , or honesty perhaps , refrain from any avowal which might compromise he . " do not you remember the lesson I have , sir , in 's -- 's affair ? I be not to be catch again , uncle , " say with mock frankness and humility . congratulate himself and he nephew heartily on the latter 's prudence and progress , and be pleased at the position which be take as a man of the world . no doubt , if have be consult , he opinion would have be different : and he would have tell that the boy 's foolish letter be better than the man 's adroit compliment and slippery gallantry ; that to win the woman he love , only a knave or a coward advance under cover , with subterfuge , and a retreat secure behind he : but speak not on this matter to , know pretty well that he be guilty , and what he friend 's verdict would be . not have not be for many week absent on he foreign tour , Claver have retire meanwhile into the country pursuant to he agreement with major Pendennis , when the ills of fate begin to fall rather suddenly and heavily upon the sole remain partner of the little firm of 's . when strong , at parting with , refuse the loan proffer by the latter in the fulness of he purse and the generosity of he heart , he make such a sacrifice to conscience and delicacy as cause he many a after twinge and pang ; he and feel -- it be not very many hour in he life he have experience the feeling -- that in this juncture of he affair he have be too delicate and too scrupulous . why should a fellow in want refuse a kind offer kindly make ? why should a thirsty man decline a pitcher of water from a friendly hand , because it be a little soile ? 's conscience smote he for refuse what the other have fairly come by , and generously proffer : and he think ruefully , now it be too late , that 's cash would have be as well in he pocket as in that of the gambling -- house proprietor at or , with whom he Excellency would infallibly leave he winnings . it be whisper among the tradesman , bill - discounter , and other who have commercial dealings with , that he and the Baronet have part company , and that the 's " paper " be henceforth of no value . the tradesman , who have put a wonderful confidence in he hithertoo , -- for who could resist 's jolly face and frank and honest demeanour ?-- now begin to pour in they bill with a cowardly mistrust and unanimity . the knock at the 's chamber door be constant , and tailor , bootmaker , pastrycook who have furnished dinner , in they own person , or by the boy they representative , hold levee on 's stair . to these be add one or two person of a less clamorous but far more sly and dangerous sort , -- the young clerk of lawyer , namely , who lurk about the , or concert with 's young man in the chamber hard by , have in they dismal pocketbook copy of writ to be serve on , require he to appear on a early day next term before we the , and answer to , etc. etc . from this invasion of creditor , poor strong , who have not a guinea in he pocket , have , of course , no refuge but that of the 's castle , into which he retire , shutt the outer and inner door upon the enemy , and not quit he stronghold until after nightfall . against this outer barrier the foe use to come and knock and curse in vain , whilst the pee at they from behind the little curtain which he have put over the orifice of he letter - box ; and have the dismal satisfaction of see the face of furious clerk and fiery dun , as they dash up against the door and retreat from it . but as they could not be always at he gate , or sleep on he staircase , the enemy of the sometimes leave he free . strong , when so presse by he commercial antagonist , be not quite alone in he defence against they , but have secure for himself a ally or two . he friend be instruct to communicate with he by a system of private signal : and they thus keep the garrison from starve by bring in necessary supplies , and keep up 's heart and prevent he from surrendering by visit he and cheer he in he retreat . two of 's most faithful allie be and : when hostile visitor be prowl about the , 's little sister be teach a particular cry or jodel , which they innocently whoop in the court : when and come up to visit strong , they archly sang this same note at he door ; when that barrier be straightway open , the honest garrison come out smile , the provision and the pot of porter be bring in , and in the society of he faithful friend the beleaguer one pass a comfortable night . there be some man who could not live under this excitement , but be a brave man , as we have say , who have see service and never lose heart in peril .
. but besides allie , we general have secure for himself , under difficulty , that still more necessary aid , a retreat . it have be mention in a former part of this history , how . and live in the house next door to , and that the window of one of they room be not very far off the kitchen - window which be situate in the upper story of 's chamber . a leaden water - pipe and gutter serve for the two ; and Strong , look out from he kitchen one day , see that he could spre with great ease up to the sill of he neighbour 's window , and clamber up the pipe which communicate from one to the other . he have laughingly show this refuge to he chum , ; and they have agree that it would be as well not to mention the circumstance to , whose dun be numerous , and who would be constantly fly down the pipe into they apartment if this way of escape be show to he . but now that the evil day be come , Strong make use of the passage , and one afternoon burst in and with he jolly face , and explain that the enemy be in wait on he staircase , and that he have take this means of give they the slip . so while 's aide - de - camp be in wait in the passage of no. 3 , Strong walk down the step of no. 4 , dine at the , go to the play , and return home at midnight , to the astonishment of and , who have not see he quit he chamber and could not conceive how he could have pass the line of sentry . strong bear this siege for some week with admirable spirit and resolution , and as only such a old and brave soldier would , for the pain and privation which he have to endure be enough to depress any man of ordinary courage ; and what vex and ril he ( to use he own expression ) be the infernal indifference and cowardly ingratitude of , to whom he write letter after letter , which the never acknowledge by a single word , or by the smallest remittance , though a five - pound note , as say , at that time would have be a fortune to he . but better day be in store for the , and in the midst of he despondency and perplexity there come to he a most welcome aid . " yes , if it have not be for this good fellow here , " say strong , --" for a good fellow you be , , my boy , and hang I if I do not stand by you as long as I live ,-- I think , , it would have be all up with . I be the fifth week of my be keep a prisoner , for I could not be always risk my neck across that water - pipe , and take my walk abroad through poor old 's window , and my spirit be quite broken , sir -- dammy , quite beat , and I be think of put a end to myself , and should have do it in another week , when who should drop down from heaven but ! " " be not exactly the place , , " say not . " I come from - , " say he , " and I would have a deuced lucky month there , that be all . " " well , sir , he take up 's bill , and he pay the other fellow that be upon I , like a man , sir , that he do , " say strong , enthusiastically . " and I shall be very happy to stand a bottle of claret for this company , and as many more as the company choose , " say , with a blush . " Hallo ! waiter , bring we a magnum of the right sort , do you hear ? and we will drink we healt all round , sir -- and may every good fellow like find another good fellow to stand by he at a pinch . that be my sentiment , , though I do not like you name . " " no ! and why ? " ask . strong press the 's foot under the table here ; and , rather excited , fill up another bumper , nod to , drank off he wine , and say , " he be a gentleman , and that be sufficient , and they be all gentleman . " the meeting between these " all gentleman " take place at , whither have go to dinner , and where he find the and he friend at table in the coffee - room . both of the latter be exceedingly hilarious , talkative , and excite by wine ; and , who be a admirable story - teller , tell the story of he own siege , and adventur , and escape with great liveliness and humour , and describe the talk of the heriff 's officer at he door , the pretty little signal of , the grotesque exclamation of when the burst in at he window , and he final rescue by , in a most graphic manner , and so as greatly to interest he hearer . " as for I , it be nothing , " not say . " when a ship have pay off , a chap spend he money , you know . and it be the feller at the black and red at - that do it . I win a good bit of money there , and intend to
to win a good bit more , do not I , strong ? I be go to take he with I . I have get a system . I will make he fortune , I tell you . I will make you fortune , if you like -- dammy , everybody be fortune . but what I will do , and no mistake , boy , I promise you . I will put in for that little Fanny . , sir , what do you think she do ? she have two pound , and I be blest if she do not go and lend it to ! do not she , ? let 's drink she health . " " with all my heart , " say , and pledge this toast with the greatest cordiality . not then begin , with the greatest volubility , at great length , to describe he system . he say that it be infallible , if play with coolness ; that he have it from a chap at , who have lose by it , it be true , but because he have not enough capital ; if he could have stood one more turn of the wheel , he would have have all he money back ; that he and several more chap be go to make a bank , and try it ; and that he would put every shilling he be worth into it , and have come back to the country for the express purpose of fetching away he money , and ; that Strong should play for he ; that he could trust and he temper much better than he could he own ; and much better than - or the italian that " stand in . " as he empty he bottle , the describe at full length all he plan and prospects to , who be interested in listen to he story , and the confession of he daring and lawless good - humour . " I meet that queer fellow not the other day , " say to he uncle , a day or two afterwards . " not ? what not ? there be 's son , " say the major . " no , no ; the fellow who come tipsy into 's dining - room one day when we be there , " say the nephew , laugh , " he say he do not like the name of , though he do I the honour to think that I be a good fellow . " " I do not know any man of the name of , I give you my honour , " say the impenetrable major ; " and as for you acquaintance , I think the less you have to do with he the better , . " yoArthu laugh again . " he be go to quit the country , and make he fortune by a gambling system . he and my amiable college acquaintance , , be partner , and the take out Strong with he as aide - de - camp . what be it that bind the and , I wonder ? " " I should think , mind you , , I should think , but of course I have only the idea , that there have be something in 's previous life which give these fellow and some other a certain power over he ; and if there should be no such a secret , which affair of ours , my boy , dammy , I say , it ought to be a lesson to a man to keep himself straight in life , and not to give any man a chance over he . " " why , I think you have some means of persuasion over , uncle , or why should he give I that seat in Parlament ? " " Claver think he be not fit for parliament , " the major answer . " no more he be . what be to prevent he from put you or anybody else into he place if he like ? do you think that vernment or the opposition would make any bone about accept the seat if he offer it to they ! why should you be more squeamish than the first man , and the most honourable man , and man of the highest birth and position in the country , begad ? " the major have a answer of this kind to most of Pen's objection , and accept he uncle 's reply , not so much because he believe they , but because he wish to believe they . we do a thing -- which of we have not ?-- not because " everybody do it , " but because we like it ; and we acquiescence , alas ! prove not that everybody be right , but that we and the rest of the world be poor creature alike . at he next visit to , do not forget to amuse with the history which he have learn at of the 's imprisonment , and of 's gallant rescue . and after he have tell he tale in he usual satirical way , he mention with praise and emotion little 's generous behaviour to the , and 's enthusiasm in she behalf . be somewhat jealous , and a good deal pique and curiious about . among the many confidential little communications which Arthur make to in the course of they delightful rural drive and they sweet evening walks , it may be suppose that we hero would not forget a story so interesting to himself and so likely to be interesting to she , as that of the passion and cure of the poor little of 's . he own part in that drama he describe , to do he justice , with become modesty
modesty ; the moral which he wish to draw from the tale be one in accordance with he usual satirical mood , viz. , that woman get over they first love quite as easily as man do ( for the fair Blanche , in they intime conversation , do not cease to twit about he notorious failure in he own virgin attachment to the ) , and , number one be withdraw , transfer themselves to number two without much difficulty . and poor little Fanny be offer up in sacrifice as a instance to prove this theory . what grief she have endure and surmount , what bitter pang of hopeless attachment she have go through , what time it have take to heal those wound of the tender little bleed heart , do not know , or perhaps do not choose to know ; for he be at once modest and doubtful about he capability as a conqueror of heart , and averse to believe that he have execute any dangerous ravage on that particular one , though he own instance and argument tell against himself in this case ; for if , as he say , be by this time in love with she surgical adorer , who have neither good look , nor good manners , nor wit , nor anything but ardour and fidelity to recommend he , must she not in she first sickness of the love - complaint have have a serious attack , and suffer keenly for a man who have certainly a number of the showy quality which want ? " you wick odious creature , " miss Blanche say , " I believe that you be enrage with Fanny for be so impudent as to forget you , and that you be actually jealous of . " perhaps be right , as the blush which come in spite of himself and tingle upon 's cheek ( one of those blow with which a man 's vanity be constantly slapp he face ) prove to that he be angry to think he have be supersed by such a rival . by such a fellow as that ! without any conceivable good quality ! of ! ( although this remark do not apply to such a smart fellow as you ) if have not make that provision for each sex in the credulity of the other , which see good quality where none exist , good look in donkey ' ears , win in they numskull , and music in they bray , there would not have be near so much marry and give in marriage as now obtain , and as be necessary for the due propagation and continuance of the noble race to which we belong . " jealous or not , " say , " and , Blanche , I do not say no , I should have like to have come to a better end than that . I do not like histories that end in that cynical way ; and when we arrive at the conclusion of the story of a pretty girl 's passion , to find such a figure as 's at the last page of the tale . be a life a compromise , my lady fair , and the end of the battle of love a ignoble surrender ? be the search for the Cupid which my poor little Psyco pursue in the darkness -- the god of she soul 's long -- the god of the blooming cheek and rainbow pinion , -- to result in smell of tobacco and gallypot ? I wish , though I do not see it in life , that people could be like and , or my and in the story - book and fashionable novel , and at once under the ceremony , and , as it be , at the parson 's benediction , become perfectly handsome and good and happy ever after . " " and do not you intend to be good and happy , pray , yoMonsieu le -- and be you very discontented with you lot -- and will you marriage be a compromise " --( ask the author of ' , ' with a charming moue ) -- " and be you Psyco a odious vulgar wretch ? you wick satirical creature , I can not abide you ! you take the heart of young thing , play with they , and fl they away with scorn . you ask for love and trample on it . you -- you make I cry , that you do , , and -- and do not -- and I will not be consol in that way -- and I think be quite right in leave such a heartless creature . " " again , I do not say no , " say , look very gloomily at , and not offer by any means to repeat the attempt at consolation , which have elicit that sweet monosyllable " do not " from the young lady . " I do not think I have much of what people call heart ; but I do not profess it . I make my venture when I be eighteen , and light my lamp and go in search of . and what be my discovery of love ?-- a vulgar dancing -woman ! I fail , as everybody do , almost everybody ; only it be luckier to fail before marriage than after . " " Merci du choix , , " say the Sylphide , make a curtsey . " look , my little Blanche , " say , take she hand , and with he voice of sad good - humour ; " at least I stoop to no flattery . " " quite the contrary , " say . and tell you no foolish lie , as vulgar man do . why should
should you and I , with we experience , ape romance and dissemble passion ? I do not believe to be peerless among the beautiful , nor the greatest poetess , nor the most surpassing musician , any more than I believe you to be the tallest woman in the whole world -- like the giantess whose picture we see as we ride through the fair yesterday . but if I do not set you up as a heroine , neither do I offer you you very humble servant as a hero . but I think you be -- well , there , I think you be very sufficiently good - look . " " , " Blanche say , with another curtsey . " I think you s charmingly . I be sure you be clever . I hope and believe that you be good - natured , and that you will be companionable . " " and so , provide I bring you a certain sum of money and a seat in parliament , you condescmend to fl to I you royal pocket - handkerchief , " say Blanche . " que d'honneur ! we use to call you Highness the of . what a honour to think that I be to be elevate to the throne , and to bring the seat in parliament as backsheesh to the sultan ! I be glad I be clever , and that I can play and s to you liking ; my song will amuse my lord 's leisure . " " and if thief be about the house , " say , grimly pursue the simile , " forty besett thiefe in the shape of lurking car and enemy in ambush and passion in arm , my will dance round I with a tambourine , and kill all my rogue and thieve with a smile . will not she ? " but look as if he do not believe that she would . " ah , Blanche , " he continue after a pause , " do not be angry ; do not be hurt at my truth - tell .-- do not you see that I always take you at you word ? you say you will be a slave and dance -- I say , dance . you say , ' I take you with what you bring :' I say , ' I take you with what you bring . ' to the necessary deceit and hypocrisy of we life , why add any that be useless and unnecessary ? if I offer myself to you because I think we have a fair chance of be happy together , and because by you help I may get for both of we a good place and a not undistinguished name , why ask I to feign rapture and counterfeit romance , in which neither of we believe ? do you want I to come woo in a 's dress from the masquerade warehouse , and to pay you compliment like ? do you want I to make you verse as in the day when we be -- when we be child ? I will if you like , and sell they to and afterwards . shall I feed my pretty princess with bonbon ? " " Mais j'adore les bonbon , moi , " say the little , with a queer piteous look . " I can buy a hatful at and be for a guinea . and it shall have its bonbon , its pooty little sugar-plum , that it shall , " say with a bitter smile . " Nay , my dear , nay , my dearest little , do not cry . dry the pretty eye , I can not bear that ; " and he proceed to offer that consolation which the circumstance require , and which the tear , the genuine tear of vexation , which now spring from the angry eye of the author of ' 's demand . the scornful and sarcastic tone of quite frightene and overcame the girl . " I -- I do not want you consolation . I -- I never be -- so -- speak to before -- by any of my --my -- by anybody " -- she sob out , with much simplicity . " anybody ! " shoute out , with a savage burst of laughter , and Blanche blush one of the most genuine blush which she cheek have ever exhibit , and she cry out , " o , vous etes un homme terrible ! " she feel bewildered , frightened , oppress , the worldly little flirt who have be play at love for the last dozen year of she life , and yet not displease at meet a master . " tell I , , " she say , after a pause in this strange love -mak . " why do give up he seat in parliament ? " " Au fait , why do he give it to I ? " ask , now blush in he turn . " you always mock I , sir , " she say . " if it be good to be in parliament , why do go out ? " " my uncle have talk he over . he always say that you be not sufficiently provide for . in the -- the family dispute , when you mamma pay he debt so liberally , it be stipulate , I suppose , that you -- that be , that I -- that be , upon my word , I do not know why he go out of parliament , " say , with rather a force laugh . " you see , Blanche , that you and I be two good little child , and that this marriage have be arrange for we by we mamma and uncle , and
and that we must be obedient , like a good little boy and girl . " so , when go to , he send Blanco a box of bonbon , each sugar - plum of which be wrap up in ready - make french verse , of the most tender kind ; and , besides , despatch to she some poem of he own manufacture , quite as artless and authentic ; and it be no wonder that he do not tell what he conversation with have be , of so delicate a sentiment be they , and of a nature so necessarily private . and if , like many a worse and better man , , the widow 's son , be meditat a apostasy , and go to sell himself to -- we all know whom , -- at least the renegade do not pretend to be a believer in the creed to which he be ready to swear . and if every woman and man in this kingdom , who have sell she or himself for money or position , as be about to do , would but purchase a copy of he memoir , what ton of volume Messr . and would sell ! in which begin he Canvass Melancholy as the great house at have be in the day before he marriage , when its bankrupt proprietor be a refugee in foreign lands , it be not much more cheerful now when come to inhabit it . the greater part of the mansion be shut up , and the Baronet only occupy a few of the room on the ground floor , where he housekeeper and she assistant from the lodge - gate wait upon the luckless gentleman in he force retreat , and cook a part of the game which he spend the dreary morning in shooting . Lightfoot , he man , have pass over to my 's service ; and , as be inform in a letter from , who perform the ceremony , have execute he prudent intention of marry , my 's woman , who , in she mature year , be stricken with the charms of the youth , and endow he with she savings and she mature person . to be landlord and landlady of the be the ambition of both of they ; and it be agree that they be to remain in 's service until quarter - day arrive , when they be to take possession of they hotel . graciously promise that he would give he election dinner there , when the Baronet should vacate he seat in the young man 's favour ; and , as it have be agree by he uncle , to whom seem to be able to refuse nothing , yoArthu come down in on a visit to , the owner of which be very glad to have a companion who would relieve he loneliness , and perhaps would lend he a little ready money . furnish he host with these desirable supplies a couple of day after he have make he appearance at : and no sooner be these small fund in 's pocket , than the latter found he have business at and at the neighbouring watering - place , of which ------ shire boast many , and go off to see to he affair , which be transact , as might be suppose , at the county race -ground and billiard - room . yoArthu could live alone well enough , have many mental resource and amusement which do not require other person ' company : he could walk with the gamekeeper of a morning , and for the evening there be a plenty of book and occupation for a literary genius like , who require but a cigar and a sheet of paper or two to make the night pass away pleasantly . in truth , in two or three day he have find the society of Claver perfectly intolerable ; and it be with a mischievous eagerness and satisfaction that he offer Claver the little pecuniary aid which the latter accord to he custom solicite , and supply he with the means of take flight from he own house . besides , we ingenious friend have to ingratiate himself with the townspeople of , and with the voter of the borough which he hope to represent ; and he set himself to this task with only the more eagerness , remember how unpopular he have before be in , and determined to vanquish the odium which he have inspire amongst the simple people there . he sense of humour make he delight in this task . naturally rather reserve and silent in public , he become on a sudden as frank , easy , and jovial as . he laugh with everybody who would exchange a laugh with he , shook hand right and leave , with what may be certainly call a dexterous cordiality ; make he appearance at the market - day and the farmer ' ordinary ; and , in fine , act like a consummate hypocrite , and as gentleman of the highest birth and most spotless integrity act when they wish to make themselves agreeable to they constituent , and have some end to gain of the country - folk . how be it that we allow ourselves not to be deceive , but to be ingratiate so readily by a glib tongue , a ready laugh , and a frank manner ? we know , for the most part , that it be false coin , and we take it we know that it be flattery , which it cost nothing to distribute to everybody , and we have rather have it than be without it . friend go about at , laboriously simple and adroitly pleased , and quite a different be from the scornful and rather sulky young
young dandy whom the inhabitant remember ten year ago . the Rectory be shut up . be gone , with he gout and he family , to , -- a event which deplor very much in a letter to the Doctor , in which , in a few kind and simple word , he express he regret at not see he old friend , whose advice he want and whose aid he might require some day : but consol himself for the Doctor 's absence by make acquaintance with , the opposition preacher , and with the two partner of the cloth - factory at , and with the independent preacher there , all of whom he meet at , which the have set up in accordance with the advanced spirit of the age , and perhaps in opposition to the aristocratic old reading - room , into which the have once scarcely get a admission , and where no tradesman be allow a entrance . he propitiate the younger partner of the cloth - factory , by ask he to dine in a friendly way at the ; he compliment the Honourable Mr . Simcoe with hare and partridge from the same quarter , and a request to read she husband 's last sermon ; and be a little unwell one day , the rascal take advantage of the circumstance to show he tongue to , who send he medicine and call the next morning . how delighte old Pendennis would have be with he pupil ! himself be amuse with the sport in which he be engage , and he success inspire he with a wicked good -humour . and yet , as he walk out of Clavering of a night , after " presid " at a meeting of the , or work through a evening with , who , with she husband , be aw by the young 's reputation , and have heard of he social success ; as he pass over the old familiar bridge of the rushing , and hear that well - remember sound of water beneath , and see he own cottage of Fairoak among the tree , they darkling outline clear against the starlit sky , different thought no doubt come to the young man 's mind , and awaken pang of grief and shame there . there still use to be a light in the window of the room which he remember so well , and in which the who love he have pass so many hour of care and yearning and prayer . he turn away he gaze from the faint light which seem to pursue he with its wan reproachful gaze , as though it be he mother 's spirit watch and warning . how clear the night be ! how kee the stars shone ! how ceaseless the rush of the flow water ! the old home tree whisper , and wave gently they dark head and branch over the cottage roof . , in the faint starlight glimmer , be the terrace where , as a boy , he walk of summer evening , ardent and trustful , unspotted , untried , ignorant of doubt or passion ; shelter as yet from the world 's contamination in the pure and anxious bosom of love . the clock of the near town toll midnight , with a clang , disturb we wanderer 's reverie , and send he onwards towards he night 's resting - place , through the lodge into Clavering avenue , and under the dark arcade of the rustling lime . when he see the cottage the next time , it be smile in sunset ; those bedroom window be open where the light be burn the night before ; and , , of the ( whose mother , old , live in ) , receive he landlord 's visit with great cordiality : show he over the grounds and the new pond he have make in the back - garden from the stable ; talk to he confidentially about the roof and chimney , and Pendennis to name a day when he will do himself and the pleasure to , etc . , who have be a fortnight in the country , excuse himself for not have call sooner upon the by frankly own that he have not the heart to do it . " I understand you , sir , " the captain say ; and , who have slipp away at the ring of the bell ( how odd it seem to Pen to ring the bell ! ) , come down in she best gown , surround by she child . the young one clamb about : the boy jump into a arm -chair . it be father 's arm - chair ; and remember the day when he would as soon have think of mount the king 's throne as of seate himself in that arm -chair . he ask if -- she be the very image of she mamma -- if she can play ? he should like to hear a tune on that piano . she play . he hear the note of the old piano once more , enfeeble by age , but he do not listen to the player . he be listen to singe as in the day of they youth , and see he mother bend and beat time over the shoulder of the girl . the dinner at Fairoaks give in Pen's honour by he tenant , and at which old , , and the clergyman and he lady from , be present , be very stupid and melancholy for , until the waiter from ( who aide the captain 's stable - boy and 's butler ) whom remember as a street boy , and who be now indeed barber in that place , drop a plate over Pen's shoulder ,
, on which ( who also employ he ) remark , " I suppose , , you hand be slippery with bear 's - grease . he be always drop the crockery about , that be -- haw , haw ! " on which blush , and look so disconcerted , that burst out laugh ; and good - humour and hilarity be the order of the evening . for the second course , there be a hare and partridge top and bottom , and when after the withdrawal of the servants say to the of , " I think , , you should have ask to cut the hare , " the joke be take instantly by the clergyman , who be follow in the course of a few minute by and Glanders , and by , who arrive rather late , but with a immense guffaw . * * * * * * while be engage in the country in the above scheme , it happen that the lady of he choice , if not of he affections , come up to from the villa bound upon shopping expedition or important business , and in company of old , she mother 's maid , who have liv and quarrell with Blanche many time since she be a infant , and who now be about to quit 's service for the hymeneal state , be anxious like a good soul to bestow some token of respectful kindness upon she old and young mistress before she quit they altogether , to take she post as the wife of , and landlady of the Clavering Arms . the honest woman take the benefit of 's taste to make the purchase which she intend to offer she ladyship ; and , request the fair Blanche to choose something for herself that should be to she like , and remind she of she old nurse who have attend she through many a wakeful night , and eventful teethe , and childish fever , and who love she like a child of she own a'most . these purchase be make , and as the nurse insist on buy a immense for , the young lady suggest that should purchase a large 's for she mamma . each of the two woman might certainly profit by the present make to she . then invest money in some bargain in linen - drapery , which might be useful at the Clavering Arms , and buy a red and yellow neck - handkerchief , which Blanche could see at once be intend for . younger than herself by at least five - and - twenty year , regard that youth with a fondness at once parental and conjugal , and love to lavish ornament on he person , which already glitter with pins , ring , shirt - stud , and chain and seal , purchase at the good creature 's expense . it be in the that make she purchase , aid by , who like the fun very well ; and when the old lady have buy everything that she desire , and be leave the shop , Blanche , with a smiling face , and a sweet bow to one of the shopman , say , " pray , sir , will you have the kindness to show we the way to 's ? " Shepherd 's be but a few score of yard off , be close by , the elegant young shopman point out the turning which the young lady be to take , and she and she companion walk off together . " Shepherd 's ! what can you want in 's , ? " inquire . " live there . do you want to go and see the captain ? " " I should like to see the very well . I like the ; but it be not he I want . I want to see a dear little good girl , who be very kind to -- to when he be so ill last year , and save he life almost ; and I want to thank she and ask she if she would like anything . I look out several of my dress on purpose this morning , ! " and she look at as if she have a right to admiration , and have perform a act of remarkable virtue . Blanche , indeed , be very fond of sugar- plum ; she would have feed the poor upon they , when she have have enough , and give a country girl a ball - dress , when she have wear it and be tired of it . " pretty girl -- pretty young woman ! " mumble . " I know I want no pretty young woman to come about , " and in imagination she people the Clavering arm with a harem of the most hideous chambermaid and barmaid . Blanche , with pink and blue , and feather , and flower , and trinket ( that wondrous invention , a chatelaine , be not extant yet , or she would have have one , we may be sure ) , and a shot - silk dress , and a wonderful mantle , and a charming parasol , present a vision of elegance and beauty such as bewilder the eye of , who be scrubb the lodge - floor of 's and cause - and - to look with delight . Blanco look on they with a smile of ineffable sweetness and protection ; like go to see ; like visit the poor in the famine ; like the of alight from she carriage - and - four at a pauper - tenant 's door , and take from . the packet of salt for the invalid 's benefit , carry it with she own imperial hand into the sick - room -- Blanche feel
feel a queen step down from she throne to visit a subject , and enjoy all the bland consciousness of do a good action . " my good woman ! I want to see -- ; be she here ? " have a sudden suspicion , from the splendour of 's appearance , that it must be a play - actor , or something worse . " what do you want with , pray ? " she ask . " I be 's daughter -- you have hear of ? and I wish very much indeed to see . " " pray step in , - , where 's Fanny ? " - say have go into no. 3 staircase , on which say she be probably in 's room , and bade the child go and see if she be there . " in 's room ! oh , let we go to 's room , " cry out . " I know he very well . you dearest little girl , show we the way to captain strong ! " cry out , for the floor reek with the recent scrubbing , and the goddess do not like the smell of brown - soap . and as they pass up the stair , a gentleman by the name of , who happen to be swagger about the court , and give a very knowing look with he " oi " under 's bonnet , remark to himself , " that be a devilish foine gyurll , bedad , goan up to and : they be always have foine gyurll up they stair . " " Hallo -- hwhat be that ? " he presently say , look up at the window : from which some piercing shriek issue . at the sound of the voice of a distressed female the intrepid cos rush up the stair as fast as he old leg would carry he , be nearly overthrown by 's servant , who be descende the stair . find the outer door of 's chamber open , and begin to thunder at the knocker . after many and fierce knock , the inner door be partially unclosed , and 's head appear . " it be oi , I boy . Hwhat be that noise , ? " ask . " go to the ----! " be the only answer , and the door be shut on 's venerable red nose : and he go downstairs mutter threat at the indignity offer to he , and vow that he would have satisfaction . in the meanwhile the reader , more lucky than , will have the privilege of be make acquaint with the secret which be withheld from that officer . it have be say of how generous a disposition not be , and when he be well supply with fund how liberally he spend they . of a hospitable turn , he have no greater pleasure than drinking in company with other people ; so that there be no man more welcome at and than the of the of . now it chance that on the day when Blanche and ascend the staircase to 's room in 's , the have invite of the ------ , and she mother , , to a little party down the river , and it have be agree that they be to meet at chambers , and thence walk down to a port in the neighbour to take water . so that when and come to the door , where , 's servant , be stand , the domestic say , " walk in , lady , " with the utmost affability , and lead they into the room , which be arrange as if they have be expect there . indeed , two bouquet of flower , buy at that morning , and instance of the tender gallantry of , be await he guest upon the table . Blanche smelt at the bouquet , and put she pretty little dainty nose into it , and trip about the room , and look behind the curtain , and at the book and print , and at the plan of Clavering estate hang up on the wall ; and have ask the servant for , and have almost forgotten he existence and the errand about which she have come , namely , to visit ; so pleased be she with the new adventure , and the odd , strange , delightful , droll little idea of be in a bachelor 's chamber in a queer old place in the city ! meanwhile , with a pair of ample varnish boot , have disappear into he master 's room . Blanche have hardly the leisure to remark how big the boot were , and how unlike 's . " the woman 's come , " say , help he master to the boot . " do you ask th'ey if they would take a glass of anything ? " ask not . come out -- " he say , will you take anything to drink ? " the domestic ask of they ; at which Blanche , amuse with the artless question , break out into a pretty little laugh , and ask of , " shall we take anything to drink ? " " well , you may take it or lave it , " say , who think he offer slighte , and do not like the contemptuous manners of the new -comer , and so leave they . " will we take anything to drink ? " Blanche ask again : and again begin to laugh . " , " bawl out a voice from the chamber within :-- a voice that make start . do not answer : he song be hear from afar off , from the kitchen , he upper room , where be singe at he
he work . " Grady , my coat ! " again roar the voice from withing . " why , that be not 's , " say the Sylphide , still half laugh . " Grady my coat ! -- , who be my coat ? we ought to go away . " Bonner still look quite puzzle at the sound of the voice which she have hear . the bedroom door here open and the individual who have call out " , my coat , " appear without the garment in question . he nod to the woman , and walk across the room . " I beg you pardon , lady . Grady , bring my coat down , sir ! well , my dear , it be a fine day , and we will have a jolly lark at ---- " he say no more ; for here , who have be look at he with scared eye , suddenly shriek out , " Amory ! Amory ! " and fall back screaming and faint in she chair . the man , so apostrophise , look at the woman a instant , and , rush up to , seize she and kiss she . " yes , , " he say , " by -- it be I . know I . what a fine gal we have grow ! but it be a secret , mind . I be dead , though I be you father . you poor mother do not know it . what a pretty gal we have grow ! kiss I -- kiss I close , my ? d --- it , I love you : I be you old father . " or Blanche look quite bewildered , and begin to scream too -- once , twice , thrice ; and it be she piercing shriek which hear as he walk the court below . at the sound of these shriek the perplex parent clasp he hand ( he wristband be open , and on one brawny arm you could see letter tattoo in blue ) , and , rush to he apartment , come back with a eau - de - Cologne bottle from he grand silver dressing - case , with the fragrant contents of which he begin liberally to and . the scream of these woman bring the other occupant of the chamber into the room : from he kitchen , and strong from he apartment in the upper story . the latter at once see from the aspect of the two woman what have occur . " Grady , go and wait in the court , " he say , " and if anybody come -- you understand I . " " be it the play -actress and she mother ? " say . " yes -- confound you -- say that there be nobody in chamber , and the party 's off for to - day . " " shall I say that , sir ? and after I buy they bokay ? " ask of he master . " yes , " say , with a stamp of he foot ; and Strong go to the door , too , reach it just in time to prevent the entrance of , who have mount the stair . the lady from the theatre do not have they treat to , nor do Blanco pay she visit to on that day . and , who take occasion majestically to inquire of what the mischief be , and who be cry ?--had for answer that ' tbe a woman , another of they , and that they be , in 's opinion , the cause of ' most all the mischief in the world . in which begin to doubt about he , in he own county , be thus carry on he selfish plan and parliamentary scheme , news come to he that have arrive at , and have bring with she we friend . at the announcement that he sister be near he , feel rather guilty . he wish be to stand higher in she esteem , perhaps ; than in that of any other person in the world . she be he mother 's legacy to he . he be to be she patron and protector in some sort . how would she brave the news which he have to tell she ; and how should he explain the plan which he be meditat ? he feel as if neither he nor Blanche could bear 's dazzling glance of calm scrutiny , and as if he would not dare to disclose he worldly hope and ambitions to that spotless judge . at she arrival at , he write a letter thither which contain a great number of fine phrasis and protest of affection , and a great deal of easy satire and raillery ; in the midst of all which could not help feel that he be in panic , and that he be act like a rogue and hypocrite . how be it that a simple country girl should be the object of fear and trembl to such a accomplished gentleman as ? he worldly tactic and diplomacy , he satire and knowledge of the world , could not bear the test of she purity , he feel somehow . and he have to own to himself that he affair be in such a position , that he could not tell the truth to that honest soul . as he ride from Clavering to he feel as guilty as a schoolboy who do not know he lesson and be about to face the awful master . for be not truth the master always , and do she not have the power and hold the book ? under the charge of she kind , though somewhat wayward and absolute patroness , , have see somewhat
somewhat of the world in the last year , have gather some accomplishment , and profit by the lesson of society . many a girl who have be accustom to that too great tenderness in which 's early life have be pass , would have be unfit for the change existence which she now have to lead . worship she two child , and think , as home - breed woman will , that all the world be make for they , or to be consider after they . she tend with a watchfulness of affection which never leave she . if she have a headache , the widow be as alarmed as if there have never be a aching head before in the world . she sleep and wake , read and move under she mother 's fond superintendence , which be now withdraw from she , along with the tender creature whose anxious heart would beat no more . and painful moments of grief and depression no doubt have , when she stand in the great careless world alone . nobody heede she grief or she solitude . she be not quite the equal , in social rank , of the lady whose companion she be , or of the friend and relatives of the imperious , but kind old dowager . some very likely bear she no goodwill -- some , perhaps , slighte she : it might have be that servants be occasionally rude ; they mistress certainly be often . not seldom find herself in family meeting , the confidence and familiarity of which she feel be interrupt by she intrusion ; and she sensitiveness of course be wounded at the idea that she should give or feel this annoyance . how many governess be there in the world , think cheerful ,-- how many lady , whose necessity make they slave and companion by profession ! what bad temper and coarse unkindness have not these to encounter ? how infinitely better my lot be with these really kind and affectionate people than that of thousand of unprotected girl ! it be with this cordial spirit that we young lady adapt herself to she new position ; and go in advance of she fortune with a trustful smile . do you ever know a person who meet in that way , whom the goddess do not regard kindly ? be not even bad people win by a constant cheerfulness and a pure and affectionate heart ? when the babe in the wood , in the ballad , look up fondly and trustfully at those notorious rogue whom they uncle have set to make away with the little folk , we all know how one of the rascal relent , and make away with the other -- not have the heart to be unkind to so much innocence and beauty . oh , happy they who have that virgin loving trust and sweet smile confidence in the world , and fear no evil because they think none ! be one of these fortunate person ; and besides the genle widow 's little cross , which , as we have see , give she , have such a sparkling and brilliant kohinoor in she bosom , as be even more precious than that famous jewel ; for it not only fetch a price , and be retain , by its owner in another world where diamonds be state to be of no value , but here , too , be of inestimable worth to its possessor ; be a talisman against evil , and lighten up the darkness of life , like 's famous stone . so that before have be a year in 's house , there be not a single person in it whose love she have not win by the use of this talisman . from the old lady to the lowest dependent of she bounty , have secure the goodwill and kindness of everybody . with a mistress of such a temper , my 's woman ( who have endure she mistress for forty year , and have be claw and scold and jibe every day and night in that space of time ) could not be expect to have a good temper of she own ; and be at first angry against , as she have be against she Ladyship 's fifteen preceding companion . but when be ill at , this old woman nurse she in spite of she mistress , who be afraid of catch the fever , and absolutely fight for she medicine with from , now advanc to be 's own maid . as she be recover , the chef want to kill she by the number of delicacies which he dress for she , and weep when she eat she first slice of chicken . the swiss major - domo of the house celebrate 's praise in almost every european language , which he speak with indifferent incorrectness ; the coachman be happy to drive she out ; the page cry when he hear she be ill ; and and ( those two footman , so large , so calm ordinarily , and so difficult to move ) break out into extraordinary hilarity at the news of she convalescence , and intoxicate the page at a wine - shop , to fete 's recovery . even ( we former acquaintance have marry by this time ) , , who have have a considerable dislike to for some time , be so enthusiastic as to say that she think be a very agreeable person , and that grandmamma have find a great trouvaille in she . all this goodwill and kindness have acquire , not by any arts , not by any flattery , but by the simple force of good - nature , and by the bless gift of pleasing and be pleased . on the one or
or two occasion when he have see , the old lady , who do not admire he , have be very pitiless and abrupt with we young friend , and perhaps expect when he come to to find install in she house in the quality of humble companion , and treat no better than himself . when she hear of he arrival she come run downstair , and I be not sure that she do not embrace he in the presence of and : not that those gentleman ever tell : if the fractus orbis have come to a smash , if , instead of kissing , have take she scissors and snip off he head -- and would have look on impavidly , without allow a grain of powder to be disturb by the calamity . have so much improve in health and look that could not but admire she . the frank and kind eye which meet he , beam with good - health ; the cheek which he kiss blush with beauty . as he look at she , artless and graceful , pure and candid , he think he have never see she so beautiful . why should he remark she beauty now so much , and remark too to himself that he have not remark it sooner ? he take she fair trustful hand and kiss it fondly : he look in she bright clear eye , and read in they that kindl welcome which he be always sure to find there . he be affect and touch by the tender tone and the pure sparkling glance ; they innocence smote he somehow and move he . " how good you be to I , Laura-- sister ! " say ; " I do not deserve that you should -- that you should be so kind to I . " " leave you to I , " she say , stoop down and brush he forehead with she lip hastily . " you know you be to come to I when you be in trouble , or to tell I when you be very happy : that be we compact , Arthur , last year , before we part . be you very happy now , or be you in trouble -- which be it ? " and she look at he with a arch glance of kindness . " do you like go into parliament ! do you intend to distinguish yourself there ? how I shall tremble for you first speech ! " " do you know about the parliament plan , then ? " ask . " know ?-- all the world know ! I have hear it talk about many time . 's doctor talk about it to - day . I daresay it will be in the paper to - morrow . it be all over the county that , of , be go to retire , in behalf of , of Fairoak ; and that the young and beautiful be ---- " " what ! that too ? " ask . " that , too , dear . tout se sait , as somebody would say , whom I intend to be very fond of ; and who I be sure be very clever and pretty . I have have a letter from . the kindest of letter . she speak so warmly of you , ! I hope -- I know she feel what she write .-- when be it to be , ? why do you not tell I ? I may come and live with you then , may not I ? " " my home be yours , dear , and everything I have , " say . " if I do not tell you , it be because -- because -- I do not know : nothing be decide as yet . no word have pass between we . but you think Blanche could be happy with I -- do not you ? not a romantic fondness , you know . I have no heart , I think ; I have tell she so : only a sober - sided attachment : -- and want my wife on one side of the fire and my sister on the other ,-- parliament in the session and Fairoak in the holiday , and my never to leave I until somebody who have a right come to take she away . " somebody who have a right -- somebody with a right ! why do , as he look at the girl and slowly utter the word , begin to feel angry and jealous of the invisible somebody with the right to take she away ? anxious , but a minute ago , how she would take the news regard he probable arrangement with , be hurt somehow that she receive the intelligence so easily , and take he happiness for grant . " until somebody come , " say , with a laugh , " I will stay at home and be aunt , and take care of the child when Blanche be in the world . I have arrange it all . I be a excellent housekeeper . do you know I have be to market at with , and have take some lesson from ? and I have have some lesson in in singing too , with the money which you send I , you kind boy : and I can s much better now : and I have learn to dance , though not so well as ; and when you become a minister of state , Blanche shall present I : " and with this , and with a provoke good - humour , she perform for he the last parisian curtsey . come in whilst this curtsey be be perform , and give to one finger to shake ; which he take
take , and over which he bow as well as he could , which , in truth , be very clumsily . " so you be go to be married , sir , " say the old lady . " scold he , , for not tell we , " say , go away : which , in truth , the old lady begin instantly to do . " so you be go to marry , and to go into parliament in place of that good - for - nothing . I want he to give my grandson he seat -- why do he not give my grandson he seat ? I hope you be to have a great deal of money with . I would not take she without a great deal . " " be tired of parliament , " say , wince , " and -- and I rather wish to attempt that career . the rest of the story be at least premature . " " I wonder , when you have at home , you could take up with such a affect little creature as that , " the old lady continue . " I be very sorry do not please you ladyship , " say , smile . " you mean -- that it be no affair of mine , and that I be not go to marry she . well , I be not , and I be very glad I be not -- a little odious thing -- when I think that a man could prefer she to my , I 've no patience with he , and so I tell you , . " " I be very glad you see with such favourable eye , " say . " you be very glad , and you be very sorry . what do it matter , sir , whether you be very glad or very sorry ? a young man who prefer to have no business to be sorry or glad . a young man who take up with such a crooke lump of affectation as that little Amory , -- for she be crook , I tell you she be , -- after see my , have no right to hold up he head again . where be you friend ? the tall young man , I mean ,-- , be not he name ? why do he not come down , and marry ? what do the young man mean by not marry such a girl as that ? they all marry for money now . you be all selfish and coward . we run away with each other , and make foolish match in my time . I have no patience with the young man ! when I be at in the winter , I ask all the three attach at the why they do not fall in love with ? they laugh -- they say they want money . you be all selfish -- you be all coward . " " I hope before you offer to the attach , " say , with some heat , " you do she the favour to consult she ? " " have only a little money . must marry soon . somebody must make a match for she , sir ; and a girl can not offer herself , " say the old dowager , with great state . " , my dear , I have be tell you cousin that all the young man be selfish ; and that there be not a pennyworth of romance leave among they . he be as bad as the rest . " " have you be ask why he will not marry I ? " say , with a kindling smile , come back and take she cousin 's hand . ( she have be away , perhaps , to hide some trace of emotion , which she do not wish other to see . ) " he be go to marry somebody else ; and I intend to be very fond of she , and to go and live with they , provide he then do not ask every bachelor who come to he house , why he do not marry I ? " the terrors of Pen's conscience be thus appease , and he examination before over without any reproach on the part of the latter , begin to find that he duty and inclination lead he constantly to , where inform he that a place be always reserve for he at she table . " and I recommend you to come often , " the old lady say , " for be a excellent cook , and to be with and I will do you manners good . it be easy to see that you be always think about yourself . do not blush and stammer -- almost all young man be always think about themselves . my son and grandson always be until I cure they . come here , and let we teach you to behave properly ; you will not have to carve , that be do at the side - table . Hecker will give you as much wine as be good for you ; and on day when you be very good and amuse you shall have some champagne . , mind what I say . be 's brother ; and you will make he comfortable , and see that he do not have too much wine , or disturb I whilst I be take my nap after dinner . you be selfish : I intend to cure you of be selfish . you will dine here when you have no other engagement ; and if it rain you have better put up at the hotel . " as long as the good lady could order everybody round about she , she be not
not hard to please ; and all the slave and subject of she little dowager court tremble before she , but love she . she do not receive a very numerous or brilliant society . the doctor , of course , be admit as a constant and faithful visitor ; the vicar and he curate ; and on public day the vicar 's wife and daughter , and some of the season visitor at , be receive at the old lady 's entertainment : but generally the company be a small one , and drank he wine by himself , when retire to take she doze , and to be play and sung to sleep by after dinner . " if my music can give she a nap , " say the good - natured girl , " ought I not to be very glad that it can do so much good ? sleep very little of night : and I use to read to she until I fall ill at , since when she will not hear of my sitting up . " " why do you not write to I when you be ill ? " ask , with a blush . " what good could you do I ? I have to nurse I and the doctor every day . you be too busy to write to woman or to think about they . you have you book and you newspaper , and you politics and you railroad to occupy you . I write when I be well . " and look at she , and blush again , as he remember that , during all the time of she illness , he have never write to she and have scarcely think about she . in consequence of he relationship , be free to walk and ride with he cousin constantly , and in the course of those walk and ride , could appreciate the sweet frankness of she disposition , and the truth , simplicity , and kindliness of she fair and spotless heart . in they mother 's lifetime , she have never speak so openly or so cordially as now . the desire of poor to make a union between she two child , have cause a reserve on 's part towards ; for which , under the altered circumstance of 's life , there be now no necessity . he be engage to another woman ; and become he sister at once , -- hide , or banish from herself , any doubts which she might have as to he choice ; strive to look cheerfully forward , and hope for he prosperity ; promise herself to do all that affection might do to make she mother 's darling happy . they talk be often about the departed mother . and it be from a thousand story which tell he that be make aware how constant and absorb that silent maternal devotion have be ; which have accompany he present and absent through life , and have only end with the fond widow 's last breath . one day the people in see a lad in charge of a couple of horse at the churchyard - gate : and it be tell over the place that and have visit 's grave together . since have come down into the country , he have be there once or twice : but the sight of the sacred stone have bring no consolation to he . a guilty man do a guilty deed : a mere speculator , content to lay down he faith and honour for a fortune and a worldly career ; and own that he life be but a contemptible surrender -- what right have he in the holy place ? what boot it to he in the world he live in , that other be no better than himself ? and ride by the gate of Fairoak ; and he shook hand with he tenant 's child , play on the lawn and the terrace -- look steadily at the cottage wall , at the creeper on the porch and the magnolia grow up to she window . " ride by to - day , " one of the boy tell he mother , " with a lady , and he stop and talk to we , and he ask for a bit of honeysuckle off the porch , and give it the lady . I could not see if she be pretty ; she have she veil down . she be ride one of 's horse , out of . " as they ride over the down between home and , do not speak much , though they ride very close together . he be think what a mockery life be , and how man refuse happiness when they may have it ; or , have it , kick it down ; or barter it , with they eye open , for a little worthless money or beggarly honour . and then the thought come , what do it matter for the little space ? the live of the best and purest of we be consume in a vain desire , and end in a disappointment : as the dear soul 's who sleep in she grave yonder . she have she selfish ambition , as much as have ; and die , baulk of she life 's long . the stone cover over we hope and we memory . we place know we not . " other people 's child be play on the grass , " he break out , in a hard voice , " where you and I use to play , . and you see how the magnolia we plant have grow up since we time . I have be round to one or two of the cottage where my mother use to visit . it be
be scarcely more than a year that she be gone , and the people whom she use to benefit care no more for she death than for 's . we be all selfish : the world be selfish : there be but a few exceptions , like you , my dear , to shine like good deed in a naughty world , and make the blackness more dismal . " " I wish you would not speak in that way , , " say , look down and bend she head to the honeysuckle on she breast . " when you tell the little boy to give I this , you be not selfish . " " a pretty sacrifice i make to get it for you ! " say the sneerer . " but you heart be kind and full of love when you do so . one can not ask for more than love and kindness ; and if you think humbly of yourself , the love and kindness be -- diminish -- be they ? I often think we dearest mother spoil you at home , by worship you ; and that if you be -- I hate the word -- what you say , she too great fondness help to make you so . and as for the world , when man go out into it , I suppose they can not be otherwise than selfish . you have to fight for yourself , and to get on for yourself , and to make a name for yourself . and you uncle both encourage you in this ambition . if it be a vain thing , why pursue it ? I suppose such a clever man as you intend to do a great deal of good to the country , by go into parliament , or you would not wish to be there . what be you go to do when you be in the house of Commons ? " " women do not understand about politics , my dear , " say sneer at himself as he speak . " but why do not you make we understand ? I could never tell about why he should like to be there so much . he be not a clever man ---- " " he certainly be not a genius , , " say . " say that he attend Committees all day ; that then again he be at the house all night ; that he always vote as he be tell ; that he never speak ; that he will never get on beyond a subordinate place ; and as he grandmother tell he , he be chok with red -tape . be you go to follow the same career ; ? what be there in it so brilliant that you should be so eager for it ? I would rather that you should stop at home , and write book -- good book , kind book , with gentle kind thought , such as you have , dear Arthur , and such as might do people good to read . and if you do not win fame , what then ? you own it be vanity , and you can live very happily without it . I must not pretend to advise ; but I take you at you own word about the world ; and as you own it be wick , and that it tire you , ask you why you do not leave it ? " " and what would you have I do ? " ask . " I would have you bring you wife to Fairoak to live there , and study , and do good round about you . I would like to see you own child play on the lawn , , and that we might pray in we mother 's church again once more , dear brother . if the world be a temptation , be we not tell to pray that we may not be lead into it ? " " do you think Blanche would make a good wife for a petty country gentleman ? do you think I should become the character very well , ? " ask . " remember temptation walk about the hedgerow as well as the city street : and idleness be the greatest tempter of all . " " what do -- do say ? " say , as a blush mount up to she cheek , and of which see the fervour , though 's veil fell over she face to hide it . ride on by 's side silently for a while . 's name so mention bring back the past to he , and the thought which he have once have regard and . why should the recurrence of the thought agitate he , now that he know the union be impossible ? why should he be curious to know if , during the month of they intimacy , have feel a regard for ? from that day until the present time have never allude to he story , and remember now that since then have scarcely ever mention 's name . at last he cane close to she . " tell I something , , " he say . she put back she veil and look at he . " what be it , ? " she ask -- though from the tremor of she voice she guess very well . " tell I -- but for 's misfortune -- I never know he speak of it before or since that day -- would you -- would you have give he -- what you refuse I ? " " yes , , " she say , burst into tear , " he deserv you better than I do , " poor Arthur groan forth , with a indescribable pang at he heart . "
" I be but a selfish wretch , and be better , nobler , truer , than I be . bless he ! " " yes , , " say , reach out she hand to she cousin , and he put he arm round she , and for a moment she sob on he shoulder . the gentle girl have have she secret , and tell it . in the widow 's last journey from , when hasten with she mother to 's sick - bed , have make a different confession ; and it be only when tell he own story , and describe the hopeless condition of he life , that she discover how much she feeling have change , and with what tender sympathy , with what great respect , delight , and admiration she have grow to regard she cousin 's friend . until she know that some plan she might have dream of be impossible , and that , read in she heart , perhaps , have tell he melancholy story to warn she , she have not ask herself whether it be possible that she affections could change ; and have be shock and sear by the discovery of the truth . how should she have tell it to , and confess she shame ? poor feel guilty before she friend , with the secret which she da not confide to she ; feel as if she have be ungrateful for 's love and regard ; feel as if she have be wickedly faithless to in withdrawing that love from he which he do not even care to accept ; humble even and repentant before , lest she should have encourage he by undue sympathy , or show the preference which she begin to feel . the catastrophe which break up 's home , and the grief and anguish which she feel for she mother 's death , give she little leisure for thought more selfish ; and by the time she rally from that grief the minor one be also almost cure . it be but for a moment that she have indulge a hope about . she admiration and respect for he remain as strong as ever . but the tender feel with which she know she have regard he , be school into such calmness , that it may be say to have be dead and pass away . the pang which it leave behind be one of humility and remorse . " oh , how wicked and proud I be about , " she think , " how self - confident and unforgiving ! I never forgave from my heart this poor girl , who be fond of he , or he for encourage she love ; and I have be more guilty than she , poor , little , artless creature ! I , professe to love one man , could listen to another only too eagerly ; and would not pardon the change of feeling in , whilst I myself be change and unfaithful : " and so humiliat herself , and acknowledge she weakness , the poor girl seek for strength and refuge in the manner in which she have be accustom to look for they . she have do no wrong : but there be some folk who suffer for a fault ever so trifling as much as other whose stout conscience can walk under crime of almost any weight ; and poor choose to fancy that she have act in this delicate juncture of she life as a very great criminal . she determine that she have do a great injury by withdrawing that love which , privately in she mother 's hearing , she have bestow upon he ; that she have be ungrateful to she dead benefactress by ever allow herself to think of another or of violat she promise ; and that , consider she own enormous crime , she ought to be very gentle in judge those of other , whose temptation be much greater , very likely , and whose motive she could not understand . a year back would have be indignant at the idea that Arthur should marry Blanco : and she high spirit would have risen , as she think that from worldly motive he should stoop to one so unworthy . now when the news be brotch to she of such a chance ( the intelligence be give to she by old , whose speech be as direct and rapid as a slap on the face ) , the humbled girl wince a little at the blow , but bear it meekly , and with a desperate acquiescence . " he have a right to marry , he know a great deal more of the world than I do , " she argue with herself . " Blanche may not be so light - mind as she see , and who be I to be she judge ? I daresay it be very good that yoArthu should go into parliament and distinguish himself , and my duty be to do everything that lie in my power to aid he and Blanche , and to make he home happy . I daresay I shall live with they . if I be godmother to one of they child , I will leave she my three thousand pound ! " and forthwith she begin to think what she could give Blanche out of she small treasure , and how best to conciliate she affection . she write she forthwith a kind letter , in which , of course , no mention be make of the plan in contemplation , but in which recal old time , and speak she goodwill , and in reply to this she receive a eager answer from Blanche : in which not a word about marriage be say , to be sure , but
but be mention two or three time in the letter , and they be to be henceforth , dearest , and dearest Blanche , and love sister , and so forth . when and reach home , after 's confession ( Pen's noble acknowledgment of he own inferiority and generous expression of love for , cause the girl 's heart to throb , and render doubly keen those tear which she sob on he shoulder ) , a little slim letter be await bell in the hall , which she tremble rather guiltily as she unseal , and which blush as he recognise : for he see instantly that it be from . open it hastily , and cast she eye quickly over it , as keep he fix on she , blushing . " she date from , " say . " she have be with old , 's maid . Bonner be go to marry Lightfoot the butler . where do you think Blanche have be ? " she cry out eagerly . " to , to , to the ? " " to 's , to see ; but be not there , and Blanche be go to leave a present for she . be not it kind off she and thoughtful ? " and she hand the letter to , who read -- " 'I see , who be scrubb the room , and look at I with very scrubby look ; but la belle Fanny be not au logis ; and as I hear that she be in 's apartment , and I mount au troisieme to see this famous beauty . another disappointment -- only the and a friend of he in the room : so we come away after all without see the enchanting Fanny . " 'Je t'envoie mille et mille baiser . when will that horrid canvassing be over ? sleeve be worn , etc. etc. etc. ' " after dinner the doctor be read the time . " a young gentleman I attend when he be here some eight or nine year ago , have come into a fine fortune , " the doctor say . " I see here announce the death of , , of , at , in the , on the 15th ult . " in which the major be bidden to stand and deliver any gentleman who have frequent the of public - house , where it may be remember that 's be hold , and where have a interview with major Pendennis , be aware that there be three room for guest upon the ground floor , besides the bar where the landlady sit . one be a parlour frequent by the public at large ; to another room gentleman in livery resort ; and the third apartment , on the door of which " private " be paint , be that hire by the club of " the Confidentials , " of which and be member . the noiseless have listen to the conversation between Strong and major Pendennis at the latter 's own lodging , and have carry away from it matter for much private speculation ; and a desire of knowledge have lead he to follow he master when the major come to the of , and to take he place quietly in the confidential room , whilst Pendennis and Clavering have they discourse in the parlour . there be a particular corner in the confidential room from which you could hear almost all that pass in the next apartment ; and as the conversation between the two gentleman there be rather angry , and carry on in a high key , have the benefit of overhearing almost the whole of it and what he hear , strengthen the conclusion which he mind have previously for . " he know not at once , do he , when he see he in ? Clavering be not no more marry to my Lady than I be ! be the man : be a convict ; young Harthur come into Parlyment , and the Gov'nor promise not to split . by , what a sly old rogue it be , that old ! no wonder he be anxious to make the match between and : why , she will have a hundred thousand if she be a penny , and bring she man a seat in Parlyment into the bargain . " nobody see , but a physiognomist would have like to behold , the expression of 's countenance , when this astounding intelligence be make clear to he . " but for my hage , and the confound preudice of society , " he say , survey himself in the glass , " dammy , , you might marry she yourself . " but if he could not marry and she fortune , think he could mmend he own by the possession of this information , and that it might be productive of benefit to he from very many source . of all the person whom the secret affect , the greater number would not like to have it know . for instance , , whose fortune it involve , would wish to keep it quiet ; , whose neck it implicate , would naturally be desirous to hush it : and that young hupstart beast , , who be for get ' into Parlyment on the strenth of it , and be as proud as if he be a duke with half a millium a year ( such , we grieve to say , be 's opinion of he employer 's nephew ) , would pay anythink sooner than let the world know that he be marry to a convick 's daughter , and have get he seat in Parlyment by trafficke with this secret . as for , think , if she be tired of Clavering , and want to get
get rid of he , she will pay : if she be frightene about she son , and fond of the little beggar , she will pay all the same : and miss Blanche will certainly come down handsome to the man who will put she into she rights , which she be unjustly defraude of they , and no mistake . " , " conclude the valet , reflect upon this wonderful hand which like have give he to play , " with such card as these , , you be a make man . it may be a reg'lar enewity to I . every one of th'ey must susscribe . and with what I have make already , I may cut business , give my old Gov'nor warning , turn gentleman , and have a servant of my own , begad . " entertain himself with calculation such as these , that be not a little likely to perturb a man 's spirit , show a very great degree of self - command by appearing and be calm , and by not allow he future prospects in any way to interfere with he present duty . one of the person whom the story chiefly concerned , , be absent from when be thus make acquaint with he history . the valet knew of 's Shepherd 's haunt , and walk thither a hour or two after the and have have they conversation together . but that bird be fly ; not have receive he winnings , and be go to the continent . the fact of he absence be exceedingly vexatious to . " he will drop all that money at the gambling - shop on the Rhind , " think , " and I might have have a good bit of it . it be confound annoying to think he be gone and could not have wait a few day longer . " hope , triumphant or defer , ambition or disappointment , victory or patient ambush , bear all alike , with similar equable countenance . until the proper day come , the major 's boot be varnished and he hair be curled , he early cup of tea be bring to he bedside , he oath , rebuke , and senile satire borne , with silent , obsequious fidelity . who would think , to see he wait upon he master , pack and shouldere he trunk , and occasionally assist at table , at the country - house where he might be stay , that be richer than he employer , and know he secret and other people 's ? in the profession be greatly respecte and admire , and he reputation for wealth and wisdom get he much reny at most supper - table : the younger gentleman vote he stoopid , a feller of no idear , and a fogey , in a word : but not one of they would not say aman to the heartfelt prayer which some of the most serious - mind among the gentleman utter , " when I die may I cut up as well as ! " as become a man of fashion , major Pendennis spend the autumn pass from house to house of such country friend as be at home to receive he ; and if the happen to be abroad , the in , condescende to sojourn with or the plain . to say the truth , the old gentleman 's reputation be somewhat on the wane : many of the man of he time have die out , and the occupant of they hall and the present wearer of they title know not major Pendennis : and little care for he tradition of " the and , " and of the heroe of fashion pass away . it must have struck the good man with melancholy as he walk by many a door , to think how seldom it be now open for he , and how often he use to knock at it -- to what banquet and welcome he use to pass through it -- a score of year back . he begin to own that he be no longer of the present age , and dimly to apprehend that the young man laugh at he . such melancholy musing must come across many a Pall mall philosopher . the man , think he , be not such as they use to be in he time : the old grand manner and courtly grace of life be go : what be and the present Castlewood , compare to the magnificence of the old mansion and owner ? the late lord come to with four postchaise and sixteen horse : all the hurrie out to look at he cavalcade : the people in street even stop as he procession pass they . the present lord travels with five bagman in a railway carriage , and sneak away from the station , smoke a cigar in a brougham . the late lord in autumn fill Castlewood with company , who drank claret till midnight : the present man bury himself in a hut on a mountain , and pass in two or three closet in a entresol at , where he amusement be a dinner at a cafe and a box at a little theatre . what a contrast there be between he , the 's , and she little ladyship of the present era ! he figure to himself the first , beautiful , gorgeous , magnificent in diamonds and velvet , da in rouge , the wit of the world ( the old wit , the old polish gentleman -- not the canaille of to - day with they language of the cabstand , and they coat smell of smoke ) bow at she foot ; and then think of to - day 's -- a little woman in a
a black silk gow , like a governess , who talk astronomy , and labour class , and emigration , and the deuce know what , and lurk to church at eight o'clock in the morning . Abbots - , that use to be the noblest house in the county , be turn into a monastery -- a regular . they do not drink two glass of wine after dinner , and every other man at table be a country curate , with a white neckcloth , whose talk be about 's progress at school , or widow 's lumbago . " and the other young man , those lounge guardsman and great lazy dandy -- sprawl over sofa and billiard - table , and steal off to smoke pipe in each other 's bedroom , care for nothing , reverence nothing , not even a old gentleman who have know they fathers and they betters , not even a pretty woman -- what a difference there be between these man , who poison the very turnip and stubble -field with they tobacco , and the gentleman of we time ! " think the major ; " the breed be gone -- there be no use for th'ey ; they be replace by a parcel of damned cotton --spinner and utilitarian , and young sprig of parson with they hair comb down they bark . I be get old : they be get past I : they laugh at we old boy , " think old Pendennis . and he be not far wrong ; the time and manners which he admire be pretty nearly go -- the gay young man " lark " he irreverently , whilst the serious youth have a grave pity and wonder at he ; which would have be even more painful to bear , have the old gentleman be aware of its extent . but he be rather simple : he examination of moral question have never be very deep ; it have never struck he perhaps , until very lately , that he be otherwise than a most respectable and rather fortunate man . be there no old age but he without reverence ? do youthful folly never jeer at other bald pate ? for the past two or three year , he have begin to perceive that he day be well - nigh over , and that the man of the new time have begin to reign . after a rather unsuccessful autumn season , then , during which he be faithfully follow by , he nephew yoArthu be engage , as we have see , at , it happen that come back for a while to , at the dismal end of , when the fog and the lawyer come to town . who have not look with interest at those loaded cab , pile box , and crowd child , ratt through the street on the dun evening ; stop at the dark house , where they discharge nurse and infant , girl , matron and father , whose holiday be over ? yesterday it be and sunshine , or Broadstairs and liberty ; to - day come work and a yellow fog ; and , ye gods ! what a heap of bills there lie in master 's study ! and the clerk have bring the lawyer 's papers from chambers ; and in half a hour the literary man know that the printer 's boy will be in the passage ; and with that little account ( that particular little account ) have call presentient of you arrival , and have leave word that he will call to - morrow morning at ten . who amongst we have not say good - bye to he holiday ; return to , and he fate ; survey he labour and liability lay out before he , and be aware of that inevitable little account to settle ? and he little account in the morning , symbolise duty , difficulty , struggle , which you will meet , let we hope , friend , with a manly and honest heart .-- and you think of he , as the child be slumber once more in they own bed , and the watchful housewife tenderly pretend to sleep . have no special labour or bill to encounter on the morrow , as he have no affection at home to soothe he . he have always money in he desk sufficient for he want ; and be by nature and habit tolerably indifferent to the wants of other people , these latter be not likely to disturb he . but a gentleman may be out of temper though he do not owe a shilling and though he may be ever so selfish , he must occasionally feel dispirited and lonely . he have have two or three twinge of gout in the country - house where he have be stay : the bird be wild and shy , and the walking over the ploughed field have fatigue he deucedly : the young man have laugh at he , and he have be peevish at table once or twice : he have not be able to get he whist of a evening : and , in fine , be glad to come away . in all he dealings with , he valet , he have be exceedingly sulky and discontented . he have swear at he and abuse he for many day past . he have scald he mouth with bad soup at . he have leave he umbrella in the railroad carriage : at which piece of forgetfulness , he be in such a rage , that he curse more freely than ever . both , the chimney smoke furiously in he lodging ; and when he cause the window to be fling open , he swore so acrimoniously , that be inclin to
to fl he out of window too , through that open casement . the valet swore after he master , as Pendennis go down the street on he way to the club . 's be not at all pleasant . the house have be new paint , and smelt of varnish and turpentine , and a large streak of white paint inflict itself on the back of the old boy 's fur - collar surtout . the dinner be not good : and the three most odious man in all -- old , whose cough and accompaniment be fit to make any man uncomfortable ; old , who seize on all the newspaper ; and that irreclaimable old bore Jawkins , who would come and dine at the next table to , and describe to he every inn - bill which he have pay in he foreign tour : each and all of these disagreeable personage and incidents have contribute to make major Pendennis miserable ; and the club waiter trod on he toe as he bring he he coffee . never alone appear the Immortal . the Furies always hunt in company : they pursue from home to the club , and from the home . whilst the major be absent from he lodging , have be seat in the landlady 's parlour , drink freely of hot brandy - and - water , and pour out on some of the abuse which he have receive from he master upstairs . be 's slave . he be he landlady 's landlord . he have buy the lease of the house which she rent ; he have get she name and she son 's to acceptance , and a bill of sale which make he master of the luckless widow 's furniture . the young be a clerk in a insurance office , and could put he into what he call quod any day . be a clergyman 's widow , and , after perform he duty on the first floor , have a pleasure in make the old lady fetch he he bootjack and he slipper . she be he slave . the little black profile of she son and daughter ; the very picture of , where she be marry , and she poor dear liv and die , be now 's property , as it hang there over the mantelpiece of he back - parlour . Morgan sate in the widow 's back - room , in the ex-curate 's old horse - hair study - chair , make bring supper for he , and fill he glass again and again . the liquor be buy with the poor woman 's own coin , and hence indulge in it only the more freely ; and he have eat he supper and be drink a third tumbler , when old return from the club , and go upstairs to he room . swore very savagely at he and he bell , when he hear the latter , and finish he tumbler of brandy before he go up to answer the summon . he receive the abuse consequent on this delay in silence , nor do the major condescend to read in the flushed face and glaring eye of the man , the anger under which he be labour . the old gentleman 's foot - bath be at the fire ; he gown and slipper await he there . knelt down to take he boot off with due subordination : and as the major abuse he from above , keep up a growl of malediction below at he foot . thus , when be cry " Confound you , sir , mind that strap -- curse you , do not wrench my foot off , " sotto voce below be express a wish to strangle he , dry he , and punch he head off . the boot remove , it become necessary to divest of he coat : and for this purpose the valet have necessarily to approach very near to he employer ; so near that could not but perceive what 's late occupation have be ; to which he advert in that simple and forcible phraseology which man be sometimes in the habit of use to they domestic ; inform that he be a drunken beast , and that he smelt of brandy . at this the man break out , lose patience , and flinge up all subordination , " I be drunk , be I ? I be a beast , be I ? I be d ---- d , be I ? you infernal old miscreant . shall I wr you old head off , and drownd yer in that pail of water ? do you think I be a - goin ' to bear you confound old harrogance , you old ! Chatter you old hivory at I , do you , you grinn old baboon ! come on , if you be a man , and can stand to a man . ! you coward , knife , knife ! " " if you advance a step , I will send it into you , " say the major , seize up a knife that be on the table near he . " go downstairs , you drunke brute , and leave the house ; send for you book and you wage in the morning , and never let I see you insolent face again . this would ---- impertinence of yours have be grow for some month past . you have be grow too rich . you be not fit for service . get out of it , and out of the house . " " and where would you wish I to go , pray , out of the ' ouse ? " ask the man , " and will not it be equal convenient to - morrow morning
morning ?--tootyfay mame shose , sivvaplay , munseer ? " " Silence , you , and go ! " cry out the major . begin to laugh , with rather a sinister laugh . " look yere , , " he say , seat himself ; " since I have be in this room you have call I beast , brute , dog : and ---- d I , have not you ? how do you suppose one man like that sort of talk from another ? how many year have I wait on you , and how many damns and cussis have you give I , along with my wage ? do you think a man be a dog , that you can talk to he in this way ? if I choose to drink a little , why should not I ? I have see many a gentleman drunk form 'ly , and peraps have the abit from they . I be not a - goin ' to leave this house , old feller , and shall I tell you why ? the house be my house , every stick of yofurnitu ' in it be mine , excep ' you old trap , and you shower - bath , and you wigbox . I have buy the place , I tell you , with my own industry and perseverance . I can show a hundred pound , where you can show a fifty , or you damn supersellious nephew either . I have serve you honourable , do everythink for you these dozen year , and I be a dog , be I ? I be a beast , be I ? that be the language for gentleman , not for we rank . but I will bear it no more . I throw up you service ; I be tired on it ; I have comb you old wig and buckle you old girth and waistband long enough , I tell you . do not look savage at I , I be sit in my own chair , in my own room , a - tell the truth to you . I will be you beast , and you brute , and you dog , no more , major . " the fury of the old gentleman , meet by the servant 's abrupt revolt , have be shock and cool by the concussion , as much as if a sudden shower - bath or a pail of cold water have be flng upon he . that effect produce , and he anger calm , 's speech have interes he , and he rather respecte he adversary , and he courage in face he ; as of old day , in the fencing - room , he would have admire the opponent who hit he . " you be no longer my servant , " the major say , " and the house may be yours ; but the lodging be mine , and you will have the goodness to leave they . to -morrow morning , when we have settle we account , I shall remove into other quarter . in the meantime , I desire to go to bed , and have not the slightest wish for you further company . " " we will have a settlement , do not you be afraid , " say , get up from he chair . " I be not do with you yet ; nor with you family , nor with the Clavering family , major Pendennis ; and that you shall know . " " have the goodness to leave the room , sir -- I be tired , " say the major . " Hah ! you will be more tired of I afore you have do , " answer the man , with a sneer , and walk out of the room ; leave the major to compose himself as best he might , after the agitation of this extraordinary scene . he sate and muse by he fireside over the past event , and the confound impudence and ingratitude of servants ; and think how he should get a new man : how devilish unpleasant it be for a man of he age , and with he habits , to part with a fellow to whom he have be accustom : how have a receipt for boot- varnish , which be incomparably better and more comfortable to the foot than any he have ever try : how very well he make mutton - broth , and ten he when he be unwell . " , it be a hard thing to lose a fellow of that sort : but he must go , " think the major . " he have grow rich , and impudent since he have grow rich . he be horribly tipsy and abusive to - night . we must part , and I must go out of the lodging . Dammy , I like the lodging ; I be use to th'ey . it be very unpleasant , at my time of life , to change my quarter . " and so on , muse the old gentleman . the shower - bath have do he good : the testiness be go : the loss of the umbrella , the smell of paint at the , be forget under the superior excitement . " Confound the insolent villain ! " think the old gentleman . " he understand my want to a nicety : he be the best servant in . " he think about he servant as a man think of a horse that have carry he long and well , and that have come down with he , and be safe no longer . how the deuce to replace he ? where can he get such another animal ? in these melancholy cogitation the major
major , who have don he own dressing - gown and replace he head of hair ( a little grey have be introduce into the coiffure of late by , which have give the major 's head the most artless and respectable appearance ) ; in these cogitation , we say , the major , who have take off he wig and put on he night - handkerchief , sate absorb by the fireside , when a feeble knock come at he door , which be presently open by the landlady of the lodging . " bless my soul , ! " cry out the major , start that a lady should behold he in the simple appareil of he night - toilet . " it -- it be very late , . " " I wish I might speak to you , sir , " say the landlady , very piteously . " , I suppose ? he have coole himself at the pump . can not take he back , . impossible . I would determi to part with he before , when I hear of he dealings in the discount business -- I suppose you have hear of they , ? my servant be a capitalist , begad . " " oh , sir , " say , " I know it to my cost . I borrow from he a little money five year ago ; and though I have pay he many time over , I be entirely in he power . I be ruin by he , sir . everything I have be he . he be a dreadful man . " " Eh , ? tout tpis --dev'lish sorry for you , and that I must quit you house after lod here so long : there be no help for it . I must go . " " he say we must all go , sir , " sob out the luckless widow . he come downstairs from you just now -- he have be drink , and it always make he very wicked -- and he say that you have insult he , sir , and treat he like a dog , and speak to he unkindly ; and he swore he would be revenge , and -- and I owe he a hundred and twenty pound , sir -- and he have a bill of sale of all my furniture -- and say he will turn I out of my house , and send my poor to prison . he have be the ruin of my family , that man . " " Dev'lish sorry , ; pray take a chair . what can I do ? " " could you not intercede with he for we ? will give half he allowance ; my daughter can send something . if you will but stay on , sir , and pay a quarter 's rent in advance ---- " " my good madam , I would as soon give you a quarter in advance as not , if I be go to stay in the lodging . but I can not ; and I can not afford to fl away twenty pound , my good madam . I be a poor half - pay officer , and want every shilling I have , begad . as far as a few pound go -- say five pound -- I do not say -- and shall be most happy , and that sort of thing : and I will give it you in the morning with pleasure : but -- but it be get late , and I have make a railroad journey . " " 's will be do , sir , " say the poor woman , dry she tear . I must bear my fate . " " and a dev'lish hard one it be , and most sincerely I pity you , . I -- I will say ten pound , if you will permit I . good night . " " , sir , when he come downstairs , and when -- when I besotch he to have pity on I , and tell he he have be the ruin of my family , say something which I do not well understand -- that he would ruin every family in the house -- that he know something would bring you down too -- and that you should pay he for you -- you insolence to he . I -- I must own to you , that I go down on my knee to he , sir ; and he say , with a dreadful oath against you , that he would have you on you knee . " " I ?-- by , that be too pleasant ! where be the confounded fellow ? " " he go away , sir . he say he should see you in the morning . oh , pray try and pacify he , and save I and my poor boy . " and the widow go away with this prayer , to pass she night as she might , and look for the dreadful morrow . the last word about himself excite major Pendennis so much , that he compassion for 's misfortune be quite forgotten in the consideration of he own case . " I on my knee ? " think he , as he get into bed : " confound he impudence ! who ever see I on my knee ? what the do the fellow know ? , I have not have a affair these twenty year . I defy he . " and the old compaigner turn round and sleep pretty sound , be rather excited and amuse by the event of the day -- the last day in , he be determine it should be . " for it be impossible to stay on with a valet
valet over I , and a bankrupt landlady . what good can I do this poor devil of a woman ? I will give she twenty pound -- there be 's twenty pound , which he have just pay -- but what be the use ? she will want more , and more , and more , and that cormorant will swallow all . no , dammy , I can not afford to know poor people ; and to - morrow I will say good - bye -- to and . " in which the major neither yield he money nor he life early next morn Pendennis 's shutter be open by , who appear as usual , with a face perfectly grave and respectful , bear with he the old gentleman 's clothes , cans of water , and elaborate toilet requisite . " it be you , be it ? " say the old fellow from he bed . " I sha not take you back again , you understand . " " I ave not the least wish to be take back agin , major Pendennis , " say , with grave dignity , " nor to serve you nor hany man . but as I wish you to be comftable as long as you stay in my house , I come up to do what be nessary . " and once more , and for the last time , lay out the silver dress - case , and strap the shining razor . these office conclude , he address himself to the major with a indescribable solemnity , and say : " ' that you would most likely be in want of a respectable pusson , until you suit yourself , I speak to a young man last night , who be ' ere . " " indeed , " say the warrior in the tent - bed . " he ave live in the fust famly , and I can wouch for he respectability . " " you be monstrous polite , " grin the old major . and the truth be , that after the occurrence of the previous evening , have go out to he own club at the of , and there find , a courier and valet just return from a foreign tour with young , and for the present disposable , have represent to , that he , , have " a devil of a blow hup with he own Gov'nor , and be goin ' to retire from the business haltogether , and that if want a tempory job , he might probbly have it by apply in . " " you be very polite , " say the major , " and you recommendation , I be sure , will have every weight . " blush ; he feel he master be 'a - chaffin ' of he . ' " the man have await on you before , sir , " he say with great dignity . " , sir , give he to he nephew young , and he have be with he on he foring tour , and not wish to go to , which 's chest be delicate , and he can not bear the cold in , he be free to serve you or not , as you choose . " " I repeat , sir , that you be exceedingly polite , " say the major . come in , -- you will do very well -- , will you have the great kindness to ---- " " I shall show he what be nessary , sir , and what be customry for you to wish to ave do . will you please to take breakfast ' ere or at the club , major Pendennis ? " " with you kind permission , I will breakfast here , and afterwards we will make we little arrangement . " " if you please , sir . " " will you now oblige I by leave the room ? " withdrew ; the excessive politeness of he ex-employer make he almost as angry as the major 's bitterest word . and whilst the old gentleman be make he mysterious toilet , we will also modestly retire . after breakfast , major Pendennis and he new aide - de -camp occupy themselves in preparing for they departure . the establishment of the old bachelor be not very complicated . he encumber himself with no useless wardrobe . a bible ( he mother 's ) , a road book , Pen's novel ( calf elegant ) , and the of 's , with a few print , map , and portrait of that illustrious general , and of various sovereign and consort of this country , and of the under whom major Pendennis have serve in , form he literary and artistical collection : he be always ready to march at a few hour ' notice , and the case in which he have bring he property into he lodging some fifteen year before , be still in the loft amply sufficient to receive all he good . these , the young woman who do the work of the house , and who be know by the name of to she mistress , and of " " to , bring down from they resting - place , and obediently dust and clean under the eyes of the terrible . he demeanour be guard and solemn ; he have speak no word as yet to respect he threat of the past night , but he look as if he would execute they , and the poor widow tremblingly await she fate . , arm with he cane , superintend the package of he good and chattel , under the hand of , and the burn such of he papers as he do not care to keep ; flng
flng open door and closet until they be all empty ; and now all box and chest be close , except he desk , which be ready to receive the final account of . that individual now make he appearance , and bring he book . " as I wish to speak to you in privick , peraps you will ave the kindness to request to step downstairs , " he say , on entering . " bring a couple of cab , , if you please -- and wait downstairs until I ring for you , " say the major . see downstair , watch he go along the street upon he errand , and produce he book and account , which be simple and very easily settled . " and now , sir , " say he , have pocket the cheque which he ex-employer give he , and sign he name to he book with a flourish , " and now that account be close between we , sir , " he say , " I porpose to speak to you as one man to another " --( like the sound of he own voice ; and , as a individual , indulge in public speak whenever he could get a opportunity , at the club , or the housekeeper 's room ) --" and I must tell you , that I be in possession of certing infamation . " " and may I inquire of what nature , pray ? " ask the major . " it be valuble information , major Pendennis , as you know very well . I know of a marriage as be no marriage -- of a honourable Baronet as be no more married than I be ; and which he wife be marry to somebody else , as you know too , sir . " Pendennis at once understand all . " ! this account for you behaviour . you have be listen at the door , sir , I suppose , " say the major , look very haughty ; " I forget to look at the keyhole when I go to that public - house , or I might have suspect what sort of a person be behind it . " " I may have my scheme as you may have yours , I suppose , " answer . " I may get my information , and I may act on that information , and I may find that information valuble as anybody else may . a poor servant may have a bit of luck as well as a gentleman , may not he ? do not you be put on you aughty look , sir , and comin ' the aristocrat over I . that be all gammon with I . I be a , I be , and as good as you . " " to what the do this tend , sir ? and how do the secret which you have surprised concern I , I should like to know ? " ask major Pendennis , with great majesty . " how do it concern I , indeed ! how grand we be ! how do it concern my nephew , I wonder ? how do it concern my nephew 's seat in Parlyment : and to subornation of bigamy ? how do it concern that ? what , be you to be the only man to have a secret , and to trade on it ? why should not I go halve , major Pendennis ? I have find it out too . look here ! I be not goin ' to be unreasonable with you . make it worth my while , and I will keep the thing close . let take he seat , and he rich wife , if you like ; I do not want to marry she . but I will have my share , as sure as my name 's . and if I do not -- -- " " and if you do not , sir -- what ? " ask . " if I do not , I split , and tell all . I smash Clavering , and have he and he wife up for bigamy -- so help I , I will ! I smash young 's marriage , and I show up you and he as makin' use of this secret , in order to squeeze a seat in Parlyment out of , and a fortune out of he wife . " " know no more of this business than the babe unborn , sir , " cry the major , aghast . " no more than , than do . " " tell that to the marine , major , " reply the valet ; " that cock will not fight with I . " " do you doubt my word , you villain ? " " no bad language . I do not care one twopence 'a 'p 'ny whether you word 's true or not . I tell you , I intend this to be a nice little annuity to I , major : for I have every one of you ; and I be not such a fool as to let you go . I should say that you might make it five hundr a year to I among you , easy . pay I down the first quarter now and I be as mum as a mouse . just give a note for one twenty - five . there be you cheque - book on you desk . " " and there be this too , you villain , " cry the old gentleman . in the desk to which the valet point be a little double - barrelled pistol , which have belong to 's old patron ; the indian commander - in - chief , and which
which have accompany he in many a campaign . " one more word , you scoundrel and I will shoot you , like a mad dog . stop -- by , I will do it now . you will assault I , will you ? you will strike at a old man , will you , you lie coward ? Kneel down and say you prayer , sir , for by the you shall die . " the major 's face glar with rage at he adversary , who look terrified before he for a moment , and at the next , with a shriek of " ! " spring towards the open window , under which a policeman happen to be on he beat . " murder ! police ! " bellow . to he surprise , major Pendennis wheel away the table and walk to the other window , which be also open . he beckon the policeman . " come up . here , policeman , " he say , and then go and place himself against the door . " you miserable sneak , " he say to ; " the pistol have not be load these fifteen year , as you would have know very well , if you have not be such a coward . that policeman be come , and I will have he up , and have you trunk search ; I have reason to believe that you be a thief , sir . I know you be . I will swear to the thing . " " you give th'ey to I -- you give th'ey to I ! " cry . the major laugh . " we will see , " he say ; and the guilty valet remember some fine lawn - front shirt -- a certain gold - head cane -- a opera- glass , which he have forget to bring down , and of which he have assume the use along with certain article of he master 's clothes , which the old dandy neither wear nor ask for . policeman X enter ; follow by the sear and she maid - of - all - work , who have be at the door and find some difficulty in close it against the street amateur , who wish to see the row . the major begin instantly to speak . " I have have occasion to discharge this drunken scoundrel , " he say . " both last night and this morning he insult and assault I . I be a old man and take up a pistol . you see it be not load , and this coward cry out before he be hurt . I be glad you be come . I be charge he with take my property , and desire to examine he trunk and he room . " " the velvet cloak you be not wear these three year , nor the weskit , and I think I might take the shirt , and I -- I take my hoath I intend to put back the hopera - glass , " roar , writh with rage and terror . " the man acknowledge that he be a thief , " the major say , calmly . " he have be in my service for year , and I have treat he with every kindness and confidence . we will go upstairs and examine he trunk . " in those trunk have thing which he would afain keep from public eye . , the bill - discounter , give goods as well as money to he customer . he provide young spendthrift with snuff box and pin and jewel and picture and cigar , and of a very doubtful quality those cigar and jewel and picture be . they display at a police -office , the discovery of he occult profession , and the exposure of the major 's property , which he have appropriate , indeed , rather than steal ,-- would not have add to the reputation of . he look a piteous image of terror and discomfiture . " he will smash I , will he ? " think the major . " I will crush he now , and finish with he . " but he pause . he look at poor 's scared face ; and he think for a moment to himself that the man bring to bay and in prison might make disclosure which have best be keep secret , and that it be best not to deal too fiercely with a desperate man . " stop , " he say , " policeman . I will speak with this man by himself . " " do you give in charge ? " say the policeman . " I have bring no charge as yet , " the major say , with a significant look at he man . " thank you , sir , " whisper , very low . " go outside the door , and wait there , policeman , if you please .-- now , , you have play one game with I , and you have not have the best of it , my good man . no , begad , you have not have the best of it , though you have the best hand ; and you have get to pay , too , now , you scoundrel . " " yes , sir , " say the man . " I have only find out , within the last week , the game which you have be drive , you villain . yong , of the , recognise you as the man who come to barrack , and do business one - third in money , one - third in - - , and one - third in french print , you confound demure old sinner ! I do
do not miss anything , or care a straw what you would take , you booby ; but I take the shot , and it hit -- hit the bull 's - eye , begad . , six , I be a old campaigner . " " what do you want with I , sir ? " " I will tell you . you bills , I suppose , you keep about you in that dem have great leather pocket - book , do not you ? you will burn 's bill ? " " Sir , I be not a - goin ' to part with my property , " grow the man . " you lent she sixty pound five year ago . she and that poor devil of a insurance clerk , she son , have pay you fifty pound a year ever since ; and you have get a bill of sale of she furniture , and she note of hand for a hundred and fifty pound . she tell I so last night . by , sir , you have b that poor woman enough . " " I will not give it up , " say ; " if I do I be -- -- " " policeman ! " cry the major . " you shall have the bill , " say . " you be not go to take money of I , and you a gentleman ? " " I shall want you directly , " say the major to , who here enter , and who again withdraw . " no , my good sir , " the old gentleman continue ; " I have not any desire to have further pecuniary transaction with you ; but we will draw out a little paper , which you will have the kindness to sign . no , stop !-- you shall write it : you have improve immensely in writing of late , and have now a very good hand . you shall sit down and write , if you please -- there , at that table -- so -- let I see -- we may as well have the date . ' , 's , 21 , 18 - - . ' " and write as he be instruct , and as the pitiless old major continue :-- " , , have come in extreme poverty into the service of , , of , 's , a major in she Majesty 's service , acknowledge that I receive liberal wage and board wage from my employer , during fifteen year .'-- you can not object to that , I be sure , " say the major . " during fifteen year , " write . " 'In which time , by my own care and prudence , ' " the dictator resume , " 'I have manage to amass sufficient money to purchase the house in which my master reside , and , besides , to effect other savings . amongst other person from whom I have have money , I may mention my present tenant , , who , in consideration of sixty pound advanc by I five year since , have pay back to I the sum of two hundred and fifty pound sterling , besides give I a note of hand for one hundred and twenty pound , which I restore to she at the desire of my late master , major , and therewith free she furniture , of which I have a bill of sale .'-- have you write ? " " I think if this pistol be load , I would blow you brain out , " say . " no , you would not . you have too great a respect for you valuable life , my good man , " the major answer . " let we go on and begin a new sentence . " ' and have , in return for my master 's kindness , steal he property from he , which I acknowledge to be now upstairs in my trunk ; and have utter falsehood regard he and other honourable family , I do hereby , in consideration of he clemency to I , express my regret for uttere these falsehood , and for steal he property ; and declare that I be not worthy of belief , and that I hope '-- yes , begad --'that I hope to amend for the future . , . ' " " I be d ---- d if I sign it , " say . " my good man , it will happen to you , whether you sign or no , begad , " say the old fellow , chuckl at he own wit " there , I shall not use this , you understand , unless -- unless I be compelle to do so . , and we friend the policeman , will witness it , I dare say , without read it : and I will give the old lady back she note of hand , and say , which you will confirm , that she and you be quit . I see there be come back with the cab for my trunk ; I shall go to a hotel .-- you may come in now , policeman ; and I have arrange we little dispute . if will sign this paper , and you , policeman , will do so , I shall be very much obliged to you both . , you and you worthy landlord , , be quit . I wish you joy of he . let come and pack the rest of the thing . " , aide by the , under the calm superintendence of , carry major Pendennis 's box to the cab in waiting ; and , when she persecutor be not by , come and ask a 's bless
bless upon the major , she preserver , and the best and quietest and kindest of lodger . and have give she a finger to shake , which the humble lady receive with a curtsey , and over which she be ready to make a speech full of tear , the major cut short that valedictory oration , and walk out of the house to the hotel in , which be not many step from 's door . that individual , look forth from the parlour - window , discharge anything but blessing at he part guest ; but the stout old boy could afford not to be frightene at , and fling he a look of great contempt and humour as he strut away with he cane . major Pendennis have not quit he house of many hour , and be enjoy he otium in a dignified manner , survey the evening fog , and smoke a cigar , on the door - step , when , , the hero of this history , make he appearance at the well - know door . " my uncle out , I suppose , ? " he say to the functionary ; know full well that to smoke be treason , in the presence of the major . " major Pendennis be hout , sir , " say , with gravity , bow , but not touch the elegant cap which he wear . " major Pendennis have leave this ouse to - day , sir , and I have no longer the honour of be in he service , sir . " " indeed , and where be he ? " " I believe he ave take tempory lodging at 's otel , in , " say ; and add , after a pause , " be you in town for some time , pray , sir ? be you in chambers ? I should like to have the honour of waiting on you there : and would be thankful if you would favour I with a quarter of a hour . " " do you want my uncle to take you back ? " ask , insolent and good-natured . " I want no such thing ; I would see he - - -- " the man glar at he for a minute , but he stop . " no , sir , thank you , " he say in a softer voice ; " it be only with you that I wish to speak , on some business which concern you ; and perhaps you would favour I by walk into my house . " " if it be but for a minute or two , I will listen to you , , " say ; and think to himself , " I suppose the fellow want I to patronise he ; " and he enter the house . a card be already in the front window , proclaim that apartment be to be let ; and have introduce into the dining - room , and offer he a chair , take one himself , and proceed to convey some information to he , of which the reader have already have cognisance . in which count he eggs we friend have arrive in on that day only , though but for a brief visit ; and have leave some fellow - traveller at a hotel to which he have convoy they from the , he hasten to the in , which be bask in as much sun as choose to visit that dreary but not altogether comfortless building . freedom stand in lieu of sunshine in chamber ; and Templar grumble , but take they ease in they Inn . 's announce to he that be in chambers too , and , of course , yoArthu run up to he friend 's room straightway , and find it , as of old , perfume with the pipe , and once more at work with he newspaper and review . the pair greet each other with the rough cordiality which yoing use one to another : and which carry a great deal of warmth and kindness under its rude exterior . smile and take he pipe out of he mouth , and say , " well , young one ! " advance and hold out he hand , and say , " how be you , old boy ? " and so this greeting pass between two friend who have not see each other for month . and would have rush into each other 's arm and shriek bon coeur ! ce cher Alphonse ! over each other 's shoulder . and would have bestow half a dozen kiss , scent with , upon each other 's mustachio . " well , young one ! " " how be you , old boy ? " be what two Briton say : after save each other 's life , possibly , the day before . to -morrow they will leave off shaking hand , and only wag they head at one another as they come to breakfast . have for the other the very warmest confidence and regard : each would share he purse with the other : and hear he attack would break out in the loudest and most enthusiastic praise of he friend ; but they part with a mere good - bye , they meet with a mere how - d' you - do ? and they do not write to each other in the interval . curious , modesty , strange stoical decorum of English friendship ! " yes , we be not demonstrative like those confound foreigner , " say : who not only show no friendship , but never feel any all he life long . " be in ? " say . " yes , " say . " could not find a bit
bit of tobacco fit to smoke till we come to , where I get some caporal . " the man 's mind be full , very likely , of the great sight which he have see , of the great emotion with which the vast work of nature have inspire it . but he enthusiasm be too coy to show itself , even to he closest friend , and he veil it with a cloud of tobacco . he will speak more fully of confidential evening , however , and write ardently and frankly about that which he be shy of say . the thought and experience of he travel will come forth in he writings ; as the learning , which he never display in talk , enrich he style with pregnant allusion and brilliant illustration , colour he generous eloquence , and point he wit . the elder give a rapid account of the place which he have visit in he tour . he have see , , and the Tyrol -- he have come home by , and , and the Rhine . he speak about these place in a shy sulky voice , as if he have rather not mention they at all , and as if the sight of they have render he very unhappy . the outline of the elder man 's tour thus gloomily sketch out , the young one begin to speak . he have be in the country -- very much bore -- canvasse uncommonly slow -- he be here for a day or two , and go on to -- to the neighbourhood of , to some friend that will be uncommonly slow , too . how hard it be to make a acknowledge that he be happy ! " and the seat in , ? have you make it all right ? " ask . " all right , -- as soon as meet and a new writ can be issue , Claver retire , and I step into he shoe , " say . " and under which king do Bezonian speak or die ? " ask . " do we come out as , or as government man , or on we own hook ? " " hey ! there be no politics now ; every man 's politics , at least , be pretty much the same . I have not get acre enough to make I a Protectionist ; nor could I be one , I think , if I have all the land in the county . I shall go pretty much with government , and in advance of they upon some social question which I have be get up during the vacation ; -- do not grin , you old cynic , I have be get up the , and intend to come out rather strong on the Sanitary and Colonisation question . " " we reserve to ourselve the liberty of voting against government , though we be generally friendly . we be , however , friend of the people avant tout . we give lecture at the , and shake band with the intelligent mechanic . we think the franchise ought to be very considerably enlarge ; at the same time we be free to accept office some day , when the house have listen to a few crack speech from we , and the Administration perceive we merit . " " I be not , " say , with , as usual , somewhat of melancholy in he voice . " I have no law from to bring down to the people from the mountain . I do not belong to the mountain at all , or set up to be a leader and reformer of mankind . my faith be not strong enough for that ; nor my vanity , nor my hypocrisy , great enough . I will tell no lie , , that I promise you ; and do no more than coincide in those which be necessary and pass current , and can not be get in without recalle the whole circulation . give a man at least the advantage of he sceptical turn . if I find a good thing to say in the house , I will say it ; a good measure , I will support it ; a fair place , I will take it , and be glad of my luck . but I would know more flatter a great man than a mob ; and now you know as much about my politics as I do . what call have I to be a ? be not a divine institution . why not vote with the liberal conservatives ? they have do for the nation what the Whig would never have do without they . who convert both ?--to radical and the country outside . I think the post be often right , and be often wrong . I do not profess a call , but take advantage of a chance . Parlon d'autre choose . " " the next thing at you heart , after ambition be love , I suppose ? " say . " how have we young love prosper ? be we go to change we condition , and give up we chamber ? be you go to divorce I , Arthur , and take unto yourself a wife ? " " I suppose so . she be very good - natured and lively . she sings , and she do not mind smoking . she will have a fair fortune -- I do not know how much -- but my uncle augur everything from the 's generosity , and say that she will come down very handsomely . and I think Blanche be dev'lish fond of I , " say , with a sigh . " that mean that we accept she caress and she money
money . " " have not we say before that life be a transaction ? " say . " I do not pretend to break my heart about she . I have tell she pretty fairly what my feeling be -- and -- and have engage myself to she . and since I see she last , and for the last two month especially , whilst I have be in the country , I think she have be grow fonder and fonder of I ; and she letter to I , and especially to , seem to show it . mine have be simple enough -- no rapture , nor vow , you understand -- but look upon the thing as a affaire faite ; and not desirous to hasten or defer the completion . " " and ? how be she ? " ask frankly . " , , " say , look he friend hard in the face --" by heaven , be the best , and noblest , and dearest girl the sun ever shine upon . " he own voice fall as he speak : it seem as if he could hardly utter the word : he stretch out he hand to he comrade , who take it and nod he head . " have you only find out that now , young un ? " say after a pause . " who have not learn thing too late , ? " cry , in he impetuous way , gather word and emotion as he go on . " whose life be not a disappointment ? who carry he heart entire to the grave without a mutilation ? I never know anybody who be happy quite : or who have not have to ransom himself out of the hand of Fate with the payment of some dearest treasure or other . lucky if we be leave alone afterwards , when we have pay we fine , and if the tyrant visit we no more . suppose I have find out that I have lose the greatest prize in the world , now that it can not be mine -- that for year I have a angel under my tent , and let she go ? -- am I the only one -- ah , dear old boy , be I the only one ? and do you think my lot be easier to bear because I own that I deserve it ? she be go from we . 's blessing be with she ! she might have stay , and I lose she ; it be like Undine : be not it , ? " " she be in this room once , " say . he see she there -- he hear the sweet low voice -- he see the sweet smile and eye shining so kindly -- the face remember so fondly -- think of in what night - watch -- blest and love always -- go now ! a glass that have hold a nosegay - - a bible with 's handwriting -- be all that be leave he of that brief flower of he life . say it be a dream : say it pass : better the recollection of a dream than a aimless waking from a blank stupor . the two friend sate in silence a while , each occupy with he own thought and aware of the other ' . break it presently , by say that he must go and seek for he uncle , and report progress to the old gentleman . the major have write in a very bad humour ; the major be get old . " I should like to see you in parliament , and snugly settle with a comfortable house and a heir to the name before I make my bow . show I these , " the major write , " and then , let old make room for the younger fellow ; he have walk the Pall mall pave long enough . " " there be a kindness about the old heathen , " say . " he care for somebody besides himself , at least for some other part of himself besides that which be buttone into he own coat ;-- for you and you race . he would like to see the progeny of the Pendennise multiply and increase , and hope that they may inherit the land . the old patriarch bless you from the window of 's , and be carry off and bury under the flag of 's , in sight of , and the cabstand , and the carriage go to the levee . it be a edifying end . " " the new blood I bring into the family , " muse , " be rather taint . if I have choose , I think my father - in - law Amory would not have be the progenitor I should have desire for my race ; nor my grandfather - in - law Snell ; nor we Oriental ancestor . by the way , who be ? be lieutenant of a . Blanco write some verse about he , about the storm , the mountain wave , the seaman 's grave , the gallant father , and that sort of thing . be drown command a country ship between and ; and the be not happy together . she have be unlucky in she selection of husband , the good old lady , for , between ourselves , a more despicable creature than , of , , never ---- " " never legislate for he country , " break in ; at which blush rather . " by the way , at , " say , " I find we friend the in great state , and wear he order . he tell I that he have quarrell with , of whom he seem
seem to have almost as bad a opinion as you have , and in fact , I think , though I will not be certain , confide to I he opinion , that be a utter scoundrel . that fellow , who teach you card - play at , be with strong ; and time , I think , have bring out he valuable quality , and render he a more accomplished rascal than he be during you undergraduateship . but the king of the place be the famous , who be carry all before he , give fly to the whole society , and break the bank , it be say . " " my uncle know something about that fellow -- Clavering know something about he . there be something louche regard he . but come ! I must go to , like a dutiful nephew . " and , take he hat , prepare to go . " I will walk , too , " say . and they descend the stair , stop , however , at Pen's chamber , which , as the reader have be inform , be now on the lower story . here begin sprinkl himself with - - , and carefully scent he hair and whisker with that odoriferous water . " what be the matter ? you have not be smoke . be it my pipe that have poisone you ? " grow . " I be go to call upon some woman , " say . " I be -- I be go to dine with th'ey . they be pass through town , and be at a hotel in . " look with good - natured interest at the young fellow dandify himself up to a pitch of completeness ; and appear at length in a gorgeous shirt - front and neckcloth , fresh glove , and glisten boot . have a pair of thick high - lows , and he old shirt be tear about the breast , and rag at the collar , where he blue beard have wear it . " well , young un , " say he , simply , " I like you to be a buck ; somehow . when I walk about with you , it be as if I have a rose in my button - hole . and you be still affable . I do not think there be any young fellow in the Temple turn out like you ; and I do not believe you be ever asham of walk with I yet . " " do not laugh at I , . " say . " I say , , " continue the other , sadly , " if you write -- if you write to , I wish you would say ' bless she ' from I . " blush ; and then look at ; and then -- and then burst into a uncontrollable fit of laughing . " I be go to dine with she , " he say . " I bring she and up from the country to - day -- make two day of it -- sleep last night at -- I say , , come and dine , too . I may ask any one I please , and the old lady be constantly talk about you . " refuse . have a article to write . hesitate ; and oh , strange to say ! at last he agree to go . it be agree that they should go and call upon the ladie ; and they march away in high spirit to the hotel in . once more the dear face shone upon he ; once more the sweet voice speak to he , and the tender hand press a welcome . there still want half a hour to dinner . " you will go and see you uncle now , , " old say . " you will not bring he to dinner - no --his old story be intolerable ; and I want to talk to ; I daresay he will amuse we . I think we have hear all you story . we have be together for two whole day , and I think we be get tired of each other . " so , obey she ladyship 's order , yoArthu go downstairs and walk to he uncle 's lodging . the dinner be serve when yoArthu return , and begin to scold he for arrive late . but , look at she cousin , see that he face be so pale and scared , that she interrupt she imperious patroness ; and ask , with tender alarm , what have happen ? be yoArthu ill ? yoArthu drank a large bumper of sherry . " I have hear the most extraordinary news ; I will tell you afterwards , " he say , look at the servants . he be very nervous and agitate during the dinner . " do not tramp and beat so with you foot under the table , " say . " you have trode on , and upset he saucer . you see keep he boot quiet . " at the dessert -- it seem as if the unlucky dinner would never be over -- say , " this dinner have be exceedingly stupid . I suppose something have happen , and that you want to speak to . I will go and have my nap . I be not sure that I shall have any tea -- no . good night , . you must come again , and when there be no business to talk about . " and the old lady , toss up she head , walk away from the room with great dignity . and the other have risen with she , and be about to go away , and be say "
" good night " to , who , of course , be look much alarmed about she cousin , when yoArthu say , " pray , stay , . you should hear my news too , and give I you counsel in this case . I hardly know how to act in it . " " it be something about , , " say , she heart beat , and she cheek blush as she think it have never blush in she life . " yes -- and the most extraordinary story , " say . " when I leave you to go to my uncle 's lodging , I find he servant , , who have be with he so long , at the door , and he say that he and he master have part that morning ; that my uncle have quit the house , and have go to a hotel -- this hotel . I ask for he when I come in ; but he be go out to dinner . then say that he have something of a most important nature to communicate to I , and beg I to step into the house ; he house it be now . it appear the scoundrel have save a great deal of money whilst in my uncle 's service , and be now a capitalist and a millionaire , for what I know . well , I go into the house , and what do you think he tell I ? this must be a secret between we all -- at least if we can keep it , now that it be in possession of that villain . Blanche 's father be not dead . he have come to life again . the marriage between and the be no marriage . " " and , I suppose , be she grandfather 's heir , " say . " perhaps : but the child of what a father ! be a escaped convict -- know it ; my uncle know it -- and it be with this piece of information hold over Clavering in terrorem that the wretch old man get he to give up he borough to I . " " Blanche do not know it , " say , " nor poor ? " " no , " say ; " Blanche do not even know the history of she father . she know that he and she mother have separat , and have hear as a child , from , she nurse , that be drown in . he be there as a convict , not as a ship 's - captain , as the poor girl thought . have tell I that they be not happy , and that she husband be a bad character . she would tell I all , she say , some day : and I remember she say to I , with tear in she eye , that it be hard for a woman to be force to own that she be glad to hear she husband be dead : and that twice in she life she should have choose so badly . what be to be do now ? the man can not show and claim he wife : death be probably over he if he discover himself : return to transportation certainly . but the rascal have hold the threat of discovery over Clavering for some time past , and have extort money from he time after time . " " it be we friend , of course , " say " I see all now . " " if the rascal come back , " continue , " , who know he secret , will use it over he -- and have it in he possession , propose to extort money from we all . the ----d rascal suppose I be cognisant of it , " say , white with anger ; " ask I if I would give he a annuity to keep it quiet ; threaten I , I , as if I be trafficke with this wretch old 's misfortune , and would extort a seat in parliament out of that miserable Clavering . good heaven ! be my uncle mad , to tamper in such a conspiracy ? Fancy we mother 's son , , trade on such a treason ! " " I can not fancy it , dear , " say , seize 's hand , and kiss it . " no ! " break out 's deep voice , with a tremor ; he survey the two generous and loving young people with a pang of indescribable love and pain . " no . we boy can not meddle with such a wretch intrigue as that . can not marry a convict 's daughter ; and sit in parliament as member for the hulk . you must wash you hand of the whole affair , . you must break off . you must give no explanation of why and wherefore , but state that family reasons render a match impossible . it be better that those poor woman should fancy you false to you word than that they should know the truth . besides , you can get from that dog Clavering -- I can fetch that for you easily enough a acknowledgment that the reasons which you have give to he as the head of the family be amply sufficient for break off the union . do not you think with I , ? " he scarcely da to look she in the face as he speak . any linger hope that he might have -- any feeble hold that he might feel upon the last spar of he wrecked fortune , he know he be cast away ; and he let the wave of he calamity close over he . have start up whilst he be speak
speak , look eagerly at he . he turn he head away . he see rise up also and go to , and once more take he hand and kiss it . " she think so too -- bless she ! " say . " she father 's shame be not 's fault , dear , be it ? " say , very pale , and speak very quickly . " suppose you have be marry , wwould you desert she because she have do no wrong ? be you not pledge to she ? would you leave she because she be in misfortune ? and if she be unhappy , would not you conseal she ? we mother would , have she be here . " and , as she speak , the kind girl fold she arm round he , and bury she face upon he heart . " we mother be a angel with , " sob out . " and you be the dearest and best of woman -- the dearest , the dearest and the best . teach I my duty . pray for I that I may do it -- pure heart . bless you -- bless you , my sister ! " " amen , " groane out , with he head in he hand . " she be right , " he murmure to himself . " she can not do any wrong , I think -- that girl . " indeed , she look and smile like a angel . many a day after he see that smile -- see she radiant face as she look up at pen-- see she put back she curl , blush and smile , and still look fondly towards he . she lean for a moment she little fair hand on the table , play on it . " and now , and now , " she say , look at the two gentleman -- " and what now ? " ask . " and now we will have some tea , " say , with she smile . but before this unromantic conclusion to a rather sentimental scene could be suffer to take place , a servant bring word that major Pendennis have return to the hotel , and be wait to see he nephew . upon this announcement , , not without some alarm , and a appeal look to , which say , " Behave yourself well -- hold to the right , and do you duty -- be gentle , but firm with you uncle " -- , we say , with these warning write in she face , take leave of the two gentleman , and retreat to she dormitory . , who be not generally fond of tea , yet grudge that expect cup very much . why could not old Pendennis have come in a hour later ? well , a hour sooner or later , what matter ? the hour strike at last . the inevitable moment come to say farewell , the hand be shaken , the door close , and the friend go ; and , the brief joy over , you be alone . " in which of those many window of the hotel do she light beam ? " perhaps he ask himself as he pass down the street . he stride away to the smoking - room of a neighbour club , and , there apply himself to he usual solace of a cigar . man be brawl and talk loud about politics , opera-girl , horse - racing , the atrocious tyranny of the committee :-- bear this sacr secret about he , he enter into this brawl . talk away , each louder than the other . and crack joke . and tell you wild story . it be strange to take one 's place and part in the midst of the smoke and din , and think every man here have he secret ego most likely , which be sit lonely and apart , away in the private chamber , from the loud game in which the rest of we be join ! , as he traverse the passage of the hotel , feel he anger rouse up within he . he be indignant to think that yonder old gentleman whom he be about to meet , should have make he such a tool and puppet , and so compromise he honour and good name . the old fellow 's hand be very cold and shaky when take it . he be cough ; he be grumbl over the fire ; could not bring he dressing - gown or arrange he papers as that ---- confound impudent scoundrel of a . the old gentleman bemoan himself , and curse 's ingratitude with peevish patho . " the confound impudent scoundrel ! he be drink last night , and challenge I to fight he , ; and , begad , at one time I be so excited that I think I should have drive a knife into he ; and the infernal rascal have make ten thousand pound , I believe -- and deserve to be hang , and will be ; but , curse he , I wish he could have last out my time . he know all my way , and , dammy , when I ring the bell , the confound thief bring the thing I want -- not like that stupid german lout . and what sort of time have you have in the country ? be a good deal with ? you can not do better . she be one of the old school -- vieille ecole , bonne ecole , hey ? Dammy , they do not make gentleman and lady now ; and in fifty year you will hardly know one man from another . but they will last my time . I
I be not long for this business : I be get very old , , my boy ; and , gad , I be think to - day , as I be pack up my little library , there be a bible amongst the book that belong to my poor mother ; I would like you to keep that , . I be think , sir , that you would most likely open the box when it be you property , and the old fellow be laid under the sod , sir , " and the major cough and wag he old head over the fire . he age -- he kindness , disarm Pen's anger somewhat , and make feel no little compunction for the deed which he be about to do . he know that the announcement which he be about to make would destroy the darling hope of the old gentleman 's life , and create in he breast a woful anger and commotion . " hey -- hey -- I be off , sir , " nod the elder ; " but I would like to read a speech of yours in the before I go --'Mr. Pendennis say , Unaccustom as I be to public speak ' -- hey , sir ? hey , ? , you look dev'lish well and healthy , sir . I always say my brother would bring the family right . you must go down into the west , and buy the old estate , sir . Nec tenui penna , hey ? we will rise again , sir -- rise again on the wing -- and , begad , I should not be surprised that you will be a Baronet before you die . " he word smote . " and it be I , " he think , " that be go to fl down the poor old fellow 's air - castle . well , it must be . here go go into you lodging at , though I do not find you , " slowly begin -- " and I talk with , uncle . " " indeed ! " the old gentleman 's cheek begin to flush involuntarily , and he mutter , " the cat 's out of the bag now , begad ! " " he tell I a story , sir , which give I the deepest surprise and pain , " say . the major try to look unconcerned . " what -- that story about-- about -- what - '- you -call - 'em , hey ? " " 's father -- about 's first husband , and who he be , and what . " " Hem -- a dev'lish awkward affair ! " say the old man , rub he nose . " I -- I have be aware of that -- eh -- confound circumstance for some time . " " I wish I have know it sooner , or not at all , " say , gloomily . " he be all safe , " think the senior , greatly relieve . " ! I should have like to keep it from you altogether -- and from those two poor woman , who be as innocent as unborn babe in the transaction . " " you be right . there be no reason why the two woman should hear it ; and I shall never tell they -- though that villain , , perhaps may , " yoArthu say , gloomily . " he seem disposed to trade upon he secret , and have already propose term of ransom to I . I wish I have know of the matter earlier , sir . it be not a very pleasant think to I that I be engage to a convict 's daughter . " " the very reason why I keep it from you -- my dear boy . but be not a convict 's daughter , do not you see ? be the daughter of , with fifty or sixty thousand pound for a fortune ; and she father - in -law , a Baronet and country gentleman , of high reputation , approve of the match , and give up he seat in parliament to he son - in - law . what can be more simple ? " " be it true , sir ? " " , yes , it be true , of course it be true . 's dead . I tell you he be dead . the first sign of life he show , he be dead . he can not appear . we have he at a deadlock , like the fellow in the play -- the ' critic ,' hey ?-- dev'lish amusing play , that ' critic . ' Monstrous witty man , ; and so be he son . by , sir , when I be at the cape , I remember -- -- " the old gentleman 's garrulity , and wish to conduct to the cape , perhaps arise from a desire to avoid the subject which be nearest he nephew 's heart ; but yoArthu break out , interrupt he -- " if you have tell I this tale sooner , I believe you would have spare I and yourself a great deal of pain and disappointment ; and I should not have find myself tie to a engagement from which I can not , in honour , recede . " " no , begad , we have fix you -- and a man who be fix to a seat in parliament , and a pretty girl , with a couple of thousand a year , be fix to no bad thing , let I tell you , " say the old man . " great Heavens , sir ! " say , " be you blind ? can not you see ?
? " " see what , young gentleman ? " ask the other . " see , that rather than trade upon this secret of 's , " yoArthu cry out , " I would go and join my father - in - law at the hulk ! see , that rather than take a seat in parliament as a bribe from Clavering for silence , I would take the spoon off the table ! see , that you have give I a felon 's daughter for a wife ; doom I to poverty and shame ; curse my career when it might have be -- when it might have be so different but for you ! do not you see that we have be play a guilty game , and have be overreach ; -- that in offer to marry this poor girl , for the sake of she money , and the advancement she would bring , I be degrad myself , and prostitut my honour ? " " what in 's name do you mean , sy ? " cry the old man . " I mean to say that there be a measure of baseness which I can not pass , " yoArthu say . " I have no other word for it , and be sorry if they hurt you . I have feel , for month past , that my conduct in this affair have be wick , sordid , and worldly . I be rightly punish by the event , and have sell myself for money and a seat in parliament , by lose both . " " how do you mean that you lose either ? " shriek the old gentleman . " who the 's to take you fortune or you seat away from you ? by g --, Clavering shall give th'ey to you . you shall have every shilling of eighty thousand pound . " " I will keep my promise to , sir , " say . " and , begad , she parent shall keep theirs to you . " " not so , please , " yoArthu answer . " I have sinn , but , help I , I will sin no more . I will let Claver off from that bargain which be make without my knowledge . I will take no money with Blanche but that which be originally settle upon she ; and I will try to make she happy . you have do it . you have bring this on I , sir . but you know no better : and I forgive ---- " " Arthur -- in 's name -- in you father 's , who , by , be the proudest man alive , and have the honour of the family always at heart -- in mine -- for the sake of a poor broken - down old fellow , who have always be dev'lish fond of you -- do not fl this chance away -- I pray you , I beg you , I implore you , my dear , dear boy , do not fl this chance away . it be the making of you . you be sure to get on . you will be a ; it be three thousand a year : dammy , on my knee , there , I beg of you , do not do this . " and the old man actually sank down on he knee , and , seize one of 's hand , look up piteously at he . it be cruel to remark the shaking hand , the wrinkle and quiver face , the old eye weeping and wink , the broken voice . " ah , sir , " say , with a groan , " you have bring pain enough on I , spare I this . you have wish I to marry Blanche . I marry she . for 's sake , sir , rise ! I can not bear it . " " you -- you mean to say that you will take she as a beggar , and be one yourself ? " say the old gentleman , rise up and coughe violently . " I look at she as a person to whom a great calamity have befallen , and to whom I be promise . she can not help the misfortune ; and as she have my word when she be prosperous , I shall not withdraw it now she be poor . I will not take 's seat , unless afterwards it should be give of he free will . I will not have a shilling more than she original fortune . " " have the kindness to ring the bell , " say the old gentleman . " I have do my best , and say my say ; and I be a dev'lish old fellow . and -- and -- it do not matter . and -- and be right -- and -- begad -- 'and have I but serve my as I have serve you '-- yes , on my knee , by , to my own nephew -- I might not have be -- good night , sir , you need not trouble yourself to call again . " yoArthu take he hand , which the old man leave to he ; it be quite passive and clammy . he look very much oldened ; and it seem as if the contest and defeat have quite break he . on the next day he keep he bed , and refuse to see he nephew . in which the deck begin to clear when , array in he dressing - gown , walk up , accord to custom , to 's chamber next morning , to inform he friend of the issue of the last night 's interview with he uncle , and to ask
ask , as usual , for 's advice and opinion , , the laundress , be the only person whom find in the dear old chamber . have take a carpet - bag , and be gone . he address be to he brother 's house , in . packages address to the newspaper and review for which he write lay on the table , await delivery . " I find he at the table , when I come , the dear gentleman ! " say , " write at he papers , and one of the candle be burn out ; and hard as he bed be , he be not in it all night , sir . " indeed , have sit at the until the brawl there become intolerable to he , have walk home , and have pass the night finish some work on which he be employ , and to the completion of which he bend himself with all he might . the labour be do , and the night be wear away somehow , and the tardy come and look in on the young man as he sate over he desk . in the next day 's paper , or 's review , many of we very likely admire the work of he genius , the variety of he illustration , the fierce vigour of he satire , the depth of he reason . there be no hint in he writing of the other thought which occupy he , and always accompany he in he work -- a tone more melancholy than be customary , a satire more bitter and impatient than that which he afterwards show , may have mark the writing of this period of he life to the very few person who know he style or he name . we have say before , could we know the man 's feeling as well as the author 's thought -- how interesting most book would be !-- more interesting than merry . I suppose harlequin 's face behind he mask be always grave , if not melancholy -- certainly each man who live by the pen , and happen to read this , must remember , if he will , he own experience , and recall many solemn hour of solitude and labour . what a constant care sate at the side of the desk and accompany he ! fever or sickness be lie possibly in the next room : a sick child might be there , with a wife watch over it terrify and in prayer : or grief might be bear he down , and the cruel mist before the eye render the paper scarce visible as he write on it , and the inexorable necessity drive on the pen . what man among we have not have night and hour like these ? but to the manly heart -- severe as these pang be , they be endurable : long as the night seem , the dawn come at last , and the wound heal , and the fever abate , and rest come , and you can afford to look back on the past misery with feeling that be anything but bitter . two or three book for reference , fragment of tear - up manuscript , drawer open , pens and inkstand , line half visible on the blotting - paper , a bit of sealing - wax twist and bite and break into sundry piece -- such relic as these be about the table , and fling himself down in 's empty chair -- no thing accord to he wont , or in spite of himself . there be a gap in the bookcase ( next to the old College Plato , with the Boniface Arm ) , where 's bible use to be . he have take that with he , think . he know why he friend be gone . dear , dear old ! rub he hand over he eye . oh , how much wiser , how much better , how much nobler he be than I ! he think . where be such a friend , or such a brave heart ? where shall I ever hear such a frank voice , and kind laughter ? where shall I ever see such a true gentleman ? no wonder she love he . bless he ! what be I compare to he ? what could she do else but love he ? to the end of we day we will be she brother , as fate wills that we can be no more . we will be she knights , and wait on she : and when we be old , we will say how we love she . dear , dear old ! when descend to he own chamber , he eye fell on the letter - box of he outer door , which he have previously overlooked , and there be a little note to , , in 's well - know handwriting , have put into Pen' box probably as he be go away . " dear ,-- I shall be half - way home when you breakfast , and intend to stay over , in , or elsewhere . " I have my own opinion of the issue of matter about which we talk in ----- yesterday ; and think my presence de trop . " . g . w . " " give my very best regards and adieux to you cousin . " and so be gone , and , the laundress , rule over he empty chamber . Pen of course have to go and see he uncle on the day after they colloquy , and not be admit , he naturally go to 's apartment , where the old lady instantly ask for , and insist that he should come to dinner . " be
be gone , " say , and he take out poor 's scrap of paper , and hand it to , who look at it -- do not look at in return , but pass the paper back to he , and walk away . rush into a eloquent eulogium upon he dear old to , who be astonished at he enthusiasm . she have never hear he so warm in praise of anybody ; and tell he with she usual frankness , that she do not think it have be in he nature to care so much about any other person . as be pass in , in one of he many walk to the hotel where liv , and whither duty to he uncle carry yoArthu every day , yoArthu see issuing from . 's celebrate shop a old friend , who be follow to he brougham by a obsequious shopman bear parcel . the gentleman be in the deepest mourning : the brougham , the driver , and the horse be in mourning . Grief in easy circumstance and support by the comfortablest spring and cushion , be typify in the equipage and the little gentleman , its proprietor . " what , ! , ! " cry out Pen-- the reader , no doubt , have likewise recognise 's old schoolfellow -- and he hold out he hand to the heir of the late lamented , , the master of Logwood and other house , the principal partner in the great brewery of and : the greater portion of 's . a little hand , cover with a glove of the deepest ebony , and set off by three inch of a snowy wristband , be put forth to meet 's salutation . the other little hand hold a little morocco case , contain , no doubt , something precious , of which have just become proprietor in Messrs . 's shop . 's keen eye and satiric turn show he at once upon what errand have be employ ; and he think of the heir in Horace pour forth the gather wine of he father 's vat ; and that human nature be pretty much the same in as in the . " est mort . Vive le ! " say . " ah ! " say the other . " yes . thank you -- very much obliged . how do you do , ?-- very busy -- good - bye ! " and he jump into the black brougham , and sate like a little black care behind the black coachman . he have blush on see , and show other sign of guilt and perturbation , which attribute to the novelty of he situation ; and on which he begin to speculate in he usual sardonic manner . " yes : so wag the world , " think . " the stone close over the , and the reign in he stead . the old minister at the brewery come and kneel before he with they book ; the drayman , he subject , fl up they red cap , and shout for he . what a grave deference and sympathy the banker and the lawyer show ! there be too great a stake at issue between those two that they should ever love each other very cordially . as long as one man keep another out of twenty thousand a year , the younger must be always hanker after the crown , and the wish must be the father to the thought of possession . thank heaven , there be no thought of money between I and we dear mother , . " " there never could have be . you would have spurn it ! " cry . " why make yourself more selfish than you be , ; and allow you mind to own for a instant that it would have entertain such -- such dreadful meanness ? you make I blush for you , Arthur : you make I ---- " she eye finish this sentence , and she pass she handkerchief across they . " there be some truth which woman will never acknowledge , " say , " and from which you modesty always turn away . I do not say that I ever know the feeling , only that I be glad I have not the temptation . be there any harm in that confession of weakness ? " " we be all teach to ask to be deliver from evil , , " say , in a low voice . " I be glad if you be spare from that great crime ; and only sorry to think that you could by any possibility have be lead into it . but you never could ; and you do not think you could . you act be generous and kind : you disdain mean action . you take Blanche without money , and without a bribe . yes , thanks be to , dear brother . you could not have sell yourself away ; I know you could not when it come to the day , and you do not . praise be -- be where praise be due . why do this horrid scepticism pursue you , my ? why doubt and sneer at you own heart -- at every one 's ? oh , if you know the pain you give I -- how I lie awake and think of those hard sentence , dear brother , and wish they unspoken , unthotch ! " " do I cause you many thought and many tear , ? " ask . the fulness of innocent love beam from she in reply . a smile heavenly pure , a glance of unutterable tenderness , sympathy , pity , shine in she face -- all which indication of love and purity Arthur beheld and worship in she
she , as you would watch they in a child , as one fancie one might regard they in a angel . " I -- I do not know what I have do , " he say , simply , " to have merit such regard from two such woman . it be like undeserved praise , -- or too much good fortune , which frighten one -- or a great post , when a man feel that he be not fit for it . ah , sister , how weak and wick we be ; how spotless , and full of love and truth , make you ! I think for some of you there have be no fall , " he say , look at the charming girl with a almost paternal glance of admiration . " you can not help have sweet thought , and do good action . dear creature ! they be the flower which you bear . " " and what else , sir ? " ask . " I see a sneer come over you face . what be it ? why do it come to drive all the good thought away ? " " a sneer , be there ? I be think , my dear , that nature in make you so good and love do very well : but ----" " but what ? what be that wick but ? and why be you always call it up ? " " but will come in spite of we . but be reflection . but be the sceptic 's familiar , with whom he have make a compact ; and if he forget it , and indulge in happy day -dream , or building of air - castle , or listen to sweet music let we say , or to the bell ring to church , but tap at the door , and say , master , I be here . you be my master ; but I be yours . go where you will you can not travel without I . I will whisper to you when you be on you knee at church . I will be at you marriage pillow . I will sit down at you table with you child . I will be behind you death curtain . that be what but be , " say . " Pen , you frighten I , " cry . " do you know what but come and say to I just now , when I be look at you ? but say , if that girl have reason as well as love , she would love you no more . if she know you as you be -- the sullied , selfish being which you know -- she must part from you , and could give you no love and no sympathy . do not I say , " he add fondly , " that some of you seem exempt from the fall ? love you know ; but the knowledge of evil be keep from you . " " what be this you young folk be talk about ? " ask , who at this moment make she appearance in the room , have perform , in the mystic retirement of she own apartment , and under the hand of she attendant , those elaborate toilet -rite without which the worthy old lady never present herself to public view . " , you be always come here . " " it be very pleasant to be here , " yoArthu say ; " and we be talk , when you come in , about my friend , whom I meet just now ; and who , as you ladyship know , have succeed to he father 's kingdom . " " he have a very fine property , he have fifteen thousand a year . he be my cousin . he be a very worthy young man . he must come and see I , " say , with a look at . " he have be engage for many year past to he cousin , " ---- " " be a foolish little chit , " say , with much dignity ; " and I have no patience with she . she have outrage every feeling of society . she have break she father 's heart , and throw away fifteen thousand a year . " " throw away ? what have happen ? " ask . " it will be the talk of the town in a day or two ; and there be no need why I should keep the secret any longer , " say , who have write and receive a dozen letter on the subject . " I have a letter yesterday from my daughter , who be stay at until all the world be obliged to go away on account of the frightful catastrophe which happen there . when come home from , and after the funeral , go down on she knee to she father , say that she never could marry she cousin , that she have contract another attachment , and that she must die rather than fulfil she contract . poor , who be dreadfully embarrassed , show he daughter what the state of he affair be , and that it be necessary that the arrangement should take place ; and in fine , we all suppose that she have listen to reason , and intend to comply with the desire of she family . but what have happen ?-- last she go out after breakfast with she maid , and be marry in the very church in to , she father 's own chaplain and she brother 's tutor ; a red - hair widower with two child . poor dear be in a dreadful way : he wish should marry or ; but be mark
mark with the small - pox , and be ten year older than he be . and , of course , now the young man be he own master , he will think of choosing for himself . the blow on be very cruel . she be inconsolable . she have the house in for she life , and she settlement , which be very handsome . have you not meet she ? yes , she dine one day at 's -- the first day I see you , and a very disagreeable young man I think you be . but I have form you . we have form he , have not we , ? where be ? let he come . that horrid , the dentist , will keep I in town another week . " to the latter part of she ladyship 's speech give no ear . he be think for whom could be purchase those trinket which he be carry away from the jeweller 's ? why do seem anxious to avoid he ? could he be still faithful to the attachment which have agitate he so much , and send he abroad eighteen month back ? ! the bracelet and present be for some of 's old friend of the or the french theatre . rumours from and , rumours such as be borne to club smoking - room , have announce that the young man have find distraction ; or , preclude from he virtuous attachment , the poor fellow have fling himself back upon he old companion and amusement -- not the only man or woman whom society force into evil , or debar from good ; not the only victim of the world 's selfish and wick law . as a good thing when it be to be do can not be do too quickly , be anxious that marriage intention should be put into execution as speedily as possible , and press on he arrangement with rather a feverish anxiety . why could she not wait ? Pen could afford to do so with perfect equanimity , but would hear of no delay . she write to : she implor : she use every means to urge expedition . it seem as if she could have no rest until 's happiness be complete . she offer herself to dearest Blanche to come and stay at with she , when should go on she intend visit to the reign house of ; and although the old dowager scold , and order , and command , be deaf and disobedient : she must go to , she would go to : she who ordinarily have no will of she own , and comply smilingly with anybody 's whim and caprice , show the most selfish and obstinate determination in this instance . the dowager lady must nurse herself in she rheumatism , she must read herself to sleep , if she would not hear she maid , whose voice croak , and who make sad work of the sentimental passage in the novel -- must go , -- and be with she new sister . in another week , she propose , with many love and regards to dear , to pass some time with dearest Blanche . Dearest Blanche write instantly in reply to dearest 's no. 1 , to say with what extreme delight she should welcome she sister : how charme it would be to practise they old duet together , to wander o 'er the grassy sward , and amidst the yellow wood of and ! Blanche count the hour till she should embrace she dearest friend . , no. 2 , express she delight at 's affectionate reply . she hope that they friendship would never diminish ; that the confidence between they would grow in after year ; that they should have no secret from each other ; that the aim of the life of each would be to make one person happy . Blanche , no. 2 , follow in two day . " how provoke ! they house be very small , the two spare bedroom be occupy by that horrid and she daughter , who have think proper to fall ill ( she always fall ill in country - house ) , and she could not or would not be move for some day . " , no . 3 . " it be indeed very provoke . have hope to hear one of dearest b . 's dear song on ; but she be the more consoled to wait , because be not very well , and like to be nurse by she . poor major be very unwell , too , in the same hotel -- too unwell even to see , who be constant in he call on he uncle . 's heart be full of tenderness and affection . she have know Arthur all she life . she would answer " -- yes , even in italic she would answer --" for he kindness , he goodness , and he gentleness . " Blanche , no . 3 . " what be this most surprising , most extraordinary letter from A . p.? what do dearest know about it ? what have happen ? what , what mystery be envelo under he frightful reserve ? " Blanche , no. 3 , require a explanation ; and it can not be better give than in the surprising and mysterious letter of . and " dear , " yoArthu write , " you be always read and dream pretty dramas , and excit romance in real life : be you now prepare to enact a part of one ? and not the pleasantest part , dear , that in which the heroine take possession of she father 's palace and wealth , and introduce she husband to the loyal retainer and faithful
faithful vassal , greet she happy bridegroom with ' all of this be mine and thine , ' -- but the other character , that of the luckless lady , who suddenly discover that she be not the 's wife , but 's the beggar 's : that of 's wife , who come in just as she husband have kick over the tray of porcelain which be to be the making of he fortune -- but stay ; , who kick down the china , be not a marry man ; he have cast he eye on the 's daughter , and he hope of she go to the ground with the shattered bowl and tea - cup . " will you be the 's daughter , and refuse and laugh to scorn , or will you be the of , and love the ? I will act that part if you like . I will love you my best in return . I will do my all to make you humble life happy : for humble it will be : at least the odd be against any other conclusion ; we shall live and die in a poor prosy humdrum way . there will be no stars and epaulette for the hero of we story . I shall write one or two more story , which will presently be forgote . I shall be call to the , and try to get on in my profession : perhaps some day , if I be very lucky , and work very hard ( which be absurd ) , I may get a colonial appointment , and you may be a indian judge 's lady . meanwhile . I shall buy back the ; the publisher be tired of it since the death of poor , and will sell it for a small sum . will be my right hand , and write it up to a respectable sale . I will introduce you to the sub-editor , and I know who in the end will be , -- a very nice gentle creature , who have liv sweetly through a sad life and we will jog on , I say , and look out for better time , and earn we liive decently . you shall have the opera - box , and superintend the fashionable intelligence , and break you little heart in the poet 's corner . shall we live over the office ?-- there be four very good room , a kitchen , and a garret for , in in the ; or would you like a house in the ?-- it would be very pleasant , only there be that halfpenny toll at the . the boy may go to 's , may not they ? do all this read to you like a joke ? " ah , dear , it be no joke , and I be sober and tell the truth . we fine day - dream be gone . we carriage have whir out of sight like 's : we house in have be whisk away into the air by a malevolent , and I be no more a member of parliament than I be a Bishop on he bench in the house of Lords , or a with a garter at he knee . you know pretty well what my property be , and you own little fortune : we may have enough with those two to live in decent comfort ; to take a cab sometimes when we go out to see we friend , and not to deny ourselves a omnibus when we be tired . but that be all : be that enough for you , my little dainty lady ? I doubt sometimes whether you can bear the life which I offer you -- at least , it be fair that you should know what it will be . if you say , ' yes , , I will follow you fate whatever it may be , and be a loyal and love wife to aid and cheer you ' -- come to I , dear Blanche , and may help I so that I may do my duty to you . if not , and you look to a higher station , I must not bar 's fortune -- I will stand in the crowd , and see you ladyship go to when you be present , and you shall give I a smile from you chariot window . I see go to the drawing - room last season : the happy husband at she side glitter with star and cordon . all the flower in the garden bloom in the coachman 's bosom . will you have these and the chariot , or walk on foot and mmend you husband 's stocking ? " I can not tell you now -- afterward I might , should the day come when we may have no secret from one another -- what have happen within the last few hour which have change all my prospects in life : but so it be , that I have learn something which force I to give up the plan which I have form , and many vain and ambitious hope in which i have be indulge . I have write and despatch a letter to , say that I can not accept he seat in parliament until after my marriage ; in like manner I can not and will not accept any larger fortune with you than that which have always belong to you since you grandfather 's death , and the birth of you half - brother . you good mother be not in the least aware -- I hope she never may be -- of the reason which force I to this very strange decision . they arise from a painful circumstance , which be attributable to none
none of we fault ; but , have once befall , they be as fatal and irreparable as that shock which overset honest 's porcelain , and shatte all he hope beyond the power of mending . I write gaily enough , for there be no use in bewail such a hopeless mischance . we have not draw the great prize in the lottery , dear Blanche : but I shall be contente enough without it , if you can be so ; and I repeat , with all my heart , that I will do my best to make you happy . " and now , what news shall I give you ? my uncle be very unwell , and take my refusal of the seat in parliament in sad dudgeon : the scheme be he , poor old gentleman , and he naturally bemoan its failure . but , , and I have a council of war : they know this awful secret , and back I in my decision . you must love as you love what be generous and upright and noble ; and as for -- she must be we sister , Blanche , we , we good angel . with two such friend at home , what need we care for the world without ; or who be member for , or who be ask or not ask to the great ball of the season ? " to this frank communication come back the letter from to , and one to himself , which perhaps he own letter justify . " you be spoilead by the world , " Blanche write ; " you do not love you poor Blanche as she would be love , or you would not offer thus lightly to take she or to leave she , no , , you love I not -- a man of the world , you have give I you plight troth , and be ready to redeem it ; but that entire affection , that love whole and abide , where -- where be that vision of my youth ? I be but a pastime of you life , and I would be its all ; -- but a fleeting think , and I would be you whole soul . I would have we two heart one ; but ah , my , how lonely yours be ! how little you give I of it ! you speak of we part with a smile on you lip ; of we meeting , and you care not to hasten it ! be life but a disillusion , then , and be the flower of we garden fade away ? I have wept -- I have pray -- I have pass sleepless hour -- I have she bitter , bitter tear over you letter ! to you I bring the gushing poesy of my be -- the yearning of the soul that long to be love -- that pine for love , love , love , beyond all !-- that fling itself at you foot , and cry , love I , ! you heart beat no quicker at the kneeling appeal of my love !-- you proud eye be dim by no tear of sympathy !-- you accept my soul 's treasure as though ' twhere dross ! not the pearl from the unfathomable deep of affection ! not the diamonds from the cavern of the heart . you treat I like a slave , and bid I bow to my master ! be this the guerdon of a free maiden -- be this the price of a life 's passion ? ah I ! when be it otherwise ? when do love meet with atch but disappointment ? could I hope ( fond fool ! ) to be the exception to the lot of my race ; and lay my fevered brow on a heart that comprehend my own ? Foolish girl that I be ! one by one , all the flower of my young life have fade away ; and this , the last , the sweetest , the dearest , the fondly , the madly love , the wildly cherish -- where be it ? but no more of this . hee not my bleed heart .-- bless you , bless you always , ! " I will write more when I be more collect . my rack brain render think almost impossible . I long to see ! she will come to we directly we return from the country , will she not ? and you , cold one ! benefit . " the word of this letter be perfectly clear , and write in 's neatest hand upon she scent paper ; and yet the meaning of the composition not a little puzzled Pen . do Blanche mean to accept or to refuse he polite offer ? she phrase either mean that do not love she , and she decline he , or that she take he , and sacrifice herself to he , cold as he be . he laugh sardonically over the letter , and over the transaction which occasion it . he laugh to think how Fortune have jilt he , and how he deserv he slippery fortune . he turn over and over the musky gilt - ed riddle . it amuse he humour : he enjoy it as if it have be a funny story . he be thus seat , twiddl the queer manuscript in he hand , joke grimly to himself , when he servant come in with a card from a gentleman , who wish to speak to he very particularly . and if have go out into the passage , he would have see , suck he stick , roll he eye , and show great mark of anxiety , he old acquaintance , . " on particular business !
! pray , beg to come in , " say , amuse rather ; and not the less so when poor appear before he . " pray take a chair , , " say , in he most superb manner . " in what way can I be of service to you ? " " I have rather not speak before the flunk -- before the man , : " on which 's attendant quit the room . " I be in a fix , " say , gloomily . " indeed . " " she send I to you , " continue the young surgeon . " what , ? be she well ? I be come to see she , but I have have a great deal of business since my return to . " " I hear of you through my and , " break in . " I wish you joy , , both of the borough and the lady , sir . Fanny wish you joy , too , " he add , with something of a blush . " there be many a slip between the cup and the lip ! who know what may happen , , or who will sit in parliament for Clavering next session ? " " you can do anything with my governor , " continue . " you get he . the old boy be very much pleased , sir , at you call he in . write I so . do you think you could speak to the governor for I , ? " " and tell he what ? " " I have go and do it , sir , " say , with a particular look . " you -- you do not mean to say you have -- you have do any wrong to that dear little creature , sir ? " say , start up in a great fury . " I hope not , " say , with a hangdog look : " but I have marry she . and I know there will be a awful shindy at home . it be agree that I should be take into partnership when I have pass the College , and it be to have be and . but I would have it , confound it . it be all over now , and the old boy 's write I that he be come up to town for drug : he will be here to - morrow , and then it must all come out . " " and when do this event happen ? " ask , not over well please , most likely , that a person who have once attract some portion of he royal good graces should have transfer she allegiance , and consol herself for he loss . " last be five week -- it be two day after come to 's , " answer . remember that Blanche have write and mention she visit . " I be call in , " say . " I be in the look after old Cos's leg ; and about something else too , very likely : and I meet , who tell I there be a woman take ill in chambers , and go up to give she my professional service . it be the old lady who attend -- she housekeeper , or some such thing . she be take with strong hysteric : I find she kick and scream like a good one -- in 's chamber , along with he and , and cry and as pale as a sheet ; and not fume about -- a regular kick - up . they be two hour in the chamber ; and the old woman go whoope off in a cab . she be much worse than the young one . I call in next day to see if I could be of any service , but they be go without so much as thanke I : and the day after I have business of my own to attend to -- a bad business too , " say , gloomily . " but it be do , and can not be undone ; and we must make the best of it " she have know the story for a month , think , with a sharp pang of grief , and a gloomy sympathy -- this account for she letter of to - day . she will not implicate she father , or divulge he secret ; she wish to let I off from the marriage -- and find a pretext -- the generous girl ! " do you know who be , sir ? " ask , after the pause during which have be think of he own affair . " Fanny and I have talk he over , and we can not help fancie that it be . 's first husband come to life again , and she who have just marry a second . perhaps Lightfoot will not be very sorry for it , " sigh , look savagely at , for the demon of jealousy be still in possession of he soul ; and now , and more than ever since he marriage , the poor fellow fancie that 's heart belong to he rival . " let we talk about you affair , " say . " show I how I can be of any service to you , . let I congratulate you on you marriage . I be thankful that , who be so good , so fascinating , so kind a creature , have find a honest man , and a gentleman who will make she happy . show I what I can do to help you . " " she think you can , sir , " say , accept Pen's proffer hand , " and I be very much
much oblige to you , I be sure ; and that you might talk over my father , and break the business to he , and my mother , who always have she back up about be a clergyman 's daughter . be not of a good family , I know , and not up to we in breeding and that -- but she be a Huxter now . " " the wife take the husband 's rank , of course , " say . " and with a little practice in society , " continue , imbib he stick , " she will be as good as any girl in . you should hear she sing and play on the piano . do you ever ? tatch she . and she will do on the stage , if the governor be to throw I over ; but I would rather not have she there . she can not help be a coquette , , she can not help it . , sir ! I will be bound to say , that two or three of the chap , that I have bring into my place , be sit with she now : even , that I take down as my best man , be as bad as the rest , and she will go on singing and make eye at he . it be what say , if there be twenty man in a room , and one not take notice of she , she would not be satisfied until the twentieth be at she elbow . " " you should have she mother with she , " say , laugh . " she must keep the lodge . she can not see so much of she family as she use . I can not , you know , sir , go on with that lot . consider my rank in life , " say , put a very dirty hand up to he ching . " fait , " say , who be infinitely amused , and concern whom mutato nomine ( and of course concern nobody else in the world ) the fable might have be narrate . as the two gentleman be in the midst of this colloquy , another knock come to door , and he servant presently announce . the old man follow slowly , he pale face blushing , and he hand trembl somewhat as he take . he cough , and wip he face in he check cotton pocket - handkerchief , and sate down with he hand on he knee , the sunshining on he bald head . look at the homely figure with no small sympathy and kindness . this man , too , have have he grief and he wound , think . this man , too , have bring he genius and he heart , and lay they at a woman 's foot ; where she spur they . the chance of life have go against he , and the prize be with that creature yonder . 's bridegroom , thus mutely apostrophise , have wink meanwhile with one eye at old Bows , and be drive hole in the floor with the cane which he love . " so we have lost , , and here be the lucky winner , " say , look hard at the old man . " here be the lucky winner , sir , as you say . " " I suppose you have come from my place ? " ask , who , have wink at with one eye , now favour with a wink of the other -- a wink which seem to say , " Infatuate old boy -- you understand -- over head and ear in love with she poor old fool . " " yes , I have be there ever since you go away . it be . who send I after you : who say that she think you might be do something stupid -- something like yourself , . " " there be as big fools as I be , " grow the young surgeon . " a few , p'rap , " say the old man ; " not many , let we trust . yes , she send I after you for fear you should offend ; and I daresay because she think you would not give she message to he , and beg he to go and see she ; and she know I would take she errand . do he tell you that , sir ? " blush scarlet , and cover he confusion with a imprecation . laugh ; the scene suite he bitter humour more and more . " I have no doubt be go to tell I , " yoArthu say , " and very much flatter I be sure I shall be to pay my respects to he wife . " " it be in , over the baker 's , on the right hand side as you go from 's , " continue , without any pity . " you know , ? 's lead into . have be down the street many a time with ragged shoe , and a bundle of penny - a - lining for the 's . you literary gent be better off now -- eh ? you ride in you cab , and wear yellow kid glove now . " " I have know so many brave and good man fail , and so many quack and impostor succeed , that you mistake I if you think I be puffe up by my own personal good luck , old friend , " yoArthu say , sadly . " do you think the prize of life be carry by the most deserve ? and set up that mean test of prosperity for merit ? you must feel that you be
be as good as I . I have never question it . it be yoyou that be peevish against the freak of fortune , and grudge the good luck that befall other . it be not the first time you have unjustly accuse I , . " " perhaps you be not far wrong , sir , " say the old fellow , wip he bald forehead . " I be think about myself and grumbl ; most man do when they get on that subject . here be the fellow that have get the prize in the lottery ; here be the fortunate youth . " " I do not know what you be drive at , " say , who have be much puzzl as the above remark pass between he two companion . " perhaps not , " say , drily . " Mrs . h . send I here to look after you , and to see that you bring that little message to , which you do not , you see , and so she be right . women always be ; they have always a reason for everything . why , sir , " he say , turn round to with a sneer , " she have a reason even for give I that message . I be sit with she after you leave we , very quiet and comfortable ; I be talk away , and she be mende you shirts , when you two young friend , and , look in from 's ; and then it be she find out that she have this message to send . you need not hurry yourself , she do not want you back again ; they will stay these two hour , I daresay . " arise with great perturbation at this news , and plunge he stick into the pocket of he paletot , and seize he hat . " you will come and see we , sir , will not you ? " he say to . " you will talk over the governor , will not you , sir , if I can get out of this place and down to ? " " you will promise to attend I gratis if ever I fall ill at , will you , ? " say , good - naturedly . " I will do anything I can for you . I will come and see . Huxter immediately , and we will conspire together about what be to be do . " " I think that would send he out , sir , " Bows say , drop into he chair again as soon as the young surgeon have quit the room . " and it be all true , sir -- every word of it . she want you back again , and send she husband after you . she cajole everybody , the little devil . she try it on you , on I , on poor , on the young chap from 's . she be get a little court of 'em already . and if there be nobody there , she practise on the old german baker in the shop , or coax the black sweeper at the crossing . " " be she fond of that fellow ? " ask . " there be no accounting for like and dislike , " Bows answer . " yes , she be fond of he ; and have take the thing into she head , she would not rest until she marry he . they have they banns publish at 's , and nobody hear it or know any just cause or impediment . and one day she slip out of the porter 's lodge and have the business done , and go off to Gravesend with ; and leave a note for I to go and explain all thing to she ma . bless you ! the old woman know it as well as I do , though she pretend ignorance . and so she go , and I be alone again . I miss she , sir , trip along that court , and come for she singing lesson ; and I have no heart to look into the porter 's lodge now , which look very empty without she , the little flirting thing . and I go and sit and dangle about she lodging , like a old fool . she make th'ey very trim and nice , though ; get up all 's shirt and clothes : cook he little dinner , and sings at she business like a little lark . what be the use of be angry ? I lent th'ey three pound to go on with : for they have not get a shilling till the reconciliation , and come down . " when Bows have take he leave , carry he letter from , and the news which he have just receive , to he usual adviser , . it be wonderful upon how many point , who generally follow he own opinion , now want another person 's counsel . he could hardly so much as choose a waistcoat without refer to : if he want to buy a horse he must have 's opinion ; all which mark of deference ten greatly to the amusement of the shrewd old lady with whom live , and whose plan regard she protegee we have indicate . yoArthu produce 's letter then to , and ask she to interpret it . be very much agitate and puzzl by the contents of the note . " it seem to I , " she say , " as if Blanche be act very artfully . " " and wish so to place matter that she may take I or leave I ? be it not so ? " " it be , I be
be afraid , a kind of duplicity which do not augur well for you future happiness ; and be a bad reply to you own candour and honesty , . do you know , I think , I think -- I scarcely like to say what I think , " say with a deep blush ; but of course the blushing young lady yield to she cousin 's persuasion , and express what she thought were . " it look to I , Arthur , as if there might be -- there might be somebody else , " say , , with a repetition of the blush . " and if there be , " break in , " and if I be free once again , will the best and dearest of all woman ---- " " you be not free , dear brother , " say calmly . " you belong to another ; of whom I own it grieve I to think ill . but I can not do otherwise . it be very odd that in this letter she do not urge you to tell she the reason why you have broken arrangement which would have be so advantageous to you ; and avoid speak on the subject . she somehow seem to write as if she know she father 's secret . " say , " yes , she must know it ; " and tell the story , which he have just hear from , of the interview at 's . " it be not so that she describe the meeting , " say ; and , go to she desk , produce from it that letter of 's which mention she visit to 's . 'Another disappointment -- only the and a friend of he in the room . ' this be all that Blanche have say . " but she be bound to keep she father 's secret , , " add . " and yet , and yet -- it be very puzzling . " the puzzle be this , that for three week after this eventful discovery Blanche have be only too eager about she dearest ; be urging , as strongly as so much modesty could urge , the completion of the happy arrangement which be to make she 's for ever ; and now it seem as if something have interfere to mar these happy arrangement -- as if yoArthu poor be not quite so agreeable to Blanche as and a member of parliament -- as if there be some mystery . at last she say : " be not very far off , be it , ? have not you better go and see she ? " they have be in town a week , and neither have thought of that simple plan before ! show how yoArthu have better have take a return -ticket the train carry Arthur only too quickly to , though he have time to review all the circumstance of he life as he make the brief journey ; and to acknowledge to what sad conclusion he selfishness and waywardness have lead he . " here be the end of hope and aspiration , " think he , " of romance and ambition ! where I yield or where I be obstinate , I be alike unfortunate ; my mother implore I , and I refuse a angel ! say I have take she ; force on I as she be , would never have be a angel to I . I could not have give she my heart at another 's instigation ; I never could have know she as she be have I be oblige to ask another to interpret she qualitie and point out she virtue . I yield to my uncle 's solicitation , and accept on he guarantee , and a seat in parliament , and wealth , and ambition , and a career ; and see !-- fortune come and leave I the wife without the dowry , which I have take in compensation of a heart . why be I not more honest , or be I not less so ? it would have cost my poor old uncle no pang to accept 's fortune whencesoever it come ; he can not even understand , he be bitterly indignant , heart - stricken , almost , at the scruple which actuate I in refuse it . I dissatisfy everybody . a maimed , weak , imperfect wretch , it seem as if I be unequal to any fortune . I neither make myself nor any one connect with I happy . what prospect be there for this poor little frivolous girl , who be to take my obscure name and share my fortune ? I have not even ambition to excite I , or self - esteem enough to conseal myself , much more she , for my failure . if I be to write a book that should go through twenty edition , why , I should be the very first to sneer at my reputation . say I could succeed at the , and achieve a fortune by bullying witness and twiste evidence ; be that a fame which would satisfy my longing , or a calling in which my life would be well spend ? how I wish I could be that priest opposite , who never have lift he eye from he breviary , except when we be in Reigate tunnel , when he could not see ; or that old gentleman next he , who scowl at he with eye of hatred over he newspaper . the priest shut he eye to the world , but have he thought on the book , which be he directory to the world to come . he neighbou hate he as a monster , tyrant , persecutor , and fancie burn martyr , and that
that pale countenance look on , and light up by the flame . these have no doubt ; these march on trustfully , bear they load of logic . " " would you like to look at the paper , sir ? " here interpose the stout gentleman ( it have a flaming article against the order of the black - coated gentleman who be travel with they in the carriage ) , and thanke he and take it , and pursue he reverie , without read two sentence of the journal . " and yet , would you take either of those man 's creed , with its consequence ? " he think . " ah I ! you must bear you own burthan , fashion you own faith , think you own thought , and pray you own prayer . to what mortal ear could I tell all , if I have a mind ? or who could understand all ? who can tell another 's shortcoming , lose opportunity , weigh the passion which overpower , the defect which incapacitate reason ?-- what extent of truth and right he neighbour 's mind be organised to perceive and to do ?-- what invisible and forgotten accident , terror of youth , chance or mischance of fortune , may have alte the whole current of life ? a grain of sand may alter it , as the flinging of a pebble may end it . who can weigh circumstance , passion , temptation , that go to we good and evil account , save one , before whose awful wisdom we kneel , and at whose mercy we ask absolution ? here it end , " think ; " this day or to - morrow will wind up the account of my youth ; a weary retrospect , alas ! a sad history , with many a page I would fain not look back on ! but who have not be tire or fall , and who have escape without scars from that struggle ? " and he head fall on he breast , and the young man 's heart prostrate itself humbly and sadly before that Throne where sit wisdom , and love , and pity for all , and make its confession . " what matter about fame or poverty ! " he think . " if I marry this woman I have choose , may I have strength and will to be true to she , and to make she happy . if I have child , pray teach I to speak and to do the truth among they , and to leave they a honest name . there be no splendour for my marriage . do my life deserve any ? I begin a new phase of it ; a better than the last may it be , I pray Heaven ! " the train stop at as be make these reflection ; and he hand over the newspaper to he neighbour , of whom he take leave , while the foreign clergyman in the opposite corner still sate with he eye on he book . jump out of the carriage then , he carpet -bag in hand , and briskly determined to face he fortune . a fly carry he rapidly to 's house from the station ; and , as he be transport thither , yoArthu compose a little speech , which he intend to address to , and which be really as virtuous , honest , and well - minde a oration as any man of he turn of mind , and under he circumstance , could have utter . the purport of it be -- " Blanche , I can not understand from you last letter what you meaning be , or whether my fair and frank proposal to you be acceptable or no . I think you know the reason which induce I to forgo the worldly advantage which a union with you offer , and which I could not accept without , as I fancy , be dishonoure . if you doubt of my affection , here I be ready to prove it . let Smirke be call in , and let we be marry out of hand ; and with all my heart I purpose to keep my vow , and to cherish you through life , and to be a true and a loving husband to you . " from the spring out then to the hall - door , where he be meet by a domestic whom he do not know . the man seem to be surprised at the approach of the gentleman with the carpet - bag , which he make no attempt to take from 's hand . " she Ladyship be not at home , sir , " the man remarke . " I be , " yoArthu say . " where be Lightfoot ? " " Lightfoot be gone , " answer the man . " my be out , and my order be ---- " " I hear 's voice in the drawing - room , " say . " take the bag to a dressing - room , if you please ; " and , pass by the porter , he walk straight towards that apartment , from which , as the door open , a warble of melodious note issue . we little be at she piano singe with all she might and fascination . master Clavering be asleep on the sofa , indifferent to the music ; but near Blanche sit a gentleman who be perfectly enrapture with she strain , which be of a passionate and melancholy nature . as the door open , the gentleman start up with ! the music stop , with a little shriek from the singer ; wake up from the sofa , and come forward and say , " what ,
, ! how do you do , ? " he look at the piano , and there , by 's side , be just such another purple - leather box as he have see in 's hand three day before , when the heir of be come out of a jeweller 's shop in . it be open , and curl round the white satin cushion within was , oh , such a magnificent serpentine bracelet , with such a blazing ruby head and diamond tail ! " how de - do , ? " say . Blanco make many motion of the shoulders , and give sign of unrest and agitation . and she put she handkerchief over the bracelet , and then she advanc , with a hand which tremble very much , to greet . " how be dearest ? " she say . the face of look up from he profound mourn -- that face , so piteous and puzzl , be one which the reader 's imagination must depict for himself ; also that of master , who , look at the three interesting individual with a expression of the utmost knowingness , have only time to ejaculate the word , " here be a jolly go ! " and to disappear sniggering . , too , have restrain himself up to that minute ; but look still at , whose ear and cheek tingle with blush , yoArthu burst out into a fit of laughter , so wild and loud , that it frightene Blanche much more than any the most serious exhibition . " and this be the secret , be it ? do not blush and turn away , , my boy . why , man , you be a pattern of fidelity . could I stand between Blanche and such constancy -- could I stand between and fifteen thousand a year ? " " it be not that , , " Blanche say , with great dignity . " it be not money , it be not rank , it be not gold that move I ; but it be constancy , it be fidelity , it be a whole trustful loving heart offer to I , that I treasure -- yes , that I treasure ! " and she make for she handkerchief , but , reflec what be underneath it , she pause . " I do not disow , I do not disguise -- my life be above disguise -- to he on whom it be bestow , my heart must be for ever bare -- that I once think I love you , -- yes , think I be belove by you , I own ! how I cling to that faith ! how I strove , I pray , I longe to believe it ! but you conduct always -- you own word so cold , so heartless , so unkind , have undeceive I . you trifle with the heart of the poor maiden ! you fling I back with scorn the troth which I have plight ! I have explain all -- all to . " " that you have , " say , with devotion , and conviction in he look . " what , all ? " say , with a meaning look at . " it be I be in fault , be it ? well , well , Blanche , be it so . I will not appeal against you sentence , and bear it in silence . I come down here look to very different thing , know , and with a heart most truly and kindly dispose towards you . I hope you may be happy with another , as , on my word , it be my wish to make you so ; and I hope my honest old friend here will have a wife worthy of he loyalty , he constancy , and affection . indeed they deserve the regard of any woman -- even miss Blanche Amory . shake hand , ; do not look askance at I . have anybody tell you that I be a false and heartless character ? " " I think you be a ---- " be begin , in he wrath , when Blanche interpose . " Henry , not a word !-- I pray you let there be forgiveness ! " " you be a angel , by , you be a angel ! " say , at which Blanche look seraphically up to the chandelier . " in spite of what have pass , for the sake of what have pass , I must always regard as a brother , " the seraph continue ; " we have know each other year , we have trode the same field , and pluck the same flowers together . ! ! I beseech you to take hand and to be friend ! forgive you !-- I forgive you , , with my heart I do . should I not do so for make I so happy ? " " there be only one person of we three whom I pity , Blanche , " yoArthu say , gravely , " and I say to you again , that I hope you will make this good fellow , this honest and loyal creature , happy . " " happy ! of ! " say . he could not speak . he happiness gush out at he eye . " she do not know -- she can not know how fond I be of she , and -- and who be I ? a poor little beggar , and she take I up and say she will try and I -- I -- love I . I be not worthy of so much happiness . give we you hand , old boy , since she forgive you after you heartless conduct ,
, and say she love you . I will make you welcome . I tell you I will love everybody who love she . by ---, if she tell I to kiss the ground I will kiss it . tell I to kiss the ground ! I say , tell I . I love you so . you see I love you so . " Blanco look up seraphically again . she gentle bosom heav . she hold out one hand as if to bless , and then royally permit he to kiss it . she take up the pocket - handkerchief and hide she own eye , as the other fair hand be abandon to poor 's tearful embrace . " I swear that be a villain who deceive such a loving creature as that , " say . Blanche lay down the handkerchief , and put hand no. 2 softly on 's head , which be bend down kissing and weep over hand no . 1 . " Foolish boy ? " she say , " it shall be love as it deserve : who could help love such a silly creature ! " and at this moment break in upon the sentimental trio . " I say , ! " he say . " well , ! " " the man want to be pay , and go back . he be have some beer . " " I will go back with he , " cry . " good - bye , Blanche . bless you , Foker , old friend . you know , neither of you want I here . " he longe to be off that instant . " stay -- I must say one word to you . one word in private , if you please , " Blanche say . " you can trust we together , can not you , ? " the tone in which the word Henry be speak , and the appeal , ravish Foker with delight . " trust you ! " say he . " oh , who would not trust you ! come along , , my boy . " " let 's have a cigar , " say , as they go into the hall . " she do not like it , " say , gently . " law bless you -- she do not mind . use to smoke regular , " say the candid youth . " it be but a short word I have to say , " say Blanche to , with great calm , when they be alone . " you never love I , . " " I tell you how much , " say . " I never deceiv you . " " I suppose you will go back and marry , " continue Blanche . " be that what you have to say ? " say . " you be go to she this very night , I be sure of it . there be no deny it . you never care for I . " " et vous ? " " et moi , c'est different . I have be spoil early . I can not live out of the world , out of excitement . I could have do so , but it be too late . if I can not have emotions , I must have the world . you would offer I neither one nor the other . you be blase in everything , even in ambition . you have a career before you , and you would not take it . you give it up !-- for what ?-- for a betise , for a absurd scruple . why would you not have that seat , and be such a puritain ? why should you refuse what be mine by right , by right , entendez - vous ? " " you know all , then ? " say . " only within a month . but I have suspect ever since -- n'importe since when . it be not too late . he be as if he have never be ; and there be a position in the world before you yet . why not sit in parliament , exert you talent , and give a place in the world to yourself , to you wife ? I take celui -la . Il est bon . Il est riche . est --vous le connaissez autant que moi enfin . think you that I would not prefer un homme qui fera parler de moi ? if the secret appear I be rich a million . how do it affect I ? it be not my fault . it will never appear . " " you will tell everything , will not you ? " " Je comprend . Vous refusez , " say Blanche , savagely . " I will tell at my own time , when we be marry . you will not betray I , will you ? you , have a defenceless girl 's secret , will not turn upon she and use it ? S'il I plait de le cacher , mon secret ; pourquoi le donnerai je ? l'aime , mon pauvre pere , voyez -vous ? I would rather live with that man than with you fade intriguer of the world . I must have emotions -- it be 'en donne . Il m'ecrit . Il ecrit tr - bien , voyez -vous --comme un pirate -- comme un Bohemien -- comme un homme . but for this I would have say to my mother -- ma mere ! quitton ce laco mari , cette lache societe -- retournon a mon pere . " " the pirate would have weary you like the rest , " say . " Eh ! Il I faut des emotion , " say Blanche . Pen have never
never see she or know so much about she in all the year of they intimacy as he see and know now : though he see more than exist in reality . for this young lady be not able to carry out any emotion to the full ; but have a sham enthusiasm , a sham hatred , a sham love , a sham taste , a sham grief , each of which flar and shine very vehemently for a instant , but subsid and give place to the next sham emotion . of - making upon the platform at , fume and fret until the arrival of the evening train to , a full half - hour , -- six hour it seem to he ; but even this immense interval be pass , the train arrive , the train s on , the light come in view -- a gentleman who forget he carpet - bag in the train rush at a cab , and say to the man , " drive as hard as you can go to . " the cabman , although a hansom -cabman , say thank you for the gratuity which be put into he hand , and run up the stair of the hotel to 's apartment . be alone in the drawing - room , read , with a pale face , by the lamp . the pale face look up when open the door . may we follow he ? the great moments of life be but moments like the other . you doom be speak in a word or two . a single look from the eyes ; a mere pressure of the hand may decide it ; or of the lip , though they can not speak . when , who have have she after -dinner nap , get up and go into she sitting - room , we may enter with she ladyship . " upon my word , young people ! " be the first word she say , and she attendant make wonder eye over she shoulder . and well may she say so ; and well may the attendant cast wonder eye ; for the young people be in a attitude ; and in such a position as every young lady who read this have hear tell of , or have see , or hope , or at any rate deserve to see . in a word , directly he enter the room , go up to of the pale face , who have not time even to say , what , back so soon ? and seize she outstretch and trembl hand just as she be rise from she chair , fall down on he knee before she , and say quickly , " I have see she . she have engage herself to -- and -- and now , ? " the hand give a pressure -- the eye beam a reply -- the quivering lip answer , though speechless . 's head sink down in the girl 's lap , as he sob out , " come and bless we , dear mother , " and arm as tender as 's once more enfold he . in this juncture it be that come in and say , " upon my word , young people ! ! leave the room . what do you want pok you nose in here ? " start up with look of triumph , still hold 's hand . " she be console I for my misfortune , ma 'am , " he say . " what do you mean by kiss she hand ? I do not know what you will be next do . " kiss she Ladyship 's . " I have be to , " he say , " and see ; and find on my arrival that -- that a villain have transplant I in she affections , " he say with a tragedy air . " be that all ? be that what you be whimper on you knee about ? " say the old lady , grow angry . " you might have keep the news till to - morrow . " " yes -- another have supersed I , " go on ; " but why call he villain ? he be brave , he be constant , he be young , he be wealthy , he be beautiful . " " what stuff be you talk , sir ? " cry the old lady . " what have happen ? " " have jilt I , and accept , . I find she warbl ditty to he as he lay at she foot ; present have be accept , vow exchange , these ten day . be old 's rheumatism , which keep dearest out of the house . he be the most constant and generous of man . he have promise the living of to 's husband , and give she a splendid present on she marriage ; and he rush to fl himself at 's foot the instant he find he be free . " " and so , as you can not get Blanche , you put up with ; be that it , sir ? " ask the old lady . " he act nobly , " say . " I act as she bade I , " say . " never mind how , ; but to the best of my knowledge and power . and if you mean that I be not worthy of , I know it , and pray heaven to better I ; and if the love and company of the best and purest creature in the world can do so , at least I shall have these to help I . " " Hm , hm , " reply the old lady to this , look with rather a
a appease air at the young people . " it be all very well ; but I should have prefer . " and now , to divert the conversation from a theme which be grow painful to some party present , bethotch he of he interview with in the morning , and of 's affair , which he have forget under the immediate pressure and excitement of he own . and he tell the lady how have elevate Fanny to the rank of wife , and what terror he be in respect the arrival of he father . he describe the scene with considerable humour , take care to dwell especially upon that part of it which concern 's coquetry and irrepressible desire of captivat mankind ; he mean being , " you see , , I be not so guilty in that little affair ; it be the girl who make love to I , and I who resist . as I be no longer present , the little siren practise she art and fascination upon other . let that transaction be forget in you mind , if you please ; or visit I with a very gentle punishment for my error . " understand he mean under the eagerness of he explanations . " if you do any wrong , you repent , dear , " she say ; " and you know , " she add , with mean eye and blush , " that I have no right to reproach you . " " Hm ! " grumble the old lady ; " I should have prefer . " " the past be break away . the morrow be before we . I will do my best to make you morrow happy , dear , " say . he heart be humble by the prospect of he happiness : it stand awestricken in the contemplation of she sweet goodness and purity . he like he wife better that she have own to that pass feeling for , and laid bear she generous heart to he . and she -- very likely she be think , " how strange it be that I ever should have care for another ! I be vex almost to think I care for he so little , be so little sorry that he be go away . oh , in these past two month how I have learn to love ! I care about nothing but : my waking and sleeping thought be about he ; he be never absent from I . and to think that he be to be mine , mine ! and that I be to marry he , and not to be he servant as I expect to be only this morning ; for I would have go down on my knee to Blanche to beg she to let I live with he . and now -- oh , it be too much . oh , mother ! mother , that you be here ! " indeed , she feel as if be there -- by she actually , though invisibly . a halo of happiness beame from she . she move with a different step , and bloom with a new beauty . yoArthu see the change ; and the old remark it with she shrewd eye . " what a sly demure little wretch you have be , " she whisper to -- while , in great spirit , be laugh , and tell he story about -- " and how you have keep you secret ! " " how be we to help the young couple ? " say . of course feel a interest in all young couple , as generous lover always love other lover . " we must go and see they , " say . " of course we must go and see they , " say . " I intend to be very fond of . let we go this instant . , may I have the carriage ? " " go now !-- why , you stupid creature , it be eleven o'clock at night . and . have get they nightcap on , I dare say . and it be time for you to go now . good night , . " and begge for ten minute more . " we will go to - morrow morning , then . I will come and fetch you with . " " a earl 's coronet , " say , who , no doubt , be pleased himself , " will have a great effect in and . stay -- , will you join we in a little conspiracy ? " " how do you mean conspiracy , young man ? " " will you please to be a little ill to - morrow ; and when old arrive , will you let I call he in ? if he be put into a good humour at the notion of attend a baronet in the country , what influence will not a countess have on he ? when he be soften -- when he be quite ripe , we will break the secret upon he ; bring in the young people , extort the paternal benediction , and finish the comedy . " " a parcel of stuff , " say the old lady . " take you hat , sir . come away , miss . there -- my head be turn another way . good night , young people . " and who know but the old lady thought of she own early day as she go away on 's arm , nodd she head and hum to herself ? with the early morning come and accord to appointment ; and the desire sensation be , let we hope , effect in , whence the three proceed to wait upon and , at they residence in .
. the two lady look at each other with great interest , and not a little emotion on 's part . she have not see she " guardian , " as she be pleased to call in consequence of he bequest , since the event have occur which have unit she to . " tell I how kind you have be , " she say . " you be always very kind , . and -- and I hope you friend be better , who be take ill in 's , . " " my name be , " say the other , with a blush . " I be -- that be , I be -- that be , I be 's sister ; and we shall always love you for be so good to he when he be ill . and when we live in the country , I hope we shall see each other . and I shall be always happy to hear of you happiness , . " " we be go to do what you and have do , .-- where be ? what nice , snug lodging you have get ! what a pretty cat ! " while be answer these question in reply to , say to herself -- " well , now really ! be this the creature about whom we be all so frightened ? what could he see in she ? she be a homely little thing , but such manners ! well , she be very kind to he , -- bless she for that . " have go out to meet he pa . . say that the old gentleman be to arrive that day at the coffee - house , in the ; and confess that she be in a sad tremor about the meeting . " if he parent cast he off , what be we to do ? " she say . " I shall never pardon myself for bring ruing on my ' usband 's ' ead . you must intercede for we , . if mortal man can , you can bend and influence senior . " Fanny still regard Pen in the light of a superior being , that be evident . no doubt think of the past , as he mark the solemn little tragedy - air and look , the little way , the little trepidation , vanity , of the little bride . as soon as the interview be over , enter Messr . and , who come , of course , to visit , and bring with they a fine fragrance of tobacco . they have watch the carriage at the baker 's door , and remark the coronet with awe . they ask of who be that uncommonly heavy swell who have just drive off ? and pronounce the countess be of the right sort . and when they hear that it be and he sister , they remark that father be only a sawbone ; and that he give himself confound air ; they have be in 's company on the night of he little altercation with in the . return homewards through , and as be just state to Pen's infinite amusement that be very well , but that really there be no beauty in she , -- there might be , but she could not see it , -- as they be lock near , they see young Huxter return to he bride . " the have arrive ; be at the - house -- be in tolerable good - humour -- something about the railway : but he have be afraid to speak about -- about that business . would try it on ? " say he would go and call at that moment upon , and see what might be do . Huxter junior would lurk outside whilst that awful interview take place . the coronet on the carriage inspire he soul also with ; and old himself beheld it with delight , as he look from the coffee - house window on that which it be always a treat to he to survey . " and I can afford to give myself a lark , sir , " say , shak hand with . " of course you know the news ? we have get we bill , sir . we shall have we branch line -- we share be up , sir -- and we buy you three field along the , and put a pretty penny into you pocket , . " " indeed !-- that be good news . " remember that there be a letter from , at chambers , these three day ; but he have not open the communication , be interested with other affair . " I hope you do not intend to grow rich , and give up practice , " say . " we can not lose you at , ; though I hear very good account of you son . my friend , speak most highly of he talents . it be hard that a man of you eminence , though , should be keep in a country town . " " the metropolis would have be my sphere of action , sir , " say , survey the . " but a man take he business where he find it ; and I succeed to that of my father . " " it be my father 's , too , " say . " I sometimes wish I have follow it . " " you , sir , have take a more lofy career , " say the old gentleman . " you aspire to the senate : and to literary honour . you wield the poet' pen , sir , and move in the circle of fashion . we keep a eye upon you at Clavering . we read you
you name in the list of the select party of the nobility . why , it be only the other day that my wife be remark how odd it be that at a party at the of 's you name be not mention . to what member of the aristocracy may I ask do that equipage belong from which I see you descmend ? the Countess Dowager of ? how be she Ladyship ? " " she Ladyship be not very well ; and when I hear that you be come to town , I strongly urge she to see you , , " say . feel , if he have a hundred vote for , he would give they all to . " there be a old friend of yours in the carriage -- a Claver lady , too -- will you come out and speak to she ? " ask . the old surgeon be delighted to speak to a coronet carriage in the midst of the full strand : he run out bowing and smile . Huxter junior , dodge about the district , beheld the meeting between he father and , see the latter put out she hand , and presently , after a little colloquy with , beheld he father actually jump into the carriage , and drive away with . there be no room for , who come back , laugh , to the young surgeon , and tell he whither he parent be bound . during the whole of the journey , that artful coax , and wheedle , and cajol he so adroitly , that the old gentleman would have grant she anything ; and achieve the victory over he by compliment he on he skill , and professe she anxiety to consult he . what be she Ladyship 's symptom ? should he meet she Ladyship 's usual medical attendent ? be call out of town ? he should be delighted to devote he very best energie and experience to she Ladyship 's service . he be so charme with he patient , that he write home about she to he wife and family ; he talk of nothing but to , when that come to partake of beefsteak and oyster - sauce and accompany he parent to the play . there be a simple grandeur , a polite urbanity , a high - breed about she Ladyship , which he have never witness in any woman . she symptom do not seem alarming ; he have prescribe -- : : : with a little Spir : Menth : Pip : and orange - flower , which would be all that be necessary . " seem to be on the most confidential and affectionate foot with she Ladyship . she be about to form a matrimonial connexion . all young people ink to marry . such be she Ladyship 's word ; and the Countess condescende to ask respect my own family , and I mention you by name to she Ladyship , , my boy . I shall look in to - morrow , when , if the remedy which I have prescribe for she Ladyship have have the effect which I anticipate , I shall probably follow they up by a little Spir : Lavend : :-- and so set my noble patient up . what be the theatre which be most frequented by the -- by the higher class in town , hey , ! and to what amusement will you take a old country doctor to - night , hey , sir ? " on the next day , when call in at twelve o'clock , have not yet leave she room , but and be in waiting to receive he . have have a most comfortable night , and be get on as well as possible . how have amuse himself ? at the theatre ? with he son ? what a capital piece it be , and how charmingly Mrs . O'Leary look and sang it ! and what a good fellow young be ! like by everybody , a honour to he profession . he have not he father 's manners , I grant you , or that old - world tone which be pass away from we , but a more excellent , sterl fellow never liv . " he ought to practise in the country whatever you do , sir , " say Arthur --" he ought to marry -- other people be go to do so -- and setle . " " the very word that she Ladyship use yesterday , . he ought to marry . should marry , sir . " " the town be full of temptation , sir , " continue . the old gentleman thought of that houri , . " there be no better safeguard for a young man than a early marriage with a honest affectionate creature . " " no better , sir , no better . " " and love be better than money , be not it ? " " indeed it be , " say . " I agree with so fair a authority , " say the old gentleman , with a bow . " and -- and suppose , sir , " say , " that I have a piece of news to communicate to you . " " bless my soul , ! what do you mean ? " ask the old gentleman . " suppose I have to tell you that a young man , carry away by a irresistible passion for a admirable and most virtuous young creature -- whom everybody fall in love with -- have consult the dictate of reason and he heart , and have marry . suppose I be to tell you that that man be my friend ; that we excellent , we truly noble friend the Countess Dowager of be
be truly interested about he ( and you may fancy what a young man can do in life when that family be interested for he ) ; suppose I be to tell you that you know he -- that he be here -- that he be ---- " " marry ! bless my soul , sir , you do not mean that ! " " and to such a nice creature , dear . " " she Ladyship be charme with she , " say , tell almost the first fib which he have tell in the course of this story . " ! the rascal , be he ? " think the old gentleman . " they will do it , sir , " say ; and go and open the door . and issue thence , and both come and knelt down before the old gentleman . the knee little Fanny find favour in he sight . there must have be some thing attractive about she , in spite of 's opinion . " will never do so any more , sir , " say . " get up , sir , " say . and they get up , and come a little nearer and a little nearer still , and look so pretty and pitiful , that somehow find himself kiss the little crying - laugh thing , and feel as if he like it . " what be you name , my dear ? " he say , after a minute of this sport . " Fanny , papa , " say . we characters be all a month older than they be when the last - describe adventur and conversation occur , and a great number of the personage of we story have chance to reassemble at the little country town where we be first introduce to they . , formerly maitre d'hotel in the service of , of , . , have beg leave to inform the nobility and gentry of ------ shire that he have take that well - known and comfortable hotel , the Clavering Arms , in , where he hope for the continue patronage of the gentleman and family of the county . " this ancient and well - establish house , " 's , " have be repair and decorate in a style of the greatest comfort . hunt with the Dumplingbeare hound will find excellent stabling and loose - box for horse at the Clavering Arms . a commodious billiard - room have be attach to the hotel , and the cellar have be furnish with the choicest wine and spirit , select , without regard to expense , by commercial gentleman will find the Clavering Arms a most comfortable place of resort : and the scale of charge have be regulate for all , so as to meet the economical spirit of the present time . " indeed , there be a considerable air of liveliness about the old inn . the Clavering arm have be splendidly repaint over the gateway . the coffee - room window be bright and fresh , and decorate with holly ; the magistrate have meet in petty session in the card - room of the old . the farmer 's ordinary be hold as of old , and frequent by increase number , who be pleased with 's cuisine . she indian curry and Mulligatawny soup be especially popular : major , the respecte tenant of , , , and other resident gentry , have pronounce in they favour , and have partaken of they more than once both in private and at the dinner of the , attendant on the incorporation of the reading - room , and when the chief inhabitant of that flourish little town meet together and do justice to the hostess 's excellent cheer . the chair be take by , . , support by the esteem rector , ; the vice chair be ably fill by , ( support by the and the ) , the enterprising head of the ribbon factory in , and chief director of the and of the Great western , which will be open in another year , and upon the work of which the engineers and workman be now busily engage . " a interesting event , which be likely to take place in the life of we talented townsman , , , have , we understand , cause he to relinquish the intentions which he have of offer himself as a candidate for we borough : and rumour whisper " ( say the , , and , -- that independent county paper , so distinguished for its unswerving principle and loyalty to the british oak , and so eligible a medium for advertisement ) -- rumour state , say the and , " that should Sir 's failing health oblige he to relinquish he seat in parliament , he will vacate it in favour of a young gentleman of colossal fortune and related to the highest aristocracy of the empire , who be about to contract a matrimonial alliance with a accomplished and lovely lady , connect by the nearest tie with the respect family at . and have arrive at the for the holiday ; and we understand that a large number of the aristocracy be expect , and that festivity of a peculiarly interesting nature will take place there at the commencement of the new year . " the ingenious reader will be enable , by the help of the above announcement , to understand what have take place during the little break which have occur in we narrative . although grumble a little at 's preference for over , those who be aware of the latter 's secret will understand that the young girl could make no other choice , and the kind old lady who have constitute herself 's guardian be not ill please
please that she be to fulfil the great purpose in life of young lady and marry . she inform she maid of the interesting event that very night , and of course , who be perfectly aware of every single circumstance , and keep by , of Fairoaks , in the fullest knowledge of what be pass , be immensely surprised and delighted . " 's income be so much ; the railroad will give he so much more , he state ; have so much , and may probably have a little more one day . for person in they degree , they will be able to manage very well . and I shall speak to my nephew , who I suspect be once rather attach to she , -- but of course that be out of the question ( 'Oh ! of course , my lady ; I should think so indeed !' ) -- not that you know anything whatever about it , or have any business to think at all on the subject ,-- I shall speak to , who be now chief secretary of the and , and have make something . and , , in the morning you will carry down my compliment to major Pendennis , and say that I shall pay he a visit at one o'clock . " --" yes , " mutter the old lady , " the major must be reconcile , and he must leave he fortune to 's child . " accordingly , at one o'clock , the appear at 's , who be delighted , as may be imagine , to receive so noble a visitor . the major have be prepare , if not for the news which she Ladyship be about to give he , at least with the intelligence that Pen's marriage with be break off . the young gentleman bethink he of he uncle , for the first time that day it must be own , and meet he new servant in the hall of the hotel , ask after the major 's health from ; and then go into the coffee - room of the hotel , where he write a half - dozen line to acquaint he guardian with what have occur . " dear uncle , " he say , " if there have be any question between we , it be over now . I go to yesterday , and find that somebody else have carry off the prize about which we be hesitat . , without any compunction for I , have bestow herself upon , with he fifteen thousand a year . I come in suddenly upon they love , and find and leave he in possession . " and you will be glad to hear , write I , that he have sell three of my field at Fairoak to the , at a great figure . I will tell you this , and more when we meet ; and be always you affectionate , -- . " " I think I be aware of what you be about to tell I , " the major say , with a most courtly smile and bow to Pen's ambassadress . " it be a very great kindness of you Ladyship to think of bring I the news . how well you look ! how very good you be ! how very kind you have always been to that young man ! " " it be for the sake of he uncle , " say , most politely . " he have inform I of the state of affair , and write I a nice note , -- yes , a nice note , " continue the old gentleman ; " and I find he have have a increase to he fortune , -- yes ; and , all thing consider , I do not much regret that this affair with be manquee , though I wish for it once , in fact , all thing consider , I be very glad of it . " " we must conseal he , major Pendennis , " continue the lady ; " we must get he a wife . " the truth then come across the major 's mind , and he see for what purpose have choose to assume the office of ambassadress . it be not necessary to enter into the conversation which ensue , or to tell at any length how she Ladyship conclude a negotiation which , in truth , be tolerably easy . there could be no reason why should not marry accord to he own and he mother 's wish ; and as for , she support the marriage by intimation which have very great weight with the major , but of which we shall say nothing , as she ladyship ( now , of course , much advanced in year ) be still alive , and the family might be angry ; and , in fine , the old gentleman be quite overcome by the determined graciousness of the lady , and she fondness for . nothing , indeed , could be more bland and kind than 's whole demeanour , except for one moment when the major talk about he boy throw himself away , at which she ladyship break out into a little speech , in which she make the major understand , what poor and he friend acknowledge very humbly , that be a thousand time too good for he . be fit to be the wife of a king , -- be a paragon of virtue and excellence . and it must be say , that when find that a lady of the rank of the Countess of seriously admire , he instantly begin to admire she himself . so that when be request to walk upstairs to 's apartment , and inform and that the major would
would receive they , and appear blushing and happy as she hang on arm , the major give a shaky hand to one and the other , with unaffected emotion and cordiality , and then go through another salutation to , which cause she to blush still more . happy blush ! bright eye beam with the light of love ! the story - teller turn from this group to he young audience , and hope that one day they eye may all shine so . have retreat in the most friendly manner , and the lovely Blanche have bestow she young affections upon a blushing bridegroom with fifteen thousand a year , there be such a outbreak of happiness in 's heart and family as the good Begum have not know for many a year , and she and be on the most delightful term of cordiality and affection . the ardent Foker press onwards the happy day , and be as anxious as might be expect to abridge the period of mourning which have put he in possession of so many charms and amiable quality , of which he have be only , as it be , the heir - apparent , not the actual owner , until then . the gentle Blanche , everythe that she affiance lord could desire , be not averse to gratify the wish of she fond Henry . come up from . Milliner and jeweller be set to work and engage to prepare the delightful paraphernalia of . be in such a good humour , that even benefit by it , and such a reconciliation be effect between this pair , that come to , sate at the head of he own table once more , and appear tolerably flush of money at he billiard - room and gambling - house again . one day , when major and go to dine in place , they find a old acquaintance establish in the quality of major -domo , and the gentleman in black , who , with perfect politeness and gravity , offer they they choice of sweet or dry champagne , be no other than . the be one of the party ; he be in high spirit and condition , and entertain the company with account of he amusement abroad . " it be my who invite I , " say to , under he voice -- " that fellow look as black as thunder when I come in . he be about no good here . I will go away first , and wait for you and major Pendennis at . " help major Pendennis to he great - coat when he be quit the house ; and mutter something about have accept a temporary engagement with the Clavering family . " I have get a paper of yours , , " say the old gentleman . " which you can show , if you please , to , sir , and perfectly welcome , " say , with downcast eye . " I be very much oblige to you , major Pendennis , and if I can pay you for all you kindness I will . " yoArthu overhear the sentence , and see the look of hatred which accompany it , suddenly cry out that he have forget he handkerchief , and run upstairs to the drawing - room again . be still there ; still linger about he siren . give the siren a look full of meaning , and we suppose that the siren understood mean look , for when , after find the veracious handkerchief of which he come in quest , he once more go out , the siren , with a laugh voice , say , " oh , -- -- I want you to tell dear something ! " and she come out to the door . " what be it ? " she ask , shutt the door . " have you tell ? do you know that know all ? " " I know it , " she say . " have you tell ? " " no , no , " she say . " you will not betray I ? " " , " say . " no , he will not , " say Blanche . " I have promise he -- n'importe . wait until after we marriage -- oh , until after we marriage -- oh , how wretch I be , " say the girl , who have be all smile , and , and gaiety during the evening . yoArthu say , " I beg and implore you to tell . tell he now . it be no fault of yours . he will pardon you anything . tell he to - night . " " and give she this -- est la --with my love , please ; and I beg you pardon for call you back ; and if she will be at 's at half - past three , and if can spare she , I should so like to drive with she in the park ; " and she go in , singe and kiss she little hand , as the velvet - foot come up the carpeted stair . hear 's piano break out into brilliant music as he go down to join he uncle ; and they walk away together . briefly tell he what he have do . " what be to be do ? " he ask . " what be to be do , begad ? " say the old gentleman . " what be to be do but to leave it alone ? , let we be thankful , " say the old fellow , with a shudder , " that we be out of the business , and leave it to those it concern . " " I hope to she will
will tell he , " say . " , she will take she own course , " say the old man . " be a dev'lish wide - awake girl , sir , and must play she own card ; and I be doosid glad you be out of it -- doosid glad , begad . who be this smoke ? oh , it be again . he want to put in he oar , I suppose . I tell you , do not meddle in the business , . " strong begin once or twice , as if to converse upon the subject , but the major would not hear a word . he remark on the moonlight on , the weather , the cabstand -- anything but that subject . he bow stifinitely to , and cling to he nephew 's arm , as he turn down 's , and again caution to leave the affair alone . " it have like to have cost you so much , sir , that you may take my advice , " he say . when come out of the hotel , 's cloak and cigar be visible a few door off . the laugh as they meet . " I be a old soldier , too , " he say . " I want to talk to you , . I have hear of all that have happen , and all the chop and change that have take place during my absence . I congratulate you on you marriage , and I congratulate you on you escape , too , -- you understand I . it be not my business to speak , but I know this , that a certain party be as arrant a little -- well -- well , never mind what . you act like a man and a trump , and be well out of it . " " I have no reason to complain , " say . " I go back to beg and entreat poor Blanche to tell Foker all : I hope , for she sake , she will ; but I fear not . there be but one policy , Strong , there be but one . " " and lucky he that can stick to it , " say the . " that rascal mean mischief . he have be lurk about we chamber for the last two month : he have find out that poor mad 's secret . he have be try to discover where he be : he have be pumpe , and make old drink several time . he bribe the porter to tell he when we come back : and he have get into 's service on the strength of he information . he will get very good pay for it , mark my word , the villain . " " where be ? " ask . " at , I believe . I leave he there , and warne he not to come back . I have break with he , after a desperate quarrel , such as one might have expect with such a madman . and I be glad to think that he be in my debt now , and that I have be the means of keep he out of more harm than one . " " he have lose all he winnings , I suppose , " say . " no : he be rather better than when he go away , or be a fortnight ago . he have extraordinary luck at : break the bank several night , and be the fable of the place . he lie himself there with a fellow by the name of , who gather about he a society of all sort of sharper , male and female , , , , . Amory get so insolent , that I be obliged to thrash he one day within a inch of he life . I could not help myself ; the fellow have plenty of pluck , and I have nothing for it but to hit out . " " and do he call you out ? " say . " you think if I have shoot he I should have do nobody any harm ? no , sir ; I wait for he challenge , but it never come and the next time I meet he he beg my pardon , and say , ' Strong , I beg you pardon ; you whop I and you serve I right . ' I shook hand : but I could not live with he after that . I pay he what I owed he the night before , " say strong with a blush , " I pawn everything to pay he , and then I go with my last ten florin , and have a shy at the roulette . if I have lose , I should have let he shoot I in the morning . I be weary of my life . by , sir , be not it a shame that a man like I , who may have have a few bill out , but who never desert a friend , or do a unfair action , should not be able to turn he hand to anything to get bread ? I make a good night , sir , at roulette , and I have do with that . I be go into the wine business . my wife 's relation live at . I intend to bring over spanish wine and ham ; there be a fortune to be make by it , sir , -- a fortune -- here be my card . if you want any sherry or ham , recollect be you man . " and the pull out a handsome card , state that and , 's , be sole agent of the celebrate
celebrate of the of , of of the ; and of the famous Toboso ham , feed on acorn only in the country of . " come and taste 'em , sir , -- come and try th'ey at my chamber . you see , I have a eye to business , and by Jove this time I will succeed . " laugh as he take the card . " I do not know whether I shall be allow to go to bachelor ' party , " he say . " you know I be go to ----" " but you must have sherry , sir . you must have sherry . " " I will have it from you , depend on it , " say the other . " and I think you be very well out of you other partnership . that worthy and he daughter correspond , I hear , " add after a pause . " yes ; she write he the longest rigmarole letter , that I use to read : the sly little devil ; and he answer under cover to . he be for carry she off the first day or two , and nothing would content he but have back he child . but she do not want to come , as you may fancy ; and he be not very eager about it . " here the burst out in a laugh . " why , sir , do you know what be the cause of we quarrel and boxing match ? there be a certain widow at , a Madame la Baronne de la Cruche - cassee , who be not much better than himself , and whom the scoundrel want to marry ; and would , but that I tell she he be marry already . I do not think that she be much better than he be . I see she on the pier at the day I come to . " and now we have brotch up we narrative to the point , whither the announcement in the have already conduct we . it want but very , very few day before that blissful one when should call Blanco he own ; the Clavering folk have all presse to see the most splendid new carriage in the whole world , which be stand in the coach - house at the Clavering Arms ; and show , in grateful return for drink , commonly , by 's head-coachman . be occupy in make some lovely dress for the tenant ' daughter , who be to figure as a sort of bridesmaid ' chorus at the breakfast and marriage ceremony . and immense festivity be to take place at the upon this delightful occasion . " yes , , yes ; a happy tenantry , it be country 's pride , will assemble in the baronial hall , where the beard will wag all . the ox shall be slain , and the cup they will drain ; and the bell shall peal quite genteel ; and my father - in - law , with the tear of sensibility bedew he eye , shall bless we at he baronial porch . that shall be the order of proceedings , I think , ; and I hope we shall see you and you lovely bride by she husband 's side ; and what will you please to drink , sir ? , madam , you will give to my excellent friend and body - surgeon , , , , every refreshment that you hostel affords , and place the festive amount to my account ; and , sir , what will you take ? though you have have enough already , I think ; yes , ha . " so speak in the bar of the . he have apartment at that hotel , and have gather a circle of friend round he there . he treat all to drink who come . he be hail - fellow with every man . he be so happy ! he dance round , 's great ally , as she sate pensive in the bar . he consol , who have already begin to have cause of matrimonial disquiet ; for the truth must be tell , that young Lightfoot , have now the full command of the cellar , have none over he own unbridled desire , and be tippling and tipsy from morning till night . and a piteous sight it be for he fond wife to behold the big youth reel about the yard and coffee - room , or drink with the farmer and tradesman he own neat wine and carefully select stock of spirit . when he could find time , the butler come from the , and take a glass at the expense of the landlord of the Clavering Arms . he watch poor 's tipsy vagary with savage sneer . feel always doubly uncomfortable when she unhappy spouse be under he comrade 's eye . but a few month marry , and to think he have get to this ! could feel for she . could tell she story of man every bit as bad . she have have she own woe too , and she sad experience of man . so it be that nobody seem happy altogether ; and that there be bitter , as remark , in the cup of every man 's life . and yet there do not seem to be any in he , the honest young fellow ! it be brim over with happiness and good - humour . be constant in he attention to . " and yet I do not like he somehow , " say the candid young man to . " he always seem as if he be measure I for my coffin somehow . - in - law 's afraid of he ; pa
pa -in - law , " ahem ! never mind , but ma -in - law be a trump , . " " indeed my be , " and own , with a sigh , that perhaps it have be better for she have she never leave she mistress . " no , I do not like , ; the reason why I can not tell , " continue ; " and he want to be take as my head man . Blanche want I to take he . why do like he so ? " " do like he so ? " the notion seem to disturb very much ; and there come to this worthy landlady another cause for disturbance . a letter , bear the , be bring to she one morning , and she and she husband be quarrell over it as Foker pass down the stair by the bar , on he way to the . he custom be to breakfast there , and bask a while in the presence of ; then , as the company of Clavering tire he exceedingly , and he do not care for sporting , he would return for a hour or two to billiards and the society of the Clavering arm ; then it would be time to ride with , and , after dine with she , he leave she and return modestly to he inn . and he wife be quarrell over the letter . what be that letter from abroad ? why be she always have letter from abroad ? who write 'em ?-- he would know . he do not believe it be she brother . it be no business of he ? it be a business of he ; and , with a curse , he seize hold of he wife , and dash at she pocket for the letter . the poor woman give a scream ; and say , " well , take it . " just as she husband seize on the letter , and enter at the door , she give another scream at see he , and once more try to seize the paper . Lightfoot open it , shak she away , and a enclosure drop down on the breakfast - table . " hand off , man alive ! " cry little , spring in . " do not lay hand on a woman , sir . the man that lay he hand upon a woman , save in the way of kindness , be a -- hallo ! it be a letter for . what be this , ? " begin , in piteous tone of reproach to she husband , -- " you unmanly ! to treat a woman so who take you off the street . oh , you coward , to lay you hand upon you wife ! why do I marry you ? why do I leave my for you ? why do I spend eight hundred pound in fitting up this house that you might drink and guzzle ? " " she get letter , and she will not tell I who write letter , " say , with a muzzy voice ; " it be a family affair , sir . will you take anything , sir ? " " I will take this letter to , as I be go to the , " say , turn very pale ; and take it up from the table , which be arrange for the poor landlady 's breakfast , he go away . " he be comin '-- dammy , who be a -comin ' ? who be , --curse I , who be .? " cry the husband . Lightfoot cry out , " be quiet , you tipsy brute , do , " and run to she bonnet and shawl , throw they on , see Foker walk down the street , take the by - lane which skirt it , and run as quickly as she could to the lodge - gate , Clavering . see a running figure before he , but it be lose when he get to the lodge - gate . he stop and ask , " who be that who have just come in ? , be it ? " he reel almost in he walk : the tree swam before he . he rest once or twice against the trunk of the naked lime . be in the breakfast - room with she son , and she husband yawn over he paper . " good morning , , " say the . " here be letter , lot of letter ; will be here on instead of , and and the major come to - day ; and be to go to 's , and come to church from there : and -- what be the matter , my dear ? what make you so pale , ? " " where be Blanche ! " ask , in a sickening voice --" not down yet ? " " Blanche be always the last , " say the boy , eat muffin ; " she be a regular dawdle , she be . when you be not here , she lay in bed till lunch - time . " " be quiet , , " say the mother . Blanco come down presently , look pale , and with rather a eager look towards ; then she advanc and kiss she mother , and have a face beaming with she very best smile on when she greet . " how do you do , sy ? " she say , and put out both she hand . " I be ill , " answer . " I -- I have bring a letter for you , . " " a letter , and from whom be it , pray ? Voyon ,
, " she say . " I do not know -- I should like to know , " say . " how can I tell until I see it ? " ask Blanche . " have not tell you ? " he say , with a shaking voice ;--" there be some secret . you give she the letter , . " lady Clavering , wonder , take the letter from poor 's shaking hand , and look at the superscription . as she look at it , she too begin to shake in every limb , and with a scared face she drop the letter , and run up to , clutch the boy to she , and burst out with a sob -- " take that away -- it be impossible , it be impossible . " " what be the matter ? " cry Blanche , with rather a ghastly smile ; " the letter be only from -- from a poor pensioner and relative of ours . " " it be not true , it be not true , " scream . " no , my -- be it , Claver ? " Blanche have take up the letter , and be move with it towards the fire , but run to she and clutch she arm --" I must see that letter , " he say ; " give it I . you sha not burn it . " " you -- you shall not treat so in my house , " cry the Baronet ; " give back the letter , by ! " " read it -- and look at she , " Blanche cry , point to she mother ; " it -- it be for she I keep the secret ! read it , cruel man ! " and open and read the letter :-- " I have not write , my darling , this three week ; but this be to give she a father 's blessing , and I shall come down pretty soon as quick as my note , and intend to see the ceremony , and my son - in -law . I shall put up at 's . I have have a pleasant autumn , and be stay here at a hotel where there be good company , and which be kep ' in good style . I do not know whether I quite approve of you throw over for , and do not think 's such a pretty name , and from you account of he he seem a muff , and not a beauty . but he have get the rowdy , which be the thing . so no more , my dear little , till we meet , from you affectionate father , . " " read it , ; it be too late to keep it from you now , " say poor Foker ; and the distracted woman , have cast she eye over it , again break out into hysterical scream , and convulsively grasp she son . " they have make a outcast of you , my boy , " she say . " they have dishonoure you old mother ; but I be innocent , ; before , I be innocent . I do not know this , ; indeed , indeed , I do not . " " I be sure you do not , " say , go up and kiss she hand . " generous , generous ! " cry out Blanche , in a ecstasy . but he withdraw he hand , which be upon she side , and turn from she with a quivering lip . " that be different , " he say . " it be for she sake -- for she sake , . " again be in a attitude . " there be something to be do for mine , " say . " I would have take you , whatever you be . everything be talk about in . I know that you father have come to -- to grief . you do not think it be -- it be for you connexion I marry you ? --- it all ! I have love you with all my heart and soul for two year , and you have be play with I , and cheat I , " break out the young man , with a cry . " oh , , , it be a hard thing , a hard thing ! " and he cover he face with he hand , and sob behind they . Blanche think , " why do not I tell he that night when warn I ? " " do not refuse she , , " cry out . " take she , take everything I have . it be all hers , you know , at my death . this boy 's disinherit . " --( master , who have be look as scared at the strange scene , here burst into a loud cry . ) " take every shilling . give I just enough to live , and to go and hide my head with this child , and to fly from both . oh , they have both be bad , bad man . perhaps he be here now . do not let I see he . Claver , you coward , defend I from he . " Claver start up at this proposal . " you be not serious , ? you do not mean that ? " he say . " you will not throw I and over ? I do not know it , so help I --- . , I would no more idea of it than the dead -- until the fellow come and find I out , the ---- escape convict scoundrel . " " the what ? " say . Blanco
Blanco give a scream . " yes , " scream out the in he turn , " yes , a d ---- would runaway convict -- a fellow that for he father - in - law 's name -- a d ----d attorney , and kill a fellow in , hang he -- and run into the , curse he ; I wish he would die there . and he come to I , a good six year ago , and rob I ; and I have be ruin myself to keep he , the infernal scoundrel ! and know it , and Strong know it , and that ---- know it , and she know it , ever so long ; and I never would tell it , never : and I keep it from my wife . " " and you see he , and you do not kill he , Claver , you coward ? " say the wife of . " come away , ; you father 's a coward . I be dishonoure , but I be you old mother , and you will -- you will love I , will not you ? " Blanche , eploree , go up to she mother ; but shrank from she with a sort of terror . " do not touch I , " she say ; " you 've no heart ; you never have . I see all now . I see why that coward be go to give up he place in parliament to ; yes , that coward ! and why you threaten that you would make I give you half 's fortune . and when offer to marry you without a shilling , because he would not rob my boy , you leave he , and you take poor . have nothing to do with she , . you be good , you be . do not marry that -- that convict 's daughter . come away , , my darling ; come to you poor old mother . we will hide ourselves ; but we be honest , yes , we be honest . " all this while a strange feeling of exultation have take possession of 's mind . that month with poor have be a weary month to she . all he fortune and splendour scarcely suffice to make the idea of himself supportable . she be weary of he simple way , and sick of coaxing and cajol he . " stay , mamma ; stay , madam ! " she cry out , with a gesture which be always appropriate , though rather theatrical ; " I have no heart , have I ? I keep the secret of my mother 's shame . I give up my rights to my half - brother and my bastard brother , yes , my rights and my fortune . I do not betray my father , and for this I have no heart . I will have my right now , and the law of my country shall give they to I . I appeal to my country 's law -- yes , my country 's law ! the persecute one return this day . I desire to go to my father . " and the little lady sweep round she hand , and think that she be a heroine . " you will , will you ? " cry out , with one of he usual oath . " I be a magistrate , and dammy , I will commit he . here be a chaise come ; perhaps it be he . let he come . " a chaise be indeed come up the avenue ; and the two woman shriek each they loudest , expect at that moment to see not arrive . the door open , and announce and , who enter , and find all party engage in this fierce quarrel . a large screen fence the breakfast - room from the hall ; and it be probable that , accord to he custom , have take advantage of the screen to make himself acquaint with all that occur . it have be arrange on the previous day that the young people should ride ; and at the appointed hour in the afternoon , 's horse arrive from the Clavering Arms . but do not accompany he on this occasion . come out and shook hand with he on the door - step ; and ride away , follow by he groom in mourning . the whole transaction which have occupy the most active part of we history be debate by the party concern during those two or three hour . many counsel have be give , story told , and compromise suggest ; and at the end , ride away , with a sad " bless you ! " from . there be a dreary dinner at , at which the lately install butler do not attend ; and the lady be both absent . after dinner , say , " I will walk down to Claver and see if he be come . " and he walk through the dark avenue , across the bridge and road by he own cottage , -- the once quiet and familiar field of which be flam with the kiln and forge of the artificer employ on the new railroad work ; and so he enter the town , and make for the . it be past midnight when he return to . he be exceedingly pale and agitate . " be Claver up yet ? " he ask . yes , she be in she own sitting - room . he go up to she , and there find the poor lady in a piteous state of tear and agitation . " it be I ,-- , " he say , look in ; and enter
enter , he take she hand very affectionately and kiss it . " you be always the kindest of friend to I , dear , " he say . " I love you very much . I have get some news for you . " " do not call I by that name , " she say , press he hand . " you be always a good boy , ; and it be kind of you to come now , -- very kind . you sometimes look very like you ma , my dear . " " dear good , " yoArthu repeat , with particular emphasis , " something very strange have happen . " " have anything happen to he ? " gas . " oh , it be horrid to think I should be glad of it -- horrid ! " " he be well . he have be and be gone , my dear lady . do not alarm yourself ; -- he be gone , and you be Lady Claver still . " " be it true ? what he sometimes say to I , " she scream out ,-- " that he ---- " " he be marry before he marry you , " say . " he have confess it to - night . he will never come back . " there come another shriek from , as she fling she arm round , and kiss he , and burst into tear on he shoulder . what have to tell , through a multiplicity of sob and interruption , must be compress briefly , for behold we prescribe limit be reach , and we tale be come to its end . with the branch coach from the railroad , which have succeed the old and , arrive , and be set down at the Clavering Arms . he order he dinner at the place under he assume name of ; and , be of a jovial turn , he welcome the landlord , who be nothing loth , to a share of he wine . have extract from all the news regard the family at the , and find , from examine he host , that , as she say , have keep he counsel , he call for more wine of ; and at the end of this symposium , both , be greatly excited , go into 's bar . she be there take tea with she friend , ; and be by this time in such a happy state as not to be surprised at anything which might occur , so that , when not shook hand with as a old acquaintance , the recognition do not appear to he to be in the least strange , but only a reasonable cause for further drinking . the gentleman partake then of brandy - and - water , which they offer to the ladie , not heed the terrified look of one or the other . whilst they be so engage , at about six o'clock in the evening , , 's new man , come in , and be request to drink . he select he favourite beverage , and the party engage in general conversation . after a while begin to doze . have repeatedly give hints to to quit the premise ; but that lady , strangely fascinate , and terrify it would seem , or persuade by not to go , keep she place . she persistence occasion much annoyance to , who vent he displeasure in such language as give pain to , and cause not to say , that he be a rum customer , and not polite to the sex . the altercation between the two gentleman become very painful to the woman , especially to , who do everything to soothey ; and , under pretence of give a pipe - light to the stranger , she hand he a paper on which she have privily write the word , " he know you . go . " there may have be something suspicious in she manner of handing , or in she guest of reading , the paper ; for when he get up a short time afterwards , and say he would go to bed , rise too , with a laugh , and say it be too early to go to bed . the stranger then say he would go to he bedroom . say he would show he the way . at this the guest say , " come up . I have get a brace of pistol up there to blow out the brain of any traitor or skulk spy , " and glar so fiercely upon , that the latter , seize hold of by the collar , and wake he , say , " , I arrest you in the 's name . by I , . this capture be worth a thousand pound . " he put forward he hand as if to seize he prisoner , but the other , double he fist , give with he left hand so fierce a blow on the chest , that it knock he back behind . that gentleman , who be athletic and courageous , say he would knock he guest 's head off , and prepare to do so , as the stranger , tear off he coat , and curse both of he opponent , roar to they to come on . but with a piercing scream Lightfoot fling herself before she husband , whilst with another and louder shriek run to the stranger , and call out " , ! " seize hold of he naked arm , on which a blue tattooing of a heart and be visible . the ejaculation of seem to astound and sober the stranger . he look down upon she , and cry out , " it
it be Polly , by . " continue to exclaim , " this be not Amory . this be , my wick -- wick husband , marry to I in 's , mate on board a , and he leave I two month after , the wicked wretch . this be -- here be the mark on he arm which he make for I . " the stranger say , " I be , sure enough , Polly . I be , , -- and let th'ey all come on , and try what they can do against a british sailor . Hurray , who be for it ? " still call out , " arrest he ! " but say , " arrest he ! arrest you , you mean spy ! what ! stop the marriage and ruin my lady , and take away the Clavering Arms from we ? " " do he say he would take away the Clavering Arms from we ? " ask , turn round . " hang he , I will throttle he . " " keep he , darling , till the coach pass to the up train . it will be here now directly . " " d --- he , I will choke he if he stir , " say . and so they keep until the coach come , and or go away back to . have follow he : but of this event do not inform , and leave she invoke blessing upon he at she son 's door , go to kiss he as he be asleep . it have be a busy day . we have to chronicle the event of but one day more , and that be a day when , attire in a new hat , a new blue frock - coat and blue handkerchief , in a new fancy waistcoat , new boot , and new shirt - stud ( present by the the of ) , make he appearance at a solitary breakfast - table , in , where he could scarce eat a single morsel of food . two letter be lay by he worship 's plate ; and he choose to open the first , which be in a round clerk - like hand , in preference to the second more familiar superscription . note 1 run as follow :-- " , 's . " my dear Pendennis ,-- in congratulate you heartily upon the event which be to make you happy for life , I send my very kindest remembrance to , whom I hope to know even longer than I have already kny she . and when I call she attention to the fact , that one of the most necessary article to she husband 's comfort be pure sherry , I know I shall have she for a customer for you worship 's sake . " but I have to speak to you of other than my own concern . yesterday afternoon , a certain arrive at my chamber from , which he have leave under circumstance of which you be doubtless now aware . in spite of we difference , I could not but give he food and shelter ( and he partake freely both of the and the ham ) , and he tell I what have happene to he , and many other surprising adventur . the rascal marry at sixteen , and have repeatedly since perform that ceremony -- in , in , in , in , he say , first , before he know we poor friend the milliner . he be a perfect . " and it seem as if the commendatore have at last overtaken he , for , as we be at we meal , there come three heavy knock at my outer door , which make we friend start . I have sustain a siege or two here , and go to my usual place to reconnoitre . thank my star I have not a bill out in the world , and besides , those gentry do not come in that way . I find that it be you uncle 's late valet , , and a policeman ( I think a sham policeman ) , and they say they have a warrant to take the person of , alias Amory , alias Altamont , a runaway convict , and threaten to break in the oak . " now , sir , in my own day of captivity I have discover a little passage along the gutter into and 's window , and I send along this covered way , not without terror of he life , for it have grow very cranky ; and then , after a parley , let in Mons . and friend . " the rascal have be instruct about that covered way , for he make for the room instantly , tel the policeman to go downstairs and keep the gate ; and he charge up my little staircase as if he have know the premise . as he be go out of the window we hear a voice that you know , from 's garret , say , ' who be ye , and hwant the divvle be ye at ? you would betther leave the gutther ; bedad there be a man kill himself already . ' " and as , cross over and look into the darkness , be try to see whether this awful news be true , he take a broomstick , and with a vigorous dash break down the pipe of communication -- and tell I this morning , with great glee , that he be remind of that 'aisy sthratagem by remember he dorling , when she act the pawrt of in the Plee -- and by the bridge in , bedad . ' I wish that have be on the bridge when the
the general try he ' sthratagem . ' " if I hear more of I will tell you . he have get plenty of money still , and I want he to send some to we poor friend the milliner ; but the scoundrel laugh , and say he have no more than he want , but offer to give anybody a lock of he hair . farewell -- be happy ! and believe I always truly yours , . " " and now for the other letter , " say . " dear old fellow ! " and he kiss the seal before he break it . " , . " I must not let the day pass over without say a bless you , to both of you . may heaven make you happy , dear Arthur , and dear . I think , , that you have the best wife in the world ; and pray that , as such , you will cherish she and tend she . the chamber will be lonely without you , dear ; but if I be tired , I shall have a new home to go to in the house of my brother and sister . I be practise in the nursery here , in order to prepare for the part of uncle . farewell ! make you wedding tour , and come back to you affectionate . " Pendennis and he wife read this letter together after 's breakfast be over , and the guest be go ; and when the carriage be wait amidst the crowd at the Doctor 's outer gate . but the wicket lead into the churchyard of . 's , where the bell be pea with all they might , and it be here , over 's green grass , that show he wife 's letter . for which of those two -- for grief be it or for happiness , that 's tear abundantly fall on the paper ? and once more , in the presence of the sacred dust , she kiss and bless she Arthur . there be only one marriage on that day at Clavering ; for in spite of 's sacrifice for she dearest mother , honest could not pardon the woman who have deceive she husband , and justly argue that she would deceive he again . he go to the and , and there leave he malady behind he , and return with a fine beard , and a supply of tarboosh and nargilly , with which he regale all he friend . he live splendidly , and , through 's mediation , get he wine from the celebrated vintage of the of . as for poor cos , he fate have be mention in a early part of this story . no very glorious end could be expect to such a career . be one of the most respectable man in the parish of 's , and in the present political movement have pronounce himself like a man and a . and , -- on the demise of , who play the organ at , little , who have the entire command of , bring down from to contest the organ - loft , and she candidate carry the chair . when quit this worthless life , the same little indefatigable canvasser take the borough by storm , and it be now represent by , , it be well kny , marry at , and the saloon of be amongst the most suivis of that capital . the duel between the count and the young and fiery Representative of the , , arise solely from the latter questioning at the the title borne by the former nobleman . travel after the adventure : and buy she poem , and publish they , with the Countess 's coronet emblazon on the Countess 's work . major Pendennis become very serious in he last day , and be never so happy as when be read to he with she sweet voice , or listen to he story . for this sweet lady be the friend of the young and the old : and she life be always pass in make other life happy . " and what sort of a husband would this be ? " many a reader will ask , doubt the happiness of such a marriage and the fortune of . the querist , if they meet she , be refer to that lady herself , who , see he fault and wayward mood -- see and own that there be man better than he -- love he always with the most constant affection . he child or they mother have never hear a harsh word from he ; and when he fit of moodiness and solitude be over , welcome he back with a never - fail regard and confidence . he friend be he friend still ,-- entirely heart - whole . that malady be never fatal to a sound organ . and go through he part of godpapa perfectly , and live alone . if 's work have procure he more reputation than have be acquire by he abler friend , whom no one know , life contente without the fame . if the best man do not draw the great prize in life , we know it have be so settle by the Ordainer of the lottery . we own , and see daily , how the false and worthless live and prosper , while the good be call away , and the dear and young perish untimely , -- we perceive in every man 's life the maim happiness , the frequent falling , the bootless endeavour , the struggle of and , in which the strong often succumb and the swift fail : we see flower of good blooming in foul place , as , in the most lofy and
