by before the curtain as the manager of the performance sit before the curtain on the board and look into the fair , a feeling of profound melancholy come over he in he survey of the bustling place . there be a great quantity of eat and drink , make love and jilting , laugh and the contrary , smoke , cheat , fight , dancing and fiddling ; there be bully push about , buck ogl the woman , knaves pick pocket , policeman on the look - out , quack ( other quack , plague take they ! ) bawl in front of they boot , and yokel look up at the tinselled dancer and poor old rouged tumbler , while the light - finger folk be operate upon they pocket behind . yes , this be Vanity fair ; not a moral place certainly ; nor a merry one , though very noisy . look at the face of the actor and buffoon when they come off from they business ; and wash the paint off he cheek before he sit down to dinner with he wife and the little Jack Puddings behind the canva . the curtain will be up presently , and he will be turn over head and heel , and cry , " how be you ? " a man with a reflective turn of mind , walk through a exhibition of this sort , will not be oppress , I take it , by he own or other people 's hilarity . a episode of humour or kindness touch and amuse he here and there -- a pretty child look at a gingerbread stall ; a pretty girl blush whilst she lover talk to she and choose she fair ; poor , yonder behind the waggon , mumbl he bone with the honest family which live by he tumbling ; but the general impression be one more melancholy than mirthful . when you come home you sit down in a sober , contemplative , not uncharitable frame of mind , and apply yourself to you book or you business . I have no other moral than this to tag to the present story of " . " some people consider Fairs immoral altogether , and eschew such , with they servants and family : very likely they be right . but person who think otherwise , and be of a lazy , or a benevolent , or a sarcastic mood , may perhaps like to step in for half a hour , and look at the performance . there be scene of all sort ; some dreadful combats , some grand and lofty horse - riding , some scene of high life , and some of very middling indeed ; some love - make for the sentimental , and some light comic business ; the whole accompany by appropriate scenery and brilliantly illuminate with the author 's own candle . what more have the manager of the performance to say ?-- to acknowledge the kindness with which it have be receive in all the principal town of through which the show have pass , and where it have be most favourably notice by the respect conductor of the public press , and by the Nobility and Gentry . he be proud to think that he puppet have give satisfaction to the very best company in this empire . the famous little have be pronounce to be uncommonly flexible in the joint , and lively on the wire ; the , though it have have a smaller circle of admirer , have yet be carve and dress with the greatest care by the artist ; the , though apparently clumsy , yet dance in a very amusing and natural manner ; the ' have be like by some ; and please to remark the richly dress figure of the , on which no expense have be spare , and which will fetch away at the end of this singular performance . and with this , and a profound bow to he patron , the manager retire , and the curtain rise . , 28 , 1848 contents I in and to open the Campaign be in presence of the iv the of of 's private and confidential X to make quite a and at in 's for a the on the how buy a who play on the at in as the of a a a marriage and part of a on he in the in all the to leave and in in the " the I " in Care of he in , and the War be bring to a in 's relation be very anxious 's be put out and how to on nothing a the continue a family in a very Small a cynical in be recognize by the in the of of the in the to the - about between and and and in the reader be introduce to the of in we and a a in a be act or the in himself in a most and a after the in the same subject be pursue be make a we friend the major LIX the to the in two light be put out in which we meet a a of and which contains Births , marriages , and I While the present century be in its teens , and on one sunshiny morning in , there drive up to the great iron gate of 's academy for young lady , on , a large family coach , with two fat horse in blazing harness , drive by a fat coachman in a three - corner hat and wig , at the rate of four mile a hour . a black servant , who repose on the box beside the fat coachman , uncurl he bandy leg as soon as the equipage draw up opposite 's shining brass plate ,
, and as he pull the bell at least a score of young head be see pee out of the narrow window of the stately old brick house . Nay , the acute observer might have recognize the little red nose of good - nature herself , rise over some geranium pots in the window of that lady 's own drawing - room . " it be 's coach , sister , " say . " , the black servant , have just ring the bell ; and the coachman have a new red waistcoat . " " have you complete all the necessary preparation incident to 's departure , ? " ask herself , that majestic lady ; the of , the friend of , the correspondent of herself . " the girl be up at four this morning , pack she trunk , sister , " reply ; " we have make she a bow - pot . " " say a bouquet , sister , ' ti more genteel . " " well , a booky as big almost as a haystack ; I have put up two bottle of the gillyflower water for , and the receipt for make it , in 's box . " " and I trust , , you have make a copy of 's account . this be it , be it ? very good -- ninety - three pound , four shilling . be kind enough to address it to , , and to seal this billet which I have write to he lady . " in 's eye a autograph letter of she sister , , be a object of as deep veneration as would have be a letter from a sovereign . only when she pupil quit the establishment , or when they be about to be marry , and once , when poor die of the scarlet fever , be kny to write personally to the parent of she pupil ; and it be 's opinion that if anything could conseal for she daughter 's loss , it would be that pious and eloquent composition in which announce the event . in the present instance 's " billet " be to the follow effect :-- the , , 15 , 18 madam , -- after she six year ' residence at the mall , I have the honour and happiness of presenting to she parent , as a young lady not unworthy to occupy a fitting position in they polished and refin circle . those virtue which characterize the young English gentlewoman , those accomplishment which become she birth and station , will not be find want in the amiable , whose and have endear she to she instructor , and whose delightful sweetness of temper have charme she aged and she youthful companion . in music , in dancing , in orthography , in every variety of embroidery and needlework , she will be find to have realize she friend ' fondest wish . in geography there be still much to be desire ; and a careful and undeviating use of the backboard , for four hour daily during the next three year , be recommend as necessary to the acquirement of that dignify DEPORTMENT and , so requisite for every young lady of fashion . in the principles of religion and morality , will be find worthy of a establishment which have be honoure by the presence of the great Lexicographer , and the patronage of the admirable . in leave the , carry with she the heart of she companion , and the affectionate regards of she mistress , who have the honour to subscribe herself , madam , you must oblige humble servant , P.s.-- . it be particularly request that 's stay in may not exceed ten day . the family of distinction with whom she be engage , desire to avail themselves of she service as soon as possible . this letter complete , proceed to write she own name , and 's , in the fly - leaf of a 's -- the interesting work which she invariably present to she scholar , on they departure from the mall . on the cover be insert a copy of " line address to a young lady on quit 's school , at the mall ; by the late rever . " in fact , the 's name be always on the lip of this majestic woman , and a visit he have pay to she be the cause of she reputation and she fortune . be command by she elder sister to get " the dictionary " from the cupboard , have extract two copy of the book from the receptacle in question . when have finish the inscription in the first , , with rather a dubious and timid air , hand she the second . " for whom be this , ? " say , with awful coldness . " for , " answer , trembl very much , and blush over she withered face and neck , as she turn she back on she sister . " for : she be go too . " " ! " exclaim , in the largest capitals . " be you in you sense ? replace the Dixonary in the closet , and never venture to take such a liberty in future . " " well , sister , it be only two - and - ninepence , and poor will be miserable if she do not get one . " " send instantly to I , " say . and so venture not to say another word , poor trot off , exceedingly flurried and nervous . 's papa be a merchant in , and a man of some wealth ; whereas be a article pupil , for whom have do , as she think , quite enough , without conferr
conferr upon she at part the high honour of the . although schoolmistress 's letter be to be trust no more nor less than churchyard epitaph ; yet , as it sometimes happen that a person depart this life who be really deserve of all the praise the stone cutter carve over he bone ; who be a good , a good parent , child , wife , or husband ; who actually do leave a disconsolate family to mourn he loss ; so in academy of the male and female sex it occur every now and then that the pupil be fully worthy of the praise bestow by the disinterested instructor . now , be a young lady of this singular species ; and deserve not only all that say in she praise , but have many charming qualitie which that pompous old of a woman could not see , from the difference of rank and age between she pupil and herself . for she could not only se like a lark , or a , and dance like or ; and embroider beautifully ; and spell as well as a Dixonary itself ; but she have such a kindly , smiling , tender , gentle , generous heart of she own , as win the love of everybody who come near she , from herself down to the poor girl in the scullery , and the one - eye tart - woman 's daughter , who be permit to vend she ware once a week to the young lady in the mall . she have twelve intimate and bosom friend out of the twenty - four young lady . even envious never speak ill of she ; high and mighty ( 's granddaughter ) allow that she figure be genteel ; and as for , the rich woolly - haire mulatto from 's , on the day go away , she be in such a passion of tear that they be oblige to send for , and half tipsify she with salvolatile . 's attachment be , as may be suppose from the high position and eminent virtue of that lady , calm and dignify ; but have already whimper several time at the idea of 's departure ; and , but for fear of she sister , would have go off in downright hysteric , like the heiress ( who pay double ) of 's . such luxury of grief , however , be only allow to parlour - boarder . have all the bill , and the washing , and the mending , and the pudding , and the plate and crockery , and the servants to superintend . but why speak about she ? it be probable that we shall not hear of she again from this moment to the end of time , and that when the great filigree iron gate be once close on she , she and she awful sister will never issue therefrom into this little world of history . but as we be to see a great deal of , there be no harm in say , at the outset of we acquaintance , that she be a dear little creature ; and a great mercy it be , both in life and in novel , which ( and the latter especially ) abound in villain of the most sombre sort , that we be to have for a constant companion so guileless and good - nature a person . as she be not a heroine , there be no need to describe she person ; indeed I be afraid that she nose be rather short than otherwise , and she cheek a great deal too round and red for a heroine ; but she face blush with rosy health , and she lip with the freshest of smile , and she have a pair of eye which sparkle with the brightest and honestest good - humour , except indeed when they fill with tear , and that be a great deal too often ; for the silly thing would cry over a dead canary - bird ; or over a mouse , that the cat haply have seize upon ; or over the end of a novel , be it ever so stupid ; and as for say a unkind word to she , be any person hard - hear enough to do so -- why , so much the worse for they . even , that austere and godlike woman , cease scold she after the first time , and though she no more comprehended sensibility than she do , give all master and teacher particular order to treat with the utmost gentleness , as harsh treatment be injuriious to she . so that when the day of departure come , between she two custom of laughing and crying , be greatly puzzl how to act . she be glad to go home , and yet most woefully sad at leave school . for three day before , little , the orphan , follow she about like a little dog . she have to make and receive at least fourteen present -- to make fourteen solemn promise of write every week : " send my letter under cover to my grandpapa , the of , " say ( who , by the way , be rather shabby ) . " never mind the postage , but write every day , you dear darling , " say the impetuous and woolly - head , but generous and affectionate ; and the orphan little ( who be just in round - hand ) , take she friend 's hand and say , look up in she face wistfully , " , when I write to you I shall call you . " all which detail , I have no doubt , , who read this book at he , will pronounce
pronounce to be excessively foolish , trivial , twaddling , and ultra-sentimental . yes ; I can see at this minute ( rather flush with he joint of mutton and half pint of wine ) , take out he pencil and score under the word " foolish , twaddl , " & c. , and add to they he own remark of " . " well , he be a lofy man of genius , and admire the great and heroic in life and novel ; and so have better take warning and go elsewhere . well , then . the flower , and the present , and the trunk , and bonnet - box of have be arrange by in the carriage , together with a very small and weather - beat old cow 's - skin trunk with 's card neatly nail upon it , which be deliver by with a grin , and pack by the coachman with a corresponding sneer -- the hour for parting come ; and the grief of that moment be considerably lessen by the admirable discourse which address to she pupil . not that the parting speech cause to philosophise , or that it arm she in any way with a calmness , the result of argument ; but it be intolerably dull , pompous , and tedious ; and have the fear of she schoolmistress greatly before she eye , do not venture , in she presence , to give way to any ebullition of private grief . a seed - cake and a bottle of wine be produce in the drawing - room , as on the solemn occasion of the visit of parent , and these refreshment be partaken of , be at liberty to depart . " you will go in and say good - by to , ! " say to a young lady of whom nobody take any notice , and who be come downstairs with she own bandbox . " I suppose I must , " say calmly , and much to the wonder of ; and the latter have knock at the door , and receive permission to come in , advanc in a very unconcerned manner , and say in , and with a perfect accent , " , je vien vous faire m adieux . " do not understand french ; she only direct those who do : but bite she lip and throw up she venerable and - nos head ( on the top of which figure a large and solemn turban ) , she say , " , I wish you a good morning . " as the speak , she wave one hand , both by way of adieu , and to give a opportunity of shak one of the finger of the hand which be leave out for that purpose . sharp only fold she own hand with a very frigid smile and bow , and quite decline to accept the proffer honour ; on which toss up she turban more indignantly than ever . in fact , it be a little battle between the young lady and the old one , and the latter be worsted . " heaven bless you , my child , " say she , embrace , and scowl the while over the girl 's shoulder at . " come away , , " say , pull the young woman away in great alarm , and the drawing - room door close upon they for ever . then come the struggle and part below . word refuse to tell it . all the servant be there in the hall -- all the dear friend -- all the young lady -- the dancing - master who have just arrive ; and there be such a scuffling , and hug , and kiss , and cry , with the hysterical Yoops of , the parlour - boarder , from she room , as no pen can depict , and as the tender heart would fain pass over . the embracing be over ; they parte -- that be , part from she friend . sharp have demurely enter the carriage some minute before . nobody cry for leave she . Sambo of the bandy leg slamm the carriage door on he young weeping mistress . he spring up behind the carriage . " stop ! " cry , rush to the gate with a parcel . " it be some sandwich , my dear , " say she to . " you may be hungry , you know ; and , , here be a book for you that my sister -- that be , I -- 's , you know ; you must not leave we without that . good - by . drive on , coachman . bless you ! " and the kind creature retreat into the garden , overcome with emotion . but , lo ! and just as the coach drive off , put she pale face out of the window and actually flng the book back into the garden . this almost cause to faint with terror . " well , I never " -- say she --" what a audacious " -- prevent she from completing either sentence . the carriage roll away ; the great gate be close ; the bell rang for the dancing lesson . the world be before the two young lady ; and so , farewell to . in and to open the Campaign when have perform the heroical act mention in the last chapter , and have see the Dixonary , fly over the pavement of the little garden , fall at length at the foot of the astonished , the young lady 's countenance , which have before wear a almost livid look of hatred , assume a smile that perhaps be scarcely more agreeable , and she sank back in the
the carriage in a easy frame of mind , say -- " so much for the Dixonary ; and , thank , I be out of . " be almost as flurry at the act of defiance as have be ; for , consider , it be but one minute that she have left school , and the impressions of six year be not get over in that space of time . Nay , with some person those awe and terrors of youth last for ever and ever . I know , for instance , a old gentleman of sixty - eight , who say to I one morning at breakfast , with a very agitated countenance , " I dream last night that I be flog by . " Fancy have carry he back five - and - fifty year in the course of that evening . and he rod be just as awful to he in he heart , then , at sixty - eight , as they have be at thirteen . if the doctor , with a large birch , have appear bodily to he , even at the age of threescore and eight , and have say in awful voice , " , take down you pant --" ? well , well , be exceedingly alarm at this act of insubordination . " how could you do so , ? " at last she say , after a pause . " why , do you think will come out and order I back to the black - hole ? " say , laugh . " no : but -- " " I hate the whole house , " continue in a fury . " I hope I may never set eye on it again . I wish it be in the bottom of the Thames , I do ; and if be there , I would not pick she out , that I would not . of how I should like to see she float in the water yonder , turban and all , with she train stream after she , and she nose like the beak of a wherry . " " Hush ! " cry . " why , will the black footman tell tale ? " cry , laugh . " he may go back and tell that I hate she with all my soul ; and I wish he would ; and I wish I have a means of prove it , too . for two year I have only have insult and outrage from she . I have be treat worse than any servant in the kitchen . I have never have a friend or a kind word , except from you . I have be make to tend the little girl in the lower schoolroom , and to talk French to the , until I grow sick of my mother tongue . but that talk to be capital fun , be not it ? she do not know a word of , and be too proud to confess it . I believe it be that which make she part with I ; and so thank for . ! Vive l'Empereur ! ! " " of , , for shame ! " cry ; for this be the greatest blasphemy have as yet utter ; and in those day , in , to say , " long live ! " be as much as to say , " long live ! " " how can you -- how dare you have such wicked , revengeful thought ? " " revenge may be wick , but it be natural , " answer . " I be no angel . " and , to say the truth , she certainly be not . for it may be remark in the course of this little conversation ( which take place as the coach roll along lazily by the river side ) that though have twice have occasion to thank , it have be , in the first place , for ridde she of some person whom she hate , and secondly , for enable she to bring she enemy to some sort of perplexity or confusion ; neither of which be very amiable motive for religious gratitude , or such as would be put forward by person of a kind and placable disposition . be not , then , in the least kind or placable . all the world use she ill , say this young misanthropist , and we may be pretty certain that person whom all the world treat ill , deserve entirely the treatment they get . the world be a look - glass , and give back to every man the reflection of he own face . Frow at it , and it will in turn look sourly upon you ; laugh at it and with it , and it be a jolly kind companion ; and so let all young person take they choice . this be certain , that if the world neglect , she never be know to have do a good action in behalf of anybody ; nor can it be expect that twenty - four young lady should all be as amiable as the heroine of this work , ( whom we have select for the very reason that she be the best - natured of all , otherwise what on earth be to have prevent we from put up , or , or , as heroine in she place ! ) it could not be expect that every one should be of the humble and gentle temper of ; should take every opportunity to vanquish 's hard - heartedness and ill - humour ; and , by a thousand kind word and office , overcome , for once at least , she hostility to she kind . 's father be a artist , and
and in that quality have give lesson of drawing at 's school . he be a clever man ; a pleasant companion ; a careless student ; with a great propensity for run into debt , and a partiality for the tavern . when he be drink , he use to beat he wife and daughter ; and the next morning , with a headache , he would rail at the world for it be neglect of he genius , and abuse , with a good deal of cleverness , and sometimes with perfect reason , the fools , he brother painter . as it be with the utmost difficulty that he could keep himself , and as he owe money for a mile round , where he liv , he think to better he circumstance by marry a young woman of the french nation , who be by profession a opera-girl . the humble call of she female parent never allude to , but use to state subsequently that the be a noble family of , and take great pride in she descent from they . and curious it be that as she advanc in life this young lady 's ancestor increase in rank and splendour . 's mother have have some education somewhere , and she daughter spoke french with purity and a parisian accent . it be in those day rather a rare accomplishment , and lead to she engagement with the orthodox . for she mother be dead , she father , find himself not likely to recover , after he third attack of delirium tremen , write a manly and pathetic letter to , recommend the orphan child to she protection , and so descende to the grave , after two bailiff have quarrell over he corpse . be seventeen when she come to , and be bound over as a article pupil ; she duty be to talk french , as we have see ; and she privileges to live cost free , and , with a few guinea a year , to gather scrap of knowledge from the professor who attend the school . she be small and slight in person ; pale , sandy - haire , and with eye habitually cast down : when they look up they be very large , odd , and attractive ; so attractive that the crisp , fresh from , and curate to the of , the , fall in love with ; be shoot dead by a glance of she eye which be fire all the way across from the school - pew to the reading - desk . this infatuate young man use sometimes to take tea with , to whom he have be present by he mamma , and actually propose something like marriage in a intercept note , which the one - eye apple- woman be charge to deliver . be summon from , and abruptly carry off she darling boy ; but the idea , even , of such a eagle in the dovecot cause a great flutter in the breast of , who would have send away but that she be bound to she under a forfeit , and who never could thoroughly believe the young lady 's protestation that she have never exchange a single word with , except under she own eye on the two occasion when she have meet he at tea . by the side of many tall and bouncing young lady in the establishment , look like a child . but she have the dismal precocity of poverty . many a dun have she talk to , and turn away from she father 's door ; many a tradesman have she coax and wheedle into good - humour , and into the granting of one meal more . she sate commonly with she father , who be very proud of she wit , and hear the talk of many of he wild companion -- often but ill - sui for a girl to hear . but she never have be a girl , she say ; she have be a woman since she be eight year old . oh , why do let such a dangerous bird into she cage ? the fact be , the old lady believe to be the meekest creature in the world , so admirably , on the occasion when she father bring she to , use to perform the part of the ingenue ; and only a year before the arrangement by which have be admit into she house , and when be sixteen year old , majestically , and with a little speech , make she a present of a doll -- which be , by the way , the confiscate property of , discover surreptitiously nurse it in school - hour . how the father and daughter laugh as they trudge home together after the evening party ( it be on the occasion of the speech , when all the professor be invite ) and how would have rage have she see the caricature of herself which the little mimic , , manage to make out of she doll . use to go through dialogue with it ; it form the delight of , , and the ' quarter : and the young painter , when they come to take they gin - and - water with they lazy , dissolute , clever , jovial senior , use regularly to ask if be at home : she be as well know to they , poor soul ! as or . once have the honour to pass a few day at ; after which she bring back , and erect another doll as : for though that honest creature have make and give she jelly and cake enough for three child , and a seven - shilling piece at parting , the girl 's sense of ridicule be
be far stronger than she gratitude , and she sacrifice quite as pitilessly as she sister . the catastrophe come , and she be bring to the mall as to she home . the rigid formality of the place suffocate she : the prayer and the meal , the lesson and the walk , which be arrange with a conventual regularity , oppress she almost beyond endurance ; and she look back to the freedom and the beggary of the old studio in with so much regret , that everybody , herself include , fancie she be consum with grief for she father . she have a little room in the garret , where the maid hear she walking and sobb at night ; but it be with rage , and not with grief . she have not be much of a dissembler , until now she loneliness teach she to feign . she have never mingle in the society of woman : she father , reprobate as he be , be a man of talent ; he conversation be a thousand time more agreeable to she than the talk of such of she own sex as she now encounter . the pompous vanity of the old schoolmistress , the foolish good - humour of she sister , the silly chat and scandal of the elder girl , and the frigid correctness of the governess equally annoye she ; and she have no soft maternal heart , this unlucky girl , otherwise the prattle and talk of the younger child , with whose care she be chiefly intrusted , might have soothe and interest she ; but she live among they two year , and not one be sorry that she go away . the gentle tender - hear be the only person to whom she could attach herself in the least ; and who could help attach herself to ? the happiness the superior advantage of the young woman round about she , give inexpressible pang of envy . " what air that girl give herself , because she be a 's grand - daughter , " she say of one . " how they cringe and bow to that Creole , because of she hundr thousand pound ! I be a thousand time cleverer and more charme than that creature , for all she wealth . I be as well breed as the 's grand - daughter , for all she fine pedigree ; and yet every one pass I by here . and yet , when I be at my father 's , do not the man give up they gayest ball and party in order to pass the evening with I ? " she determine at any rate to get free from the prison in which she find herself , and now begin to act for herself , and for the first time to make connect plan for the future . she take advantage , therefore , of the means of study the place offer she ; and as she be already a musician and a good linguist , she speedily go through the little course of study which be consider necessary for lady in those day . she music she practise incessantly , and one day , when the girl be out , and she have remain at home , she be overheard to play a piece so well that think , wisely , she could spare herself the expense of a master for the juniors , and intimate to that she be to instruct they in music for the future . the girl refuse ; and for the first time , and to the astonishment of the majestic mistress of the school . " I be here to speak french with the child , " say abruptly , " not to teach they music , and save money for you . give I money , and I will teach they . " be oblige to yield , and , of course , dislike she from that day . " for five - and - thirty year , " she say , and with great justice , " I never have see the individual who have da in my own house to question my authority . I have nourished a viper in my bosom . " " a viper -- a fiddlestick , " say to the old lady , almost faint with astonishment . " you take I because I be useful . there be no question of gratitude between we . I hate this place , and want to leave it . I will do nothing here but what I be oblige to do . " it be in vain that the old lady ask she if she be aware she be speak to ? laugh in she face , with a horrid sarcastic demoniacal laughter , that almost send the schoolmistress into fit . " give I a sum of money , " say the girl , " and get rid of I -- or , if you like better , get I a good place as governess in a nobleman 's family -- you can do so if you please . " and in they further dispute she always return to this point , " get I a situation -- we hate each other , and I be ready to go . " , although she have a nose and a turban , and be as tall as a grenadier , and have be up to this time a irresistible princess , have no will or strength like that of she little apprentice , and in vain did battle against she , and try to overawe she . attempt once to scold she in public , hit upon the before - mention plan of answer she in , which quite route the old woman . in order to maintain authority in she
she school , it become necessary to remove this rebel , this monster , this serpent , this firebrand ; and hear about this time that 's family be in want of a governess , she actually recommend for the situation , firebrand and serpent as she be . " I cannot , certainly , " she say , " find fault with 's conduct , except to myself ; and must allow that she talents and accomplishment be of a high order . as far as the head go , at least , she do credit to the educational system pursue at my establishment . " and so the schoolmistress reconcile the recommendation to she conscience , and the indenture be cancel , and the apprentice be free . the battle here describe in a few line , of course , last for some month . and as , be now in she seventeenth year , be about to leave school , and have a friendship for ( " 'tis the only point in 's behaviour , " say , " which have not be satisfactory to she mistress " ) , be invite by she friend to pass a week with she at home , before she enter upon she duty as governess in a private family . thus the world begin for these two young lady . for it be quite a new , fresh , brilliant world , with all the bloom upon it . it be not quite a new one for --( indeed , if the truth must be tell with respect to the crisp affair , the tart-woman hint to somebody , who take a affidavit of the fact to somebody else , that there be a great deal more than be make public regard and , and that he letter be in answer to another letter ) . but who can tell you the real truth of the matter ? at all event , if be not begin the world , she be begin it over again . by the time the young lady reach turnpike , have not forget she companion , but have dry she tear , and have blush very much and be delighte at a young officer of the , who spy she as he be ride by , and say , " a dem fine gal , egad ! " and before the carriage arrive in , a great deal of conversation have take place about the Drawing - room , and whether or not young lady wore powder as well as hoops when present , and whether she be to have that honour : to the 's ball she know she be to go . and when at length home be reach , skip out on 's arm , as happy and as handsome a girl as any in the whole big city of . both he and coachman agree on this point , and so do she father and mother , and so do every one of the servants in the house , as they stand bobbing , and curtsey , and smile , in the hall to welcome they young mistress . you may be sure that she show over every room of the house , and everything in every one of she drawer ; and she book , and she piano , and she dress , and all she necklace , brooch , lace , and gimcrack . she insist upon accept the white cornelian and the turquoise ring , and a sweet sprigged muslin , which be too small for she now , though it would fit she friend to a nicety ; and she determine in she heart to ask she mother 's permission to present she white Cashmere shawl to she friend . could she not spare it ? and have not she brother just bring she two from ? when see the two magnificent Cashmere shawl which have bring home to he sister , she say , with perfect truth , " that it must be delightful to have a brother , " and easily get the pity of the tender - hear for be alone in the world , a orphan without friend or kindr . " not alone , " say ; " you know , , I shall always be you friend , and love you as a sister -- indeed I will . " " ah , but to have parent , as you have -- kind , rich , affectionate parent , who give you everything you ask for ; and they love , which be more precious than all ! my poor papa could give I nothing , and I have but two frock in all the world ! and then , to have a brother , a dear brother ! oh , how you must love he ! " laugh . " what ! do not you love he ? you , who say you love everybody ? " " yes , of course , I do -- only -- " " only what ? " " only do not seem to care much whether I love he or not . he give I two finger to shake when he arrive after ten year ' absence ! he be very kind and good , but he scarcely ever speak to I ; I think he love he pipe a great deal better than he " -- but here check herself , for why should she speak ill of she brother ? " he be very kind to I as a child , " she add ; " I be but five year old when he go away . " " be not he very rich ? " say . " they say all indian nabob be enormously rich . " " I believe he have a very large income . " " and
and be you sister - in - law a nice pretty woman ? " " ! be not marry , " say , laugh again . perhaps she have mention the fact already to , but that young lady do not appear to have remembe it ; indeed , vow and protest that she expect to see a number of 's nephew and niece . she be quite disappointed that be not marry ; she be sure have say he be , and she do so on little child . " I think you must have have enough of they at , " say , rather wonder at the sudden tenderness on she friend 's part ; and indeed in later day would never have commit herself so far as to advance opinion , the untruth of which would have be so easily detect . but we must remember that she be but nineteen as yet , unused to the art of deceiving , poor innocent creature ! and make she own experience in she own person . the meaning of the above series of query , as translate in the heart of this ingenious young woman , be simply this : " if be rich and unmarried , why should I not marry he ? I have only a fortnight , to be sure , but there be no harm in try . " and she determine within herself to make this laudable attempt . she redouble she caress to ; she kiss the white cornelian necklace as she put it on ; and vow she would never , never part with it . when the dinner - bell rang she go downstairs with she arm round she friend 's waist , as be the habit of young lady . she be so agitate at the drawing - room door , that she could hardly find courage to enter . " feel my heart , how it beat , dear ! " say she to she friend . " no , it do not , " say . " come in , do not be frightene . will not do you any harm . " be in presence of the very stout , puffy man , in buckskin and Hessian boot , with several immense neckcloth that rise almost to he nose , with a red striped waistcoat and a apple green coat with steel button almost as large as crown piece ( it be the morning costume of a dandy or blood of those day ) be read the paper by the fire when the two girl enter , and bounce off he arm -chair , and blush excessively , and hide he entire face almost in he neckcloth at this apparition . " it be only you sister , , " say , laugh and shake the two finger which he hold out . " I have come home for , you know ; and this be my friend , , whom you have hear I mention . " " no , never , upon my word , " say the head under the neckcloth , shak very much --" that be , yes -- what abominably cold weather , " -- and herewith he fall to pok the fire with all he might , although it be in the middle of . " he be very handsome , " whisper to , rather loud . " do you think so ? " say the latter . " I will tell he . " " Darling ! not for worlds , " say , start back as timid as a fawn . she have previously make a respectful virgin - like curtsey to the gentleman , and she modest eye gaze so perseveringly on the carpet that it be a wonder how she should have find a opportunity to see he . " thank you for the beautiful shawl , brother , " say to the fire poker . " be they not beautiful , ? " " of heavenly ! " say , and she eye go from the carpet straight to the chandelier . still continue a huge clattering at the poker and tong , puffe and blow the while , and turn as red as he yellow face would allow he . " I can not make you such handsome present , , " continue he sister , " but while I be at school , I have embroider for you a very beautiful pair of brace . " " ! , " cry the brother , in serious alarm , " what do you mean ? " and plunge with all he might at the bell - rope , that article of furniture come away in he hand , and increase the honest fellow 's confusion . " for heaven 's sake see if my buggy 's at the door . I can not wait . I must go . ---- that groom of mine . I must go . " at this minute the father of the family walk in , ratt he seal like a true british merchant . " what be the matter , ? " say he . " want I to see if he -- he buggy be at the door . what be a buggy , ? " " it be a one - horse palanquin , " say the old gentleman , who be a wag in he way . at this burst out into a wild fit of laughter ; in which , encounter the eye of , he stop all of a sudden , as if he have be shot . " this young lady be you friend ? , I be very happy to see you . have you and be quarrell already with , that he want to be off ? " " I promise of we service , sir , " say
say , " to dine with he . " " of fie ! do not you tell you mother you would dine here ? " " but in this dress it be impossible . " " look at he , be not he handsome enough to dine anywhere , ? " on which , of course , look at she friend , and they both set off in a fit of laughter , highly agreeable to the old gentleman . " do you ever see a pair of buckskin like those at 's ? " continue he , follow up he advantage . " gracious heaven ! Father , " cry . " there now , I have hurt he feeling . , my dear , I have hurt you son 's feeling . I have allude to he buckskin . ask if I have not ? come , , be friend with , and let we all go to dinner . " " there be a pillau , , just as you like it , and have bring home the best turbot in . " " come , come , sir , walk downstairs with , and I will follow with these two young woman , " say the father , and he take a arm of wife and daughter and walk merrily off . if have determine in she heart upon make the conquest of this big beau , I do not think , lady , we have any right to blame she ; for though the task of husband - hunting be generally , and with become modesty , entrust by young persons to they mamma , recollect that have no kind parent to arrange these delicate matter for she , and that if she do not get a husband for herself , there be no one else in the wide world who would take the trouble off she hand . what cause young people to " come out , " but the noble ambition of matrimony ? what send they troo to water - place ? what keep they dance till five o'clock in the morning through a whole mortal season ? what cause they to labour at pianoforte sonata , and to learn four song from a fashionable master at a guinea a lesson , and to play the harp if they have handsome arm and neat elbow , and to wear toxophilite hat and feather , but that they may bring down some " desirable " young man with those kill bow and arrow of theirs ? what cause respectable parent to take up they carpet , set they house topsy - turvy , and spend a fifth of they year 's income in ball supper and ice champagne ? be it sheer love of they species , and a unadulterated wish to see young people happy and dancing ? ! they want to marry they daughter ; and , as honest have , in the depth of she kind heart , already arran a score of little scheme for the settlement of she , so also have we beloved but unprotected determined to do she very best to secure the husband , who be even more necessary for she than for she friend . she have a vivid imagination ; she have , besides , read the and 's ; and it be a fact that while she be dress for dinner , and after she have ask whether she brother be very rich , she have build for herself a most magnificent castle in the air , of which she be mistress , with a husband somewhere in the background ( she have not see he as yet , and he figure would not therefore be very distinct ) ; she have array herself in a infinity of shawl , turban , and diamond necklace , and have mount upon a elephant to the sound of the march in , in order to pay a visit of ceremony to the . charme vision ! it be the happy privilege of youth to construct you , and many a fanciful young creature besides have indulge in these delightful day - dream ere now ! be twelve year older than he sister . he be in the 's , and he name appear , at the period of which we write , in the Bengal division of the , as collector of , a honourable and lucrative post , as everybody know : in order to know to what higher post rise in the service , the reader be refer to the same periodical . be situate in a fine , lonely , marshy , jungly district , famous for snipe - shoot , and where not unfrequently you may flush a tiger . , where there be a magistrate , be only forty mile off , and there be a cavalry station about thirty mile farther ; so write home to he parent , when he take possession of he collectorship . he have live for about eight year of he life , quite alone , at this charming place , scarcely see a face except twice a year , when the detachment arrive to carry off the revenue which he have collect , to . luckily , at this time he catch a liver complaint , for the cure of which he return to , and which be the source of great comfort and amusement to he in he native country . he do not live with he family while in , but have lodging of he own , like a gay young bachelor . before he go to he be too young to partake of the delightful pleasure of a man about town , and plunge into they on he return with considerable assiduity . he drive he horse in the ; he dine at the fashionable tavern ( for the be
be not as yet invent ) ; he frequent the theatre , as the mode be in those day , or make he appearance at the opera , laboriously attire in tights and a cock hat . on return to , and ever after , he use to talk of the pleasure of this period of he existence with great enthusiasm , and give you to understand that he and be the lead buck of the day . but he be as lonely here as in he jungle at . he scarcely know a single soul in the metropolis : and be it not for he doctor , and the society of he blue - pill , and he liver complaint , he must have die of loneliness . he be lazy , peevish , and a bon -vivant ; the appearance of a lady frightene he beyond measure ; hence it be but seldom that he join the paternal circle in , where there be plenty of gaiety , and where the joke of he good - nature old father frightene he amour-propre . he bulk cause much anxious thought and alarm ; now and then he would make a desperate attempt to get rid of he superabundant fat ; but he indolence and love of good living speedily get the better of these endeavour at reform , and he find himself again at he three meal a day . he never be well dress ; but he take the hugest pain to adorn he big person , and pass many hour dailly in that occupation . he valet make a fortune out of he wardrobe : he toilet - table be cover with as many pomatum and essences as ever be employ by a old beauty : he have try , in order to give himself a waist , every girth , stay , and waistband then invent . like most fat man , he would have he clothes make too tight , and take care they should be of the most brilliant colour and youthful cut . when dress at length , in the afternoon , he would issue forth to take a drive with nobody in the park ; and then would come back in order to dress again and go and dine with nobody at the - . he be as vain as a girl ; and perhaps he extreme shyness be one of the result of he extreme vanity . if can get the better of he , and at she first entrance into life , she be a young person of no ordinary cleverness . the first move show considerable skill . when she call a very handsome man , she know that would tell she mother , who would probably tell , or who , at any rate , would be pleas by the compliment pay to she son . all mother be . if you have tell Sycorax that she son be as handsome as , she would have be pleased , witch as she be . perhaps , too , would overhear the compliment -- speak loud enough -- and he do hear , and ( think in he heart that he be a very fine man ) the praise thrill through every fibre of he big body , and make it tingle with pleasure . then , however , come a recoil . " be the girl make fun of I ? " he think , and straightway he bounce towards the bell , and be for retreating , as we have see , when he father 's joke and he mother 's entreaty cause he to pause and stay where he be . he conduct the young lady down to dinner in a dubious and agitate frame of mind . " do she really think I be handsome ? " think he , " or be she only make game of I ? " we have talk of be as vain as a girl . heaven help we ! the girl have only to turn the table , and say of one of they own sex , " she be as vain as a man , " and they will have perfect reason . the bearded creature be quite as eager for praise , quite as finikin over they toilette , quite as proud of they personal advantage , quite as conscious of they powers of fascination , as any coquette in the world . downstairs , then , they go , very red and blush , very modest , and hold she green eye downward . she be dress in white , with bare shoulders as white as snow -- the picture of youth , unprotected innocence , and humble virgin simplicity . " I must be very quiet , " think , " and very much interested about . " now we have hear how have prepare a fine curry for she son , just as he like it , and in the course of dinner a portion of this dish be offer to . " what be it ? " say she , turn a appeal look to . " , " say he . he mouth be full of it : he face quite red with the delightful exercise of gobbling . " mother , it be as good as my own curry in . " " oh , I must try some , if it be a indian dish , " say . " I be sure everything must be good that come from there . " " some curry , my dear , " say , laugh . have never taste the dish before . " do you find it as good as everything else from ? " say . " oh , excellent ! " say , who be suffer torture with the cayenne pepper . " try a chili with it
it , , " say , really interested . " a chili , " say , gas . " oh yes ! " she think a chili be something cool , as its name import , and be serve with some . " how fresh and green they look , " she say , and put one into she mouth . it be hotter than the curry ; flesh and blood could bear it no longer . she lay down she fork . " , for 's sake , water ! " she cry . burst out laugh ( he be a coarse man , from the stock , where they love all sort of practical joke ) . " they be real indian , I assure you , " say he . " Sambo , give some water . " the paternal laugh be echo by , who think the joke capital . the lady only smile a little . they think poor suffer too much . she would have like to choke old , but she swallow she mortification as well as she have the abominable curry before it , and as soon as she could speak , say , with a comical , good - humoured air , " I ought to have remember the pepper which the princess of put in the cream - tart in the Arabian night . do you put cayenne into you cream -tart in , sir ? " begin to laugh , and think be a good - humoured girl . simply say , " Cream - tart , ? we cream be very bad in . we generally use goat ' milk ; and , ' gad , do you know , I have get to prefer it ! " " you will not like everything from now , , " say the old gentleman ; but when the lady have retire after dinner , the wily old fellow say to he son , " have a care , ; that girl be set she cap at you . " " Pooh ! nonsense ! " say , highly flatter . " I recollect , sir , there be a girl at , a daughter of Cutler of the artillery , and afterwards marry to , the surgeon , who make a dead set at I in the year ' 4 -- at I and , whom I mention to you before dinner -- a devilish good fellow Mulligatawney -- he be a magistrate at , and sure to be in council in five year . well , sir , the give a ball , and , of the 's , say to I , ' , ' say he , 'I bet you thirteen to ten that hook either you or before the rains . ' ' done , ' say I ; and egad , sir -- this claret 's very good . 's or 's ? " a slight snore be the only reply : the honest stockbroker be asleep , and so the rest of 's story be lose for that day . but he be always exceedingly communicative in a man 's party , and have tell this delightful tale many score of time to he apothecary , , when he come to inquire about the liver and the blue - pill . be a invalid , contente himself with a bottle of claret besides he Madeira at dinner , and he manage a couple of plate full of strawberry and cream , and twenty - four little rout cake that be lie neglect in a plate near he , and certainly ( for novelist have the privilege of know everything ) he think a great deal about the girl upstairs . " a nice , gay , merry young creature , " think he to himself . " how she look at I when I pick up she handkerchief at dinner ! she drop it twice . who be that singe in the drawing - room ? ' ! shall I go up and see ? " but he modesty come rush upon he with uncontrollable force . he father be asleep : he hat be in the hall : there be a hackney - coach stand hard by in . " I will go and see the , " say he , " and 's dance " ; and he slipp away gently on the point toe of he boot , and disappear , without wake he worthy parent . " there go , " say , who be look from the open window of the drawing - room , while be singe at the piano . " have frightene he away , " say . " poor , why while he be so shy ? " chapter iv the 's panic last for two or three day ; during which he do not visit the house , nor during that period do ever mention he name . she be all respectful gratitude to ; delighte beyond measure at the Bazaars ; and in a whirl of wonder at the theatre , whither the good - natured lady take she . one day , have a headache , and could not go upon some party of pleasure to which the two young people be invite : nothing could induce she friend to go without she . " what ! you who have show the poor orphan what happiness and love be for the first time in she life -- quit you ? never ! " and the green eye look up to and fill with tear ; and could not but own that she daughter 's friend have a charming kind heart of she own . as for 's joke , laugh at they with a cordiality and perseverance which not a little pleased and soften that good - natured gentleman . be it
it with the chiefs of the family alone that find favour . she interest by evince the deepest sympathy in the raspberry - jam preserve , which operation be then go on in the 's room ; she persist in call " , " and " , " to the delight of that attendant ; and she apologise to the lady 's maid for give she trouble in venturing to ring the bell , with such sweetness and humility , that the ' be almost as charme with she as the . once , in look over some drawing which have send from school , suddenly come upon one which cause she to burst into tear and leave the room . it be on the day when make he second appearance . hasten after she friend to know the cause of this display of feeling , and the good - natured girl come back without she companion , rather affect too . " you know , she father be we drawing - master , , at , and use to do all the best part of we drawing . " " my love ! I be sure I always hear say that he do not touch they -- he only mount they . " " it be call mounting , . remember the drawing , and she father work at it , and the thought of it come upon she rather suddenly -- and so , you know , she -- " " the poor child be all heart , " say . " I wish she could stay with we another week , " say . " she have devilish like that I use to meet at , only fairer . she be marry now to , the . do you know , ma 'am , that once , of the 14th , bet I -- " " o , we know that story , " say , laugh . " never mind about tell that ; but to write to for leave of absence for poor dear : here she come , she eye red with weeping . " " I be better , now , " say the girl , with the sweetest smile possible , take good - nature 's extend hand and kiss it respectfully . " how kind you all be to I ! all , " she add , with a laugh , " except you , . " " I ! " say , meditat a instant departure " ! good Gad ! ! ' " yes ; how could you be so cruel as to make I eat that horrid pepper - dish at dinner , the first day I ever see you ? you be not so good to I as dear . " " he do not know you so well , " cry . " I defy anybody not to be good to you , my dear , " say she mother . " the curry be capital ; indeed it be , " say , quite gravely . " perhaps there be not enough citron juice in it -- no , there be not . " " and the chilis ? " " by , how they make you cry out ! " say , catch by the ridicule of the circumstance , and explode in a fit of laughter which end quite suddenly , as usual . " I shall take care how I let you choose for I another time , " say , as they go down again to dinner . " I do not think man be fond of put poor harmless girl to pain . " " by , , I would not hurt you for the world . " " no , " say she , " I know you would not " ; and then she give he ever so gentle a pressure with she little hand , and draw it back quite frightened , and look first for one instant in he face , and then down at the carpet - rod ; and I be not prepare to say that 's heart do not thump at this little involuntary , timid , gentle motion of regard on the part of the simple girl . it be a advance , and as such , perhaps , some lady of indisputable correctness and gentility will condemn the action as immodest ; but , you see , poor dear have all this work to do for herself . if a person be too poor to keep a servant , though ever so elegant , he must sweep he own room : if a dear girl have no dear Mamma to settle matter with the young man , she must do it for herself . and oh , what a mercy it be that these woman do not exercise they power oftener ! we can not resist they , if they do . let they show ever so little inclination , and man go down on they knee at once : old or ugly , it be all the same . and this I set down as a positive truth . a woman with fair opportunity , and without a absolute hump , may marry whom she like . only let we be thankful that the darling be like the beasts of the field , and do not know they own power . they would overcome we entirely if they do . " ! " think , enter the dining - room , " I exactly begin to feel as I do at with . " many sweet little appeal , half tender , half jocular , do make to he about the dish at dinner ; for by this time she be on a footing of considerable familiarity with the family , and as for the girl , they love each other
other like sister . yong unmarried girl always do , if they be in a house together for ten day . as if bend upon advancing 's plan in every way -- what must do , but remind she brother of a promise make last Easter holiday -- " when I be a girl at school , " say she , laugh -- a promise that he , , would take she to . " now , " she say , " that be with we , will be the very time . " " o , delightful ! " say , go to clap she hand ; but she recollect herself , and pause , like a modest creature , as she be . " to - night be not the night , " say . " well , to - morrow . " " To - morrow you and I dine out , " say . " you do not suppose that I be go , ? " say she husband , " and that a woman of you year and size be to catch cold , in such a abominable damp place ? " " the child must have someone with they , " cry . " let go , " say - he father , laugh . " he be big enough . " at which speech even at the sideboard burst out laugh , and poor fat feel inclin to become a parricide almost . " Undo he stay ! " continue the pitiless old gentleman . " F some water in he face , , or carry he upstairs : the dear creature 's fainting . poor victim ! carry he up ; he be as light as a feather ! " " if I stand this , sir , I be d ------ ! " roar . " order 's elephant , ! " cry the father . " send to 's , " ; but see ready almost to cry with vexation , the old joker stop he laughter , and say , hold out he hand to he son , " it be all fair on the stock , -- and , , never mind the elephant , but give I and a glass of . himself have not get such in he cellar , my boy ! " a goblet of restore 's equanimity , and before the bottle be empty , of which as a invalid he take two - third , he have agree to take the young lady to . " the girl must have a gentleman apiece , " say the old gentleman . " Jos will be sure to leave in the crowd , he will be so take up with here . send to 96 , and ask if he will come . " at this , I do not know in the least for what reason , look at she husband and laugh . 's eye twinkle in a manner indescribably roguish , and he look at ; and , hang down she head , blush as only young lady of seventeen know how to blush , and as never blush in she life -- at least not since she be eight year old , and when she be catch steal jam out of a cupboard by she godmother . " have better write a note , " say she father ; " and let see what a beautiful handwriting we have bring back from 's . do you remember when you write to he to come on Twelfth - night , , and spel twelfth without the f ? " " that be year ago , " say . " it seem like yesterday , do not it , ? " say to she husband ; and that night in a conversation which take place in a front room in the second floor , in a sort of tent , hang round with chintz of a rich and fantastic pattern , and double with calico of a tender rose - colour ; in the interior of which species of marquee be a featherbed , on which be two pillow , on which be two round red face , one in a laced nightcap , and one in a simple cotton one , end in a tassel -- in a , I say , take she husband to task for he cruel conduct to poor . " it be quite wicked of you , , " say she , " to torment the poor boy so . " " my dear , " say the cotton - tassel in defence of he conduct , " be a great deal vainer than you ever be in you life , and that be say a good deal . though , some thirty year ago , in the year seventeen hundred and eighty -- what be it ?-- perhaps you have a right to be vain -- I do not say no . but I have no patience with and he dandified modesty . it be out - , my dear , and all the while the boy be only think of himself , and what a fine fellow he be . I doubt , ma 'am , we shall have some trouble with he yet . here be 's little friend make love to he as hard as she can ; that be quite clear ; and if she do not catch he some other will . that man be destin to be a prey to woman , as I be to go on ' change every day . it be a mercy he do not bring we over a black daughter - in - law , my dear . but , mark my word , the first woman who fish for he , hook he . " " she shall go off to - morrow
morrow , the little artful creature , " say Sedley , with great energy . " why not she as well as another , ? the girl 's a white face at any rate . I do not care who marry he . let please himself . " and presently the voice of the two speaker be hush , or be replace by the gentle but unromantic music of the nose ; and save when the church bell toll the hour and the watchman call it , all be silent at the house of , , of , and the stock . when morning come , the good - nature no longer think of execute she threat with regard to ; for though nothing be more keen , nor more common , nor more justifiable , than maternal jealousy , yet she could not bring herself to suppose that the little , humble , grateful , gentle governess would dare to look up to such a magnificent personage as the Collector of . the petition , too , for a extension of the young lady 's leave of absence have already be despatch , and it would be difficult to find a pretext for abruptly dismisse she . and as if all thing conspire in favour of the gentle , the very element ( although she be not inclin at first to acknowledge they action in she behalf ) interpose to aid she . for on the evening appoint for the , have come to dinner , and the elder of the house have depart , accord to invitation , to dine with at , there come on such a thunder - storm as only happen on Vauxhall night , and as oblige the young people , perforce , to remain at home . do not seem in the least disappointed at this occurrence . he and drank a fitting quantity of port-wine , tete - a - tete , in the dining - room , during the drinking of which tell a number of he best indian story ; for he be extremely talkative in man 's society ; and afterwards do the honour of the drawing - room ; and these four young person pass such a comfortable evening together , that they declare they be rather glad of the thunder - storm than otherwise , which have cause they to put off they visit to . be 's godson , and have be one of the family any time these three - and - twenty year . at six week old , he have receive from a present of a silver cup ; at six month old , a coral with gold whistle and bell ; from he youth upwards he be " tip " regularly by the old gentleman at : and on go back to school , he remember perfectly well be thrash by , when the latter be a big , swagger hobbadyhoy , and a impudent urching of ten year old . in a word , be as familiar with the family as such daily act of kindness and intercourse could make he . " do you remember , , what a fury you be in , when I cut off the tassel of you Hessian boot , and how -- hey !--how rescue I from a beating , by fall down on she knee and cry out to she brother , not to beat little ? " remembe this remarkable circumstance perfectly well , but vow that he have totally forget it . " well , do you remember come down in a gig to 's to see I , before you go to , and give I half a guinea and a pat on the head ? I always have a idea that you be at least seven foot high , and be quite astonished at you return from to find you no taller than myself . " " how good of to go to you school and give you the money ! " exclaim , in accent of extreme delight . " yes , and after I have cut the tassel of he boot too . boy never forget those tip at school , nor the giver . " " I delight in Hessian boot , " say . , who admire he own leg prodigiously , and always wear this ornamental chaussure , be extremely pleased at this remark , though he draw he leg under he chair as it be make . " ! " say , " you who be so clever a artist , you must make a grand historical picture of the scene of the boot . shall be represent in buckskin , and hold one of the injured boot in one hand ; by the other he shall have hold of my shirt - frill . shall be knee near he , with she little hand up ; and the picture shall have a grand allegorical title , as the frontispiece have in the and the spelling - book . " " I sha not have time to do it here , " say . " I will do it when -- when I be gone . " and she drop she voice , and look so sad and piteous , that everybody feel how cruel she lot be , and how sorry they would be to part with she . " o that you could stay longer , dear , " say . " why ? " answer the other , still more sadly . " that I may be only the more unhap -- unwill to lose you ? " and she turn away she head . begin to give way to that natural infirmity of tear which , we have say , be one of the defects of this silly little thing . look at the two young woman with a touch
touch curiosity ; and heav something very like a sigh out of he big chest , as he cast he eye down towards he favourite Hessian boot . " let we have some music , -- , " say , who feel at that moment a extraordinary , almost irresistible impulse to seize the above -mentioned young woman in he arm , and to kiss she in the face of the company ; and she look at he for a moment , and if I should say that they fall in love with each other at that single instant of time , I should perhaps be tell a untruth , for the fact be that these two young people have be breed up by they parent for this very purpose , and they banns have , as it be , be read in they respective family any time these ten year . they go off to the piano , which be situate , as piano usually be , in the back draw - room ; and as it be rather dark , , in the most unaffected way in the world , put she hand into 's , who , of course , could see the way among the chair and ottoman a great deal better than she could . but this arrangement leave tete - a - tete with , at the drawing - room table , where the latter be occupy in knitt a green silk purse . " there be no need to ask family secret , " say . " those two have tell theirs . " " as soon as he get he company , " say , " I believe the affair be settled . be a capital fellow . " " and you sister the dearest creature in the world , " say . " happy the man who win she ! " with this , give a great sigh . when two unmarried person get together , and talk upon such delicate subject as the present , a great deal of confidence and intimacy be presently establish between they . there be no need of give a special report of the conversation which now take place between and the young lady ; for the conversation , as may be judge from the forego specimen , be not especially witty or eloquent ; it seldom be in private society , or anywhere except in very high - flown and ingenious novel . as there be music in the next room , the talk be carry on , of course , in a low and become tone , though , for the matter of that , the couple in the next apartment would not have be disturb have the talking be ever so loud , so occupied be they with they own pursuit . almost for the first time in he life , find himself talk , without the least timidity or hesitation , to a person of the other sex . ask he a great number of question about , which give he a opportunity of narrat many interesting anecdote about that country and himself . he describe the ball at , and the manner in which they keep themselves cool in the hot weather , with punka , tatty , and other contrivance ; and he be very witty regard the number of whom , the governor- General , patronise ; and then he describe a tiger - hunt ; and the manner in which the mahout of he elephant have be pull off he seat by one of the infuriated animal . how delighted be at the government ball , and how she laugh at the story of the - de- camp , and call a sad wicked satirical creature ; and how frightened she be at the story of the elephant ! " for you mother 's sake , dear , " she say , " for the sake of all you friend , promise never to go on one of those horrid expedition . " " Pooh , pooh , , " say he , pull up he shirt - collar ; " the danger make the sport only the pleasanter . " he have never be but once at a tiger - hunt , when the accident in question occur , and when he be half kill -- not by the tiger , but by the fright . and as he talk on , he grow quite bold , and actually have the audacity to ask for whom she be knitt the green silk purse ? he be quite surprised and delighte at he own graceful familiar manner . " for any one who want a purse , " reply , look at he in the most gentle win way . be go to make one of the most eloquent speech possible , and have begin -- " o , how -- " when some song which be perform in the other room come to a end , and cause he to hear he own voice so distinctly that he stop , blush , and blow he nose in great agitation . " do you ever hear anything like you brother 's eloquence ? " whisper to . " why , you friend have work miracle . " " the more the better , " say ; who , like almost all woman who be worth a pin , be a match - maker in she heart , and would have be delight that should carry back a wife to . she have , too , in the course of this few day ' constant intercourse , warm into a most tender friendship for , and discover a million of virtue and amiable quality in she which she have not perceive when they be at together . for the affection of young lady be of as rapid growth as
as 's bean - stalk , and reach up to the sky in a night . it be no blame to they that after marriage this Sehnsucht nach der subside . it be what sentimentalist , who deal in very big word , call a yearning after the ideal , and simply mean that woman be commonly not satisfy until they have husband and child on whom they may centre affections , which be spend elsewhere , as it be , in small change . have expend she little store of song , or have stay long enough in the back draw - room , it now appear proper to to ask she friend to s . " you would not have listen to I , " she say to ( though she know she be tell a fib ) , " have you hear first . " " I give warning , though , " say , " that , right or wrong , I consider the first singer in the world . " " you shall hear , " say ; and be actually polite enough to carry the candle to the piano . hint that he should like quite as well to sit in the dark ; but , laugh , decline to bear he company any farther , and the two accordingly follow . sang far better than she friend ( though of course Osborne be free to keep he opinion ) , and exert herself to the utmost , and , indeed , to the wonder of , who have never know she perform so well . she sang a french song , which do not understand in the least , and which confess he do not understand , and then a number of those simple ballad which be the fashion forty year ago , and in which british tar , we king , poor , blue - eye , and the like , be the principal theme . they be not , it be say , very brilliant , in a musical point of view , but contain numberless good - natured , simple appeal to the affections , which people understand better than the milk - and - water lagrime , sospiri , and felicita of the eternal Donizettian music with which we be favour now - a - day . conversation of a sentimental sort , befitt the subject , be carry on between the song , to which , after he have bring the tea , the delighted cook , and even , the housekeeper , condescende to listen on the landing - place . among these ditty be one , the last of the concert , and to the follow effect : ! bleak and barren be the moor , ! loud and piercing be the storm , the cottage roof be shelter have sure , the cottage hearth be bright and warm -- a orphan boy the lattice pass would , and , as he have its cheerful glow , doubly kee the midnight blast , and doubly could the fall snow . they mark ' he as he onward prest , with faint heart and weary limb ; voice bay he turn and rest , and gentle face welcome he . the dawn be up -- the guest be gone , the cottage hearth be blaze still ; pity all poor wanderer lone ! Hark to the wind upon the hill ! it be the sentiment of the before - mention word , " when I be go , " over again . as she come to the last word , 's " deep - toned voice falter . " everybody feel the allusion to she departure , and to she hapless orphan state . , who be fond of music , and soft - hear , be in a state of ravishment during the performance of the song , and profoundly touch at its conclusion . if he have have the courage ; if and have remain , accord to the former 's proposal , in the farther room , 's bachelorhood would have be at a end , and this work would never have be write . but at the close of the ditty , quit the piano , and give she hand to , walk away into the front drawing - room twilight ; and , at this moment , make he appearance with a tray , contain sandwich , jelly , and some glitter glass and decanter , on which 's attention be immediately fix . when the parent of the house of return from they dinner - party , they find the young people so busy in talking , that they have not hear the arrival of the carriage , and be in the act of say , " my dear , one little teaspoonful of jelly to recruit you after you immense -- you -- you delightful exertion . " " , ! " say ; on hear the bantering of which well - know voice , instantly relapse into a alarmed silence , and quickly take he departure . he do not lie awake all night think whether or not he be in love with ; the passion of love never interfere with the appetite or the slumber of ; but he think to himself how delightful it would be to hear such song as those after -- what a distinguee girl she be -- how she could speak better than the Governor- 's lady herself -- and what a sensation she would make at the balls . " it be evident the poor 's in love with I , " think he . " she be just as rich as most of the girl who come out to . I might go farther , and fare worse , egad ! " and in these meditation he fall asleep . how sharp
sharp lay awake , think , will he come or not to - morrow ? need not be tell here . to -morrow come , and , as sure as fate , make he appearance before luncheon . he have never be know before to confer such a honour on . be somehow there already ( sadly " put out " , who be write to she twelve dearest friend at ) , and be employ upon she yesterday 's work . as 's buggy drive up , and while , after he usual thundering knock and pompous bustle at the door , the ex-Collector of laboure up stair to the drawing - room , knowe glance be telegraph between and , and the pair , smile archly , look at , who actually blush as she bend she fair ringlet over she knitting . how she heart beat as appear -- , puffe from the staircase in shining creak boot -- , in a new waistcoat , red with heat and nervousness , and blush behind he wad neckcloth . it be a nervous moment for all ; and as for , I think she be more frightened than even the people most concerned . , who fling open the door and announce , follow grinning , in the Collector 's rear , and bear two handsome nosegay of flower , which the monster have actually have the gallantry to purchase in that morning -- they be not as big as the haystack which lady carry about with they now - a - day , in cone of filigree paper ; but the young woman be delighted with the gift , as present one to each , with a exceedingly solemn bow . " , ! " cry . " thank you , dear , " say , quite ready to kiss she brother , if he be so minded . ( and I think for a kiss from such a dear creature as , I would purchase all 's conservatory out of hand . ) " of heavenly , heavenly flower ! " exclaim , and smelt they delicately , and hold they to she bosom , and cast up she eye to the ceiling , in a ecstasy of admiration . perhaps she just look first into the bouquet , to see whether there be a billet - doux hide among the flower ; but there be no letter . " do they talk the language of flower at , ? " ask , laugh . " Pooh , nonsense ! " reply the sentimental youth . " buy th'ey at 's ; very glad you like th'ey ; and eh , , my dear , I buy a pine - apple at the same time , which I give to . let 's have it for tiffin ; very cool and nice this hot weather . " say she have never taste a pine , and long beyond everything to taste one . so the conversation go on . I do not know on what pretext leave the room , or why , presently , go away , perhaps to superintend the slicing of the pine - apple ; but be leave alone with , who have resume she work , and the green silk and the shining needle be quiver rapidly under she white slender finger . " what a beautiful , BYOO - Ootiful song that be you sang last night , dear , " say the Collector . " it make I cry almost ; ' pon my honour it do . " " because you have a kind heart , ; all the Sedley have , I think . " " it keep I awake last night , and I be try to hum it this morning , in bed ; I be , upon my honour . , my doctor , come in at eleven ( for I be a sad invalid , you know , and see Gollop every day ) , and , ' gad ! there I be , singe away like -- a robin . " " o you droll creature ! do let I hear you s it . " " I ? no , you , ; my dear , do se it . " " not now , , " say , with a sigh . " my spirit be not equal to it ; besides , I must finish the purse . will you help I , ? " and before he have time to ask how , , of the 's service , be actually seate tete - a - tete with a young lady , look at she with a most killing expression ; he arm stretch out before she in a imploring attitude , and he hand bound in a web of green silk , which she be unwinding . in this romantic position and find the interesting pair , when they enter to announce that tiffin be ready . the skein of silk be just wound round the card ; but have never speak . " I be sure he will to - night , dear , " say , as she press 's hand ; and , too , have commune with he soul , and say to himself , " ' , I will pop the question at . " of 's fight with , and the unexpected issue of that contest , will long be remembe by every man who be educate at 's famous school . the latter ( who use to be call - , -ho , and by many other name indicative of puerile contempt ) be the quietest , the clumsiest , and , as it see , the dullest of all 's young gentleman . he parent be a grocer in the city : and it be bruit abroad that he be
be admit into 's academy upon what be call " mutual principle " -- that be to say , the expense of he board and schooling be defray by he father in goods , not money ; and he stand there -- most at the bottom of the school -- in he scraggy corduroy and jacket , through the seam of which he great big bone be burst -- as the representative of so many pound of tea , candle , sugar , mottle - soap , plum ( of which a very mild proportion be supply for the pudding of the establishment ) , and other commodity . a dreadful day it be for young when one of the youngster of the school , have run into the town upon a poaching excursion for hardbake and polony , espy the cart of & , and , , , at the 's door , discharge a cargo of the ware in which the firm deal . young have no peace after that . the joke be frightful , and merciless against he . " Hullo , , " one wag would say , " here 's good news in the paper . Sugar be ri ' , my boy . " another would set a sum --" if a pound of mutton - candle cost sevenpence - halfpenny , how much must Dobbin cost ? " and a roar would follow from all the circle of young knave , usher and all , who rightly consider that the selling of goods by retail be a shameful and infamous practice , merit the contempt and scorn of all real gentleman . " you father 's only a merchant , , " say in private to the little boy who have bring down the storm upon he . at which the latter reply haughtily , " my father 's a gentleman , and keep he carriage " ; and retreat to a remote outhouse in the playground , where he pass a half - holiday in the bitterest sadness and woe . who amongst we be there that do not recollect similar hour of bitter , bitter childish grief ? who feel injustice ; who shrink before a slight ; who have a sense of wrong so acute , and so glow a gratitude for kindness , as a generous boy ? and how many of those genle soul do you degrade , estrange , torture , for the sake of a little loose arithmetic , and miserable dog - latin ? now , , from a incapacity to acquire the rudiment of the above language , as they be propound in that wonderful book the , be compelle to remain among the very last of 's scholar , and be " take down " continually by little fellows with pink face and pinafore when he march up with the lower form , a giant amongst they , with he downcast , stupefy look , he dog 's - eare primer , and he tight corduroy . high and low , all make fun of he . they sew up those corduroy , tight as they be . they cut he bed - string . they upset bucket and bench , so that he might break he shins over they , which he never fail to do . they send he parcel , which , when open , be find to contain the paternal soap and candle . there be no little fellow but have he jeer and joke at ; and he bear everything quite patiently , and be entirely dumb and miserable . Cuff , on the contrary , be the great chief and dandy of the . he smuggle wine in . he fight the town - boy . Pony use to come for he to ride home on . he have he top - boot in he room , in which he use to hunt in the holiday . he have a gold repeater : and take snuff like the doctor . he have be to the , and know the merit of the principal actor , prefer to . he could knock you off forty Latin verse in a hour . he could make french poetry . what else do not he know , or could not he do ? they say even the Doctor himself be afraid of he . Cuff , the unquestioned king of the school , rule over he subject , and bully they , with splendid superiority . this one black he shoe : that toast he bread , other would fag out , and give he ball at cricket during whole summer afternoons . " Fig " be the fellow whom he despise most , and with whom , though always abuse he , and sneer at he , he scarcely ever condescende to hold personal communication . one day in private , the two young gentleman have have a difference . Figs , alone in the schoolroom , be blundere over a home letter ; when Cuff , enter , bay he go upon some message , of which tart be probably the subject . " I can not , " say ; " I want to finish my letter . " " you can not ? " say , lay hold of that document ( in which many word be scratch out , many be mis-spelt , on which have be spend I do not know how much thought , and labour , and tear ; for the poor fellow be write to he mother , who be fond of he , although she be a grocer 's wife , and live in a back parlour in ) . " you can not ? " say : " I should like to know why , pray ? can not you write to old mother Figs to - morrow ? "
" " do not call name , " say , get off the bench very nervous . " well , sir , will you go ? " crow the cock of the school . " put down the letter , " reply ; " no gentleman readth letterth . " " well , now will you go ? " say the other . " no , I will not . do not strike , or I will Thmash you , " roar out , spring to a leaden inkstand , and look so wicked , that Cuff pause , turn down he coat sleeve again , put he hand into he pocket , and walk away with a sneer . but he never meddle personally with the grocer 's boy after that ; though we must do he the justice to say he always speak of with contempt behind he back . some time after this interview , it happen that , on a sunshiny afternoon , be in the neighbourhood of poor , who be lie under a tree in the playground , spell over a favourite copy of the Arabian night which he have apart from the rest of the school , who be pursue they various sport -- quite lonely , and almost happy . if people would but leave child to themselves ; if teacher would cease to bully they ; if parent would not insist upon direct they thought , and dominate they feeling -- those feeling and thought which be a mystery to all ( for how much do you and I know of each other , of we child , of we father , of we neighbour , and how far more beautiful and sacred be the thought of the poor lad or girl whom you govern likely to be , than those of the dull and world - corrupt person who rule he ? ) -- if , I say , parent and master would leave they child alone a little more , small harm would accrue , although a less quantity of as in praesento might be acquire . well , have for once forget the world , and be away with the in the of , or with and the in that delightful cavern where the find she , and whither we should all like to make a tour ; when shrill cry , as of a little fellow weeping , wake up he pleasant reverie ; and look up , he see Cuff before he , belabour a little boy . it be the lad who have peach upon he about the grocer 's cart ; but he bear little malice , not at least towards the young and small . " how dare you , sir , break the bottle ? " say Cuff to the little urching , swing a yellow cricket - stump over he . the boy have be instruct to get over the playground wall ( at a select spot where the broken glass have be remove from the top , and nich make convenient in the brick ) ; to run a quarter of a mile ; to purchase a pint of rum-shrub on credit ; to brave all the Doctor 's outlying spy , and to clamber back into the playground again ; during the performance of which feat , he foot have slipt , and the bottle be broken , and the shrub have be spilt , and he pantaloon have be damage , and he appear before he employer a perfectly guilty and trembl , though harmless , wretch . " how dare you , sir , break it ? " say Cuff ; " you blunder little thief . you drank the shrub , and now you pretend to have break the bottle . hold out you hand , sir . " down come the stump with a great heavy thump on the child 's hand . a moan follow . look up . the have fle into the inmost cavern with : the have whisk away the out of the of out of sight , far into the cloud : and there be every day life before honest ; and a big boy beat a little one without cause . " hold out you other hand , sir , " roar Cuff to he little schoolfellow , whose face be distort with pain . quiver , and gather himself up in he narrow old clothes . " take that , you little devil ! " cry , and down come the wicket again on the child 's hand .-- do not be horrified , lady , every boy at a public school have do it . you child will so do and be do by , in all probability . down come the wicket again ; and start up . I can not tell what he motive be . torture in a public school be as much license as the knout in . it would be ungentlemanlike ( in a manner ) to resist it . perhaps 's foolish soul revolt against that exercise of tyranny ; or perhaps he have a hankering feeling of revenge in he mind , and long to measure himself against that splendid bully and tyrant , who have all the glory , pride , pomp , circumstance , banner fly , drum beat , guard salut , in the place . whatever may have be he incentive , however , up he spring , and scream out , " hold off , ; do not bully that child any more ; or I will -- " " or you will what ? " Cuff ask in amazement at this interruption . " hold out you hand , you little . " " I will give you the worst thrash you ever have in you life , " say , in reply to the
the first part of 's sentence ; and little , gas and in tear , look up with wonder and incredulity at see this amazing champion put up suddenly to defend he : while 's astonishment be scarcely less . fancy we late monarch III when he hear of the revolt of the american colony : fancy brazen Goliath when little step forward and claim a meeting ; and you have the feeling of Cuff when this rencontre be propose to he . " after school , " say he , of course ; after a pause and a look , as much as to say , " make you will , and communicate you last wish to you friend between this time and that . " " as you please , " say . " you must be my botle holder , . " " well , if you like , " little Osborne replie ; for you see he papa keep a carriage , and he be rather asham of he champion . yes , when the hour of battle come , he be almost asham to say , " go it , Figs " ; and not a single other boy in the place utter that cry for the first two or three round of this famious combat ; at the commencement of which the scientific Cuff , with a contemptuous smile on he face , and as light and as gay as if he be at a ball , plant he blow upon he adversary , and floor that unlucky champion three time run . at each fall there be a cheer ; and everybody be anxious to have the honour of offer the conqueror a knee . " what a licking I shall get when it be over , " young thought , pick up he man . " you would best give in , " he say to ; " it be only a thrashing , Figs , and you know I be use to it . " but Fig , all whose limb be in a quiver , and whose nostril be breathing rage , put he little bottle - holder aside , and go in for a fourth time . as he do not in the least know how to parry the blow that be aim at himself , and have begin the attack on the three preceding occasion , without ever allow he enemy to strike , Figs now determine that he would commence the engagement by a charge on he own part ; and accordingly , be a leave - hand man , bring that arm into action , and hit out a couple of time with all he might -- once at Cuff 's left eye , and once on he beautiful Roman nose . Cuff go down this time , to the astonishment of the assembly . " well hit , by , " say little , with the air of a connoisseur , clapp he man on the back . " give it he with the left , Fig my boy . " Figs 's leave make terrific play during all the rest of the combat . Cuff go down every time . at the sixth round , there be almost as many fellow shout out , " go it , Figs , " as there be youths exclaim , " go it , . " at the twelfth round the latter champion be all abroad , as the say be , and have lose all presence of mind and power of attack or defence . Figs , on the contrary , be as calm as a quaker . he face be quite pale , he eye shin open , and a great cut on he underlip bleed profusely , give this young fellow a fierce and ghastly air , which perhaps strike terror into many spectator . nevertheless , he intrepid adversary prepare to close for the thirteenth time . if I have the pen of a , or a 's , I should like to describe this combat properly . it be the last charge of the --( that be , it would have be , only Waterloo have not yet take place ) -- it be 's column breast the hill of , bristl with ten thousand bayonet , and crown with twenty eagle -- it be the shout of the beef - eat british , as leap down the hill they rush to hug the enemy in the savage arm of battle -- in other word , Cuff come up full of pluck , but quite reeling and groggy , the Fig - merchant put in he left as usual on he adversary 's nose , and send he down for the last time . " I think that will do for he , " Fig say , as he opponent drop as neatly on the green as I have see 's ball plump into the pocket at billiards ; and the fact be , when time be call , be not able , or do not choose , to stand up again . and now all the boy set up such a shout for Figs as would have make you think he have be they darling champion through the whole battle ; and as absolutely bring out of he study , curiious to know the cause of the uproar . he threaten to flog Figs violently , of course ; but Cuff , who have come to himself by this time , and be wash he wound , stand up and say , " it be my fault , sir -- not ' -- not 's . I be bully a little boy ; and he serve I right . " by which magnanimous speech he not only save he conqueror a whipping , but get back all he ascendancy over the boy
boy which he defeat have nearly cost he . young write home to he parent a account of the transaction . , , , 18-- , -- I hope you be quite well . I should be much oblige to you to send I a cake and five shilling . there have be a fight here between & . Cuff , you know , be the cock of the . they fight thirteen round , and . so Cuff be now only second cock . the fight be about I . Cuff be lick I for break a bottle of milk , and would not stand it . we call he Figs because he father be a Grocer -- Figs & Rudge , , -- I think as he fight for I you ought to buy you & at he father 's . Cuff go home every , but can not this , because he have 2 black eye . he have a white pony to come and fetch he , and a groom in livery on a bay mare . I wish my would let I have a pony , and I be you dutiful , P.s.-- my love to little . I be cut she out a coach in cardboard . please not a seed - cake , but a plum -cake . in consequence of 's victory , he character rise prodigiously in the estimation of all he schoolfellow , and the name of , which have be a byword of reproach , become as respectable and popular a nickname as any other in use in the school . " after all , it be not he fault that he father be a grocer , " say , who , though a little chap , have a very high popularity among the youth ; and he opinion be receive with great applause . it be vote low to sneer at about this accident of birth . " " grow to be a name of kindness and endearment ; and the sneak of a usher jeered at he no longer . and 's spirit rise with he altered circumstance . he make wonderful advance in scholastic learning . the superb Cuff himself , at whose condescension could only blush and wonder , help he on with he Latin verse ; " coach " he in play - hour : carry he triumphantly out of the little - boy class into the middle - size form ; and even there get a fair place for he . it be discover , that although dull at classical learning , at mathematics he be uncommonly quick . to the contentment of all he pass third in algebra , and get a french prize - book at the public Midsummer examination . you should have see he mother 's face when ( that delicious romance ) be present to he by the Doctor in the face of the whole school and the parent and company , with a inscription to . all the boy clap hand in token of applause and sympathy . he blush , he stumble , he awkwardness , and the number of foot which he crush as he go back to he place , who shall describe or calculate ? , he father , who now respecte he for the first time , give he two guinea publicly ; most of which he spend in a general tuck - out for the school : and he come back in a tail - coat after the holiday . be much too modest a young fellow to suppose that this happy change in all he circumstance arise from he own generous and manly disposition : he choose , from some perverseness , to attribute he good fortune to the sole agency and benevolence of little , to whom henceforth he vow such a love and affection as be only feel by child -- such a affection , as we read in the charming fairy - book , uncouth have for splendid young he conqueror . he fling himself down at little 's foot , and love he . even before they be acquaint , he have admire in secret . now he be he valet , he dog , he man . he believe to be the possessor of every perfection , to be the handsomest , the bravest , the most active , the cleverest , the most generous of create boy . he share he money with he : buy he uncountable present of knife , pencil - case , gold seal , toffee , Warblers , and romantic book , with large coloured picture of knights and robber , in many of which latter you might read inscription to , , from he attach friend -- the which token of homage receive very graciously , as become he superior merit . so that , when come to on the day of the , say to the ladie , " . , , I hope you have room ; I have ask Dobbin of ours to come and dine here , and go with we to . he be almost as modest as . " " Modesty ! pooh , " say the stout gentleman , cast a vainqueur look at . " he be -- but you be incomparably more graceful , , " add , laugh . " I meet he at the , when I go to look for you ; and I tell he that be come home , and that we be all bent on go out for a night 's pleasuring ; and that have forgiven he break the punch - bowl at the child 's party . do not you remember the catastrophe , ma 'am , seven year ago ? " " over 's crimson silk gow , " say good - nature . " what a gawky it be !
! and he sister be not much more graceful . be at last night with three of they . such figure ! my dear . " " the 's very rich , be not he ? " say archly . " do not you think one of the daughter would be a good spec for I , ma 'am ? " " you foolish creature ! who would take you , I should like to know , with you yellow face ? " " mine a yellow face ? stop till you see . why , he have the yellow fever three time ; twice at , and once at . " " well , well ; yours be quite yellow enough for we . be not it , ? " say : at which speech only make a smile and a blush ; and look at 's pale interesting countenance , and those beautiful black , curling , shining whisker , which the young gentleman himself regard with no ordinary complacency , she think in she little heart that in he 's army , or in the wide world , there never be such a face or such a hero . " I do not care about 's complexion , " she say , " or about he awkwardness . I shall always like he , I know , " she little reason being , that he be the friend and champion of . " there be not a finer fellow in the service , " Osborne say , " nor a better officer , though he be not a , certainly . " and he look towards the glass himself with much naivete ; and in so do , catch 's eye fix keenly upon he , at which he blush a little , and think in she heart , " ah , mon ! I think I have you gauge " -- the little artful minx ! that evening , when come trippe into the drawing - room in a white muslin frock , prepare for conquest at , singe like a lark , and as fresh as a rose -- a very tall ungainly gentleman , with large hand and foot , and large ear , set off by a closely cropped head of black hair , and in the hideous military frogged coat and cock hat of those time , advance to meet she , and make she one of the clumsiest bow that be ever perform by a mortal . this be no other than , of he 's Regiment of , return from yellow fever , in the , to which the fortune of the service have order he regiment , whilst so many of he gallant comrade be reap glory in the . he have arrive with a knock so very timid and quiet that it be inaudible to the ladie upstairs : otherwise , you may be sure would never have be so bold as to come singe into the room . as it be , the sweet fresh little voice go right into the 's heart , and nestle there . when she hold out she hand for he to shake , before he envelope it in he own , he pause , and think -- " well , be it possible -- be you the little maid I remember in the pink frock , such a short time ago -- the night I upset the punch - bowl , just after I be gazet ? be you the little girl that say should marry he ? what a blooming young creature you seem , and what a prize the rogue have get ! " all this he think , before he take 's hand into he own , and as he let he cock hat fall . he history since he leave school , until the very moment when we have the pleasure of meet he again , although not fully narrated , have yet , I think , be indicate sufficiently for a ingenious reader by the conversation in the last page . , the despise grocer , be Dobbin-- be of the , then burn with military ardour to resist the french invasion . 's corps , in which old himself be but a indifferent corporal , have be review by the and the of ; and the colonel and alderman have be knighte . he son have enter the army : and young follow presently in the same regiment . they have serve in the and in . they regiment have just come home , and the attachment of to be as warm and generous now as it have be when the two be schoolboy . so these worthy people sit down to dinner presently . they talk about war and glory , and and , and the last Gazette . in those famous day every gazette have a victory in it , and the two gallant young man long to see they own name in the glorious list , and curse they unlucky fate to belong to a regiment which have be away from the chance of honour . kind with this exciting talk , but tremble and grow quite faint as she hear it . tell several of he tiger - hunt story , finish the one about and the surgeon ; help to everything on the table , and himself gobble and drank a great deal . he spring to open the door for the ladie , when they retire , with the most kill -- and come back to the table , fill himself bumper after bumper of claret , which he swallow with nervous rapidity . " he be prim himself , " whisper to , and at length the hour and the carriage arrive for . I know that the tune I be pipe be a very mild one ( although
although there be some terrific chapter come presently ) , and must beg the good - natured reader to remember that we be only discourse at present about a stockbroker 's family in , who be take walk , or luncheon , or dinner , or talk and make love as people do in common life , and without a single passionate and wonderful incident to mark the progress of they love . the argument stand thus -- , in love with , have ask a old friend to dinner and to -- be in love with . will he marry she ? that be the great subject now in hand . we might have treat this subject in the genteel , or in the romantic , or in the facetious manner . suppose we have lay the scene in , with the very same adventur -- would not some people have listen ? suppose we have show how fell in love , and the of become attach to , with the full consent of the , she noble father : or instead of the supremely genteel , suppose we have resort to the entirely low , and describe what be go on in 's kitchen -- how black be in love with the cook ( as indeed he be ) , and how he fight a battle with the coachman in she behalf ; how the knife - boy be catch steal a cold shoulder of mutton , and 's new femme de chambre refuse to go to be without a wax candle ; such incidents might be make to provoke much delightful laughter , and be suppose to represent scene of " life . " or if , on the contrary , we have take a fancy for the terrible , and make the lover of the new femme chambre a professional burglar , who burst into the house with he band , slaughters black at the foot of he master , and carry off in she night - dress , not to be let loose again till the third volume , we should easily have construct a tale of thrilling interest , through the fiery chapter of which the reader should hurry , pante . but my reader must hope for no such romance , only a homely story , and must be content with a chapter about , which be so short that it scarce deserve to be call a chapter at all . and yet it be a chapter , and a very important one too . be not there little chapters in everybody 's life , that seem to be nothing , and yet affect all the rest of the history ? let we then step into the coach with the party , and be off to the . there be barely room between and , who be on the front seat . sit bodkin opposite , between and . every soul in the coach agree that on that night would propose to make . the parent at home have acquiesce in the arrangement , though , between ourselves , old have a feeling very much akin to contempt for he son . he say he be vain , selfish , lazy , and effeminate . he could not endure he air as a man of fashion , and laugh heartily at he pompous braggadocio storie . " I shall leave the fellow half my property , " he say ; " and he will have , besides , plenty of he own ; but as I be perfectly sure that if you , and I , and he sister be to die to - morrow , he would say ' ! ' and eat he dinner just as well as usual , I be not go to make myself anxious about he . let he marry whom he like . it be no affair of mine . " , on the other hand , as become a young woman of she prudence and temperament , be quite enthusiastic for the match . once or twice have be on the point of say something very important to she , to which she be most willing to lend a ear , but the fat fellow could not be bring to unbosom himself of he great secret , and very much to he sister 's disappointment he only ry himself of a large sigh and turn away . this mystery serve to keep 's gentle bosom in a perpetual flutter of excitement . if she do not speak with on the tender subject , she compensate herself with long and intimate conversation with , the housekeeper , who drop some hint to the lady 's - maid , who may have cursorily mention the matter to the cook , who carry the news , I have no doubt , to all the tradesman , so that 's marriage be now talk of by a very considerable number of person in the world . it be , of course , 's opinion that she son would demean himself by a marriage with a artist 's daughter . " but , lor ' , ma 'am , " ejaculate , " we be only grocer when we marry , who be a stock - broker 's clerk , and we have not five hundred pound among we , and we be rich enough now . " and be entirely of this opinion , to which , gradually , the good - natured be bring . be neutral . " let marry whom he like , " he say ; " it be no affair of mine . this girl have no fortune ; no more have . she seem good - humoured and clever , and will keep he in order , perhaps . better she , my dear , than a black , and a dozen of mahogany
mahogany grandchild . " so that everything seem to smile upon 's fortune . she take 's arm , as a matter of course , on go to dinner ; she have sate by he on the box of he open carriage ( a most tremendous " buck " he be , as he sit there , serene , in state , drive he grey ) , and though nobody say a word on the subject of the marriage , everybody seem to understand it . all she want be the proposal , and ah ! how now feel the want of a mother !-- a dear , tender mother , who would have manage the business in ten minute , and , in the course of a little delicate confidential conversation , would have extract the interesting avowal from the bashful lip of the young man ! such be the state of affair as the carriage cross bridge . the party be land at the in due time . as the majestic step out of the creaking vehicle the crowd give a cheer for the fat gentleman , who blush and look very big and mighty , as he walk away with under he arm . , of course , take charge of . she look as happy as a rose - tree in sunshine . " I say , , " say , " just look to the shawl and thing , there be a good fellow . " and so while he paire off with , and squeeze through the gate into the garden with at he side , honest Dobbin content himself by give a arm to the shawl , and by pay at the door for the whole party . he walk very modestly behind they . he be not willing to spoil sport . and he do not care a fig . but he think worthy even of the brilliant , and as he see that good - look couple thread the walk to the girl 's delight and wonder , he watch she artless happiness with a sort of fatherly pleasure . perhaps he feel that he would have like to have something on he own arm besides a shawl ( the people laugh at see the gawky young officer carry this female burthen ) ; but be very little addicte to selfish calculation at all ; and so long as he friend be enjoy himself , how should he be discontent ? and the truth be , that of all the delights of the gardens ; of the hundred thousand extra lamp , which be always lighte ; the fiddler in cocked hat , who play ravish melody under the gild cockle - shell in the midst of the garden ; the singer , both of comic and sentimental ballad , who charme the ear there ; the country dance , form by bouncing cockney and cockneyess , and execute amidst jumping , thumping and laughter ; the signal which announce that be about to mount skyward on a slack - rope ascend to the star ; the hermit that always sit in the illuminated hermitage ; the dark walk , so favourable to the interview of young lover ; the pots of stout hand about by the people in the shabby old livery ; and the twinkling box , in which the happy feaster make - believe to eat slice of almost invisible ham -- of all these thing , and of the gentle Simpson , that kind smile idiot , who , I daresay , preside even then over the place -- do not take the slightest notice . he carry about 's white cashmere shawl , and have attend under the gilt cockle - shell , while perform the of ( a savage cantata against the Corsican upstart , who have lately meet with he russian reverse ) -- try to hum it as he walk away , and find he be hum -- the tune which sang on the stair , as she come down to dinner . he burst out laugh at himself ; for the truth be , he could s no better than a owl . it be to be understand , as a matter of course , that we young people , be in party of two and two , make the most solemn promise to keep together during the evening , and separate in ten minute afterwards . party at always do separate , but ' twas only to meet again at supper - time , when they could talk of they mutual adventur in the interval . what be the adventure of and ? that be a secret . but be sure of this -- they be perfectly happy , and correct in they behaviour ; and as they have be in the habit of be together any time these fifteen year , they tete - a - tete offer no particular novelty . but when and she stout companion lose themselves in a solitary walk , in which there be not above five score more of couple similarly stray , they both feel that the situation be extremely tender and critical , and now or never be the moment think , to provoke that declaration which be trembl on the timid lip of . they have previously been to the panorama of , where a rude fellow , tread on 's foot , cause she to fall back with a little shriek into the arm of , and this little incident increase the tenderness and confidence of that gentleman to such a degree , that he tell she several of he favourite indian story over again for , at least , the sixth time . " how I should like to see ! " say . " should you ? " say , with a most kill tenderness ; and be no
no doubt about to follow up this artful interrogatory by a question still more tender ( for he puffe and pante a great deal , and 's hand , which be place near he heart , could count the feverish pulsation of that organ ) , when , oh , provoke ! the bell ring for the firework , and , a great scuffling and run take place , these interesting lover be oblige to follow in the stream of people . have some thought of join the party at supper : as , in truth , he find the amusement be not particularly lively -- but he parade twice before the box where the now united couple be meet , and nobody take any notice of he . cover be laid for four . the mated pair be prattl away quite happily , and know he be as clean forget as if he have never exist in this world . " I should only be trop , " say the , look at they rather wistfully . " I would best go and talk to the hermit , " -- and so he stroll off out of the hum of man , and noise , and clatter of the banquet , into the dark walk , at the end of which liv that well - know pasteboard . it be not very good fun for -- and , indeed , to be alone at , I have find , from my own experience , to be one of the most dismal sport ever enter into by a bachelor . the two couple be perfectly happy then in they box : where the most delightful and intimate conversation take place . be in he glory , order about the waiter with great majesty . he make the salad ; and uncork the ; and carve the chicken ; and eat and drank the greater part of the refreshment on the table . finally , he insist upon have a bowl of rack punch ; everybody have rack punch at . " waiter , rack punch . " that bowl of rack punch be the cause of all this history . and why not a bowl of rack punch as well as any other cause ? be not a bowl of prussic acid the cause of 's retir from the world ? be not a bowl of wine the cause of the demise of the , or , at least , do not say so ?--so do this bowl of rack punch influence the fate of all the principal character in this " novel without a hero , " which we be now relate . it influence they life , although most of they do not taste a drop of it . the young lady do not drink it ; do not like it ; and the consequence be that , that fat gourmand , drank up the whole contents of the bowl ; and the consequence of he drinking up the whole contents of the bowl be a liveliness which at first be astonish , and then become almost painful ; for he talk and laugh so loud as to bring score of listener round the box , much to the confusion of the innocent party within it ; and , volunteer to s a song ( which he do in that maudlin high key peculiar to gentleman in a inebriated state ) , he almost draw away the audience who be gather round the musician in the gilt scollop - shell , and receive from he hearer a great deal of applause . " Brayvo , fat un ! " say one ; " , ! " say another ; " what a figure for the tight - rope ! " exclaim another wag , to the inexpressible alarm of the ladie , and the great anger of . " for 's sake , , let we get up and go , " cry that gentleman , and the young woman rose . " stop , my dearest diddle - diddle - darling , " shoute , now as bold as a lion , and clasp round the waist . start , but she could not get away she hand . the laughter outside redouble . continue to drink , to make love , and to s ; and , wink and wave he glass gracefully to he audience , challenge all or any to come in and take a share of he punch . be just on the point of knock down a gentleman in top - boot , who propose to take advantage of this invitation , and a commotion seem to be inevitable , when by the greatest good luck a gentleman of the name of , who have be walk about the garden , step up to the box . " be off , you fool ! " say this gentleman --shoulder off a great number of the crowd , who vanish presently before he cock hat and fierce appearance -- and he enter the box in a most agitated state . " ! , where have you be ? " say , seize the white cashmere shawl from he friend 's arm , and huddl up in it .--" make yourself useful , and take charge of here , whilst I take the lady to the carriage . " be for rise to interfere -- but a single push from 's finger send he puff back into he seat again , and the lieutenant be enable to remove the lady in safety . kiss he hand to they as they retreate , and hiccup out " you ! bless you ! " then , seize 's hand , and weep in the most pitiful way , he confide to that gentleman the secret of he love . he adore that girl who have just go
go out ; he have break she heart , he know he have , by he conduct ; he would marry she next morning at 's , ; he would knock up the of at : he would , by ! and have he in readiness ; and , act on this hint , shrewdly induce he to leave the garden and hasten to , and , when once out of the gate , easily convey into a hackney - coach , which deposit he safely at he lodging . conduct the girl home in safety : and when the door be close upon they , and as he walk across , laugh so as to astonish the watchman . look very ruefully at she friend , as they go up stair , and kiss she , and go to be without any more talking . " he must propose to - morrow , " think . " he call I he soul 's darling , four time ; he squeeze my hand in 's presence . he must propose to - morrow . " and so thing , too . and I dare say she think of the dress she be to wear as bridesmaid , and of the present which she should make to she nice little sister - in - law , and of a subsequent ceremony in which she herself might play a principal part , & c. , and & c. , and & c. , and &c . oh , ignorant young creature ! how little do you know the effect of rack punch ! what be the rack in the punch , at night , to the rack in the head of a morning ? to this truth I can vouch as a man ; there be no headache in the world like that cause by punch . through the lapse of twenty year , I can remember the consequence of two glassis ! two wine - glassis ! but two , upon the honour of a gentleman ; and , who have a liver complaint , have swallow at least a quart of the abominable mixture . that next morning , which thought be to daw upon she fortune , find groan in agony which the pen refuse to describe . -water be not invent yet . small beer -- will it be believe !-- be the only drink with which unhappy gentleman soothe the fever of they previous night 's potation . with this mild beverage before he , find the ex-Collector of groan on the sofa at he lodging . be already in the room , good - naturedly tend he patient of the night before . the two officer , look at the prostrate Bacchanalian , and askance at each other , exchange the most frightful sympathetic grin . even 's valet , the most solemn and correct of gentleman , with the muteness and gravity of a undertaker , could hardly keep he countenance in order , as he look at he unfortunate master . " be uncommon wild last night , sir , " he whisper in confidence to , as the latter mount the stair . " he want to fight the ' ackney - coachman , sir . the Capting be oblige to bring he upstairs in he harm like a babby . " a momentary smile flicker over 's feature as he speak ; instantly , however , they relapse into they usual unfathomable calm , as he fling open the drawing - room door , and announce " . " " how be you , ? " that young wag begin , after survey he victim . " no bone break ? there be a hackney - coachman downstair with a black eye , and a tie - up head , vow he will have the law of you . " " what do you mean -- law ? " faintly ask . " for thrash he last night -- do not he , ? you hit out , sir , like . the watchman say he never see a fellow go down so straight . ask . " " you do have a round with the coachman , " say , " and show plenty of fight too . " " and that fellow with the white coat at ! how drive at he ! how the woman scream ! by , sir , it do my heart good to see you . I think you civilian have no pluck ; but I will never get in you way when you be in you cup , . " " I believe I be very terrible , when I be rouse , " ejaculate from the sofa , and make a grimace so dreary and ludicrous , that the 's politeness could restrain he no longer , and he and fire off a ring volley of laughter . pursue he advantage pitilessly . he think a milksop . he have be revolve in he mind the marriage question pend between and , and be not over well please that a member of a family into which he , , of the -- th , be go to marry , should make a mesalliance with a little nobody -- a little upstart governess . " you hit , you poor old fellow ! " say . " you terrible ! why , man , you could not stand -- you make everybody laugh in the , though you be cry yourself . you be maudlin , . do not you remember singe a song ? " " a what ? " ask . " a sentimental song , and call , , what be she name , 's little friend -- you dearest diddle - diddle - darling ? " and this ruthless young fellow , seize hold of 's hand , act over the
the scene , to the horror of the original performer , and in spite of 's good - natured entreaty to he to have mercy . " why should I spare he ? " say to he friend 's remonstrance , when they quit the invalid , leave he under the hand of . " what the deuce right have he to give himself he patronize air , and make fools of we at ? who be this little schoolgirl that be ogl and make love to he ? hang it , the family 's low enough already , without she . a governess be all very well , but I would rather have a lady for my sister - in - law . I be a liberal man ; but I have proper pride , and know my own station : let she know hers . and I will take down that great hectoring , and prevent he from be make a greater fool than he be . that be why I tell he to look out , lest she bring a action against he . " " I suppose you know best , " say , though rather dubiously . " you always be a , and you family 's one of the oldest in . but --" " come and see the girl , and make love to yourself , " the lieutenant here interrupt he friend ; but decline to join in he daily visit to the young lady in . as walk down , from , he laugh as he see , at the , in two different story two head on the look - out . the fact be , , in the draw - room balcony , be look very eagerly towards the opposite side of the , where dwelt , on the watch for the lieutenant himself ; and , from she little bed - room on the second floor , be in observation until 's great form should heave in sight . " be on the watch - tower , " say he to , " but there be nobody come " ; and laugh and enjoy the joke hugely , he describe in the most ludicrous term to , the dismal condition of she brother . " I think it be very cruel of you to laugh , , " she say , look particularly unhappy ; but only laugh the more at she piteous and discomfit mien , persist in think the joke a most divert one , and when come downstairs , banter she with a great deal of liveliness upon the effect of she charms on the fat civilian . " of ! if you could but see he this morning , " he say -- " moan in he flower dressing - gown -- writhing on he sofa ; if you could but have see he lol out he tongue to Gollop the apothecary . " " see whom ? " say . " whom ? of whom ? , of course , to whom we be all so attentive , by the way , last night . " " we be very unkind to he , " say , blush very much . " I -- I quite forget he . " " of course you do , " cry , still on the laugh . " one can not be always think about , you know , . can one , ? " " except when he overset the glass of wine at dinner , " say , with a haughty air and a toss of the head , " I never give the existence of one single moment 's consideration . " " very good , , I will tell he , " Osborne say ; and as he speak begin to have a feeling of distrust and hatre towards this young officer , which he be quite unconscious of have inspire . " he be to make fun of I , be he ? " think . " have he be laugh about I to ? have he frightene he ? perhaps he will not come . " -- a film pass over she eye , and she heart beat quite quick . " you be always joke , " say she , smile as innocently as she could . " joke away , ; there be nobody to defend I . " and , as she walk away -- and look reprovingly at he -- feel some little manly compunction for have inflict any unnecessary unkindness upon this helpless creature . " my dearest , " say he , " you be too good -- too kind . you do not know the world . I do . and you little friend must learn she station . " " do not you think -- " " upon my word , my dear , I do not know . he may , or may not . I be not he master . I only know he be a very foolish vain fellow , and put my dear little girl into a very painful and awkward position last night . my dearest diddle - diddle - darling ! " he be off laugh again , and he do it so drolly that laugh too . all that day never come . but have no fear about this ; for the little schemer have actually send away the page , 's aide - de - camp , to 's lodging , to ask for some book he have promise , and how he be ; and the reply through 's man , , be , that he master be ill in bed , and have just have the doctor with he . he must come to - morrow , she think , but she never have the courage to speak a word on the subject
subject to ; nor do that young woman herself allude to it in any way during the whole evening after the night at . the next day , however , as the two young lady sate on the sofa , pretend to work , or to write letter , or to read novel , come into the room with he usual engaging grin , with a packet under he arm , and a note on a tray . " note from , , " say . how tremble as she open it ! so it run : dear ,-- I send you the " Orphan of the . " I be too ill to come yesterday . I leave town to - day for . pray excuse I , if you can , to the amiable , for my conduct at , and entreat she to pardon and forget every word I may have utter when excited by that fatal supper . as soon as I have recover , for my health be very much shaken , I shall go to for some month , and be truly yours , it be the death - warrant . all be over . do not dare to look at 's pale face and burn eye , but she dropt the letter into she friend 's lap ; and get up , and go upstairs to she room , and cry she little heart out . , the housekeeper , there seek she presently with consolation , on whose shoulder weep confidentially , and relieve herself a good deal . " do not take on , . I do not like to tell you . but none of we in the house have like she except at fust . I sor she with my own eye read you ma 's letter . Pinner say she be always about you trinket - box and drawer , and everybody be drawer , and she be sure she be put you white rib into she box . " " I give it she , I give it she , " say . but this do not alter 's opinion of . " I do not trust they governess , Pinner , " she remark to the maid . " they give themselves the hair and hupstart of lady , and they wage be no better than you nor I . " it now become clear to every soul in the house , except poor , that should take she departure , and high and low ( always with the one exception ) agree that that event should take place as speedily as possible . we good child ransack all she drawer , cupboard , reticule , and gimcrack box -- pass in review all she gown , fichus , tags , bobbin , lace , silk stocking , and fallal -- select this thing and that and the other , to make a little heap for . and go to she , that generous british merchant , who have promise to give she as many guinea as she be year old -- she beg the old gentleman to give the money to dear , who must want it , while she lack for nothing . she even make contribute , and nothing loth ( for he be as free - hand a young fellow as any in the army ) , he go to , and buy the best hat and spenser that money could buy . " that be 's present to you , , dear , " say , quite proud of the bandbox convey these gift . " what a taste he have ! there be nobody like he . " " nobody , " answer . " how thankful I be to he ! " she be think in she heart , " it be who prevent my marriage . " -- and she love accordingly . she make she preparations for departure with great equanimity ; and accept all the kind little 's present , after just the proper degree of hesitation and reluctance . she vow eternal gratitude to , of course ; but do not intrude herself upon that good lady too much , who be embarrassed , and evidently wish to avoid she . she kiss 's hand , when he present she with the purse ; and ask permission to consider he for the future as she kind , kind friend and protector . she behaviour be so affect that he be go to write she a cheque for twenty pound more ; but he restrain he feeling : the carriage be in waiting to take he to dinner , so he tripp away with a " bless you , my dear , always come here when you come to town , you know . -- drive to the , . " finally come the parting with , over which picture I intend to throw a veil . but after a scene in which one person be in earnest and the other a perfect performer -- after the tenderest caress , the most pathetic tear , the smell - bottle , and some of the very best feeling of the heart , have be call into requisition -- and part , the former vow to love she friend for ever and ever and ever . of 's the most respected of the name begin in which the court - guide contain , in the year 18 -- , be that of , , , Great , and 's , . this honourable name have figure constantly also in the list for many year , in conjunction with that of a number of other worthy gentleman who sit in turn for the borough . it be related , with regard to the borough of 's , that in one of she progress , stop at to , be so
so delighted with some remarkably fine beer which be then present to she by the of the day ( a handsome gentleman with a trim beard and a good leg ) , that she forthwill erect into a borough to send two member to parliament ; and the place , from the day of that illustrious visit , take the name of 's , which it hold up to the present moment . and though , by the lapse of time , and those mutation which age produce in empire , city , and borough , 's be no longer so populious a place as it have be in 's time -- nay , be come down to that condition of borough which use to be denominate rotten -- yet , as would say with perfect justice in he elegant way , " ! be hang -- it produce I a good fifteen hundr a year . " ( name after the great Commoner ) be the son of , first , of the and - in the reign of , when he be impeach for peculation , as be a great number of other honest gentleman of those day ; and be , as need scarcely be say , son of , name after the celebrated military commander of the reign of . the family tree ( which hang up at 's ) furthermore mention , afterwards call , son of the of the 's time ; and finally , 's , who be represent as the foreground of the picture in he forked beard and armour . out of he waistcoat , as usual , grow a tree , on the main branch of which the above illustrious name be inscribe . close by the name of , ( the subject of the present memoir ) , be write that of he brother , the ( the great Commoner be in disgrace when the reverend gentleman be bear ) , rector of - cum - Snailby , and of various other male and female member of the family . be first marry to , sixth daughter of , , and cousin , in consequence , of . she bring he two son : , name not so much after he father as after the heaven - bear minister ; and , from the of 's friend , whom he forget so completely . many year after she ladyship 's demise , lead to the altar , daughter of , of , by whom he have two daughter , for whose benefit be now engage as governess . it will be see that the young lady be come into a family of very genteel connexion , and be about to move in a much more distinguished circle than that humble one which she have just quit in . she have receive she order to join she pupil , in a note which be write upon a old envelope , and which contain the follow word : beg and baggidge may be hear on , as I leaf for 's to - morrow morning Erly . great . have never see a Baronet , as far as she know , and as soon as she have take leave of , and count the guinea which good - nature have put into a purse for she , and as soon as she have do wip she eye with she handkerchief ( which operation she conclude the very moment the carriage have turn the corner of the street ) , she begin to depict in she own mind what a Baronet must be . " I wonder , do he wear a star ? " think she , " or be it only lord that wear stars ? but he will be very handsomely dress in a court suit , with ruffle , and he hair a little powdered , like at . I suppose he will be awfully proud , and that I shall be treat most contemptuously . still I must bear my hard lot as well as I can -- at least , I shall be amongst , and not with vulgar city people " : and she fall to think of she friend with that very same philosophical bitterness with which , in a certain apologue , the fox be represent as speak of the grape . have pass through into , the carriage at length stop at a tall gloomy house between two other tall gloomy house , each with a hatchment over the middle drawing - room window ; as be the custom of house in great , in which gloomy locality death seem to reign perpetual . the shutter of the first - floor window of 's mansion be close -- those of the dining - room be partially open , and the blind neatly cover up in old newspaper . , the groom , who have drive the carriage alone , do not care to descmend to ring the bell ; and so pray a passing milk - boy to perform that office for he . when the bell be ring , a head appear between the interstice of the dining - room shutter , and the door be open by a man in drab breech and gaiter , with a dirty old coat , a foul old neckcloth lash round he bristly neck , a shining bald head , a leering red face , a pair of twinkling grey eye , and a mouth perpetually on the grin . " this 's ? " say , from the box . " ees , " say the man at the door , with a nod . " Hand down these ' ere trunk then , " say . " 'n down yourself , " say the porter . " do not you see I can not leave my hoss ? come , bear a hand
hand , my fine feller , and will give you some beer , " say , with a horse - laugh , for he be no longer respectful to , as she connexion with the family be break off , and as she have give nothing to the servants on come away . the bald - head man , take he hand out of he breech pocket , advanc on this summon , and throw 's trunk over he shoulder , carry it into the house . " take this basket and shawl , if you please , and open the door , " say , and descende from the carriage in much indignation . " I shall write to and inform he of you conduct , " say she to the groom . " do not , " reply that functionary . " I hope you have forget nothink ? ' 's gownd -- have you get they -- as the lady 's maid be to have 'ad ? I hope they will fit you . shut the door , , you will get no good out of , " continue , point with he thumb towards : " a bad lot , I tell you , a bad lot , " and so say , 's groom drive away . the truth be , he be attach to the lady 's maid in question , and indignant that she should have be rob of she perquisite . on enter the dining - room , by the order of the individual in gaiter , find that apartment not more cheerful than such room usually be , when genteel family be out of town . the faithful chamber seem , as it be , to mourn the absence of they master . the turkey carpet have roll itself up , and retire sulkily under the sideboard : the picture have hide they face behind old sheet of brown paper : the ceiling lamp be muff up in a dismal sack of brown holland : the window - curtain have disappear under all sort of shabby envelope : the marble bust of be look from it be black corner at the bare board and the oiled fire - iron , and the empty card - rack over the mantelpiece : the cellaret have lurk away behind the carpet : the chair be turn up head and tail along the wall : and in the dark corner opposite the statue , be a old - fashioned crab knife - box , lock and sit on a dumb waiter . two kitchen chair , and a round table , and a attenuate old poker and tong be , however , gather round the fire - place , as be a saucepan over a feeble sputtering fire . there be a bit of cheese and bread , and a tin candlestick on the table , and a little black porter in a pint - pot . " have you dinner , I suppose ? it be not too warm for you ? like a drop of beer ? " " where be ? " say majestically . " he , he ! I be . Reklect you owe I a pint for bring down you luggage . he , he ! ask if I aynt . , ; , . Ho , ho ! " the lady address as . Tinker at this moment make she appearance with a pipe and a paper of tobacco , for which she have be despatch a minute before 's arrival ; and she hand the article over to , who have take he seat by the fire . " where be the farden ? " say he . " I give you three halfpence . where be the change , old ? " " there ! " reply , flinge down the coin ; " it be only baronet as care about farthing . " " a farthing a day be seven shilling a year , " answer the ; " seven shilling a year be the interest of seven guinea . take care of you farthing , old Tinker , and you guinea will come quite nat'ral . " " you may be sure it be , young woman , " say , surlily ; " because he look to he farthing . you will know he better afore long . " " and like I no the worse , , " say the old gentleman , with a air almost of politeness . " I must be just before I be generous . " " he never give away a farthing in he life , " grow . " never , and never will : it be against my principle . go and get another chair from the kitchen , Tinker , if you want to sit down ; and then we will have a bit of supper . " presently the baronet plunge a fork into the saucepan on the fire , and withdraw from the pot a piece of tripe and a onion , which he divide into pretty equal portion , and of which he partake with . " you see , , when I be not here 's on board wage : when I be in town she dine with the family . Haw ! haw ! I be glad be not hungry , be not you , ? " and they fall to upon they frugal supper . after supper begin to smoke he pipe ; and when it become quite dark , he light the rushlight in the tin candlestick , and produce from a interminable pocket a huge mass of papers , begin read they , and put they in order . " I be here on law business , my dear , and that be how it happen that I shall have the pleasure of such a pretty
pretty travelling companion to - morrow . " " he be always at law business , " say , take up the pot of porter . " drink and drink about , " say the Baronet . " yes ; my dear , be quite right : I have lose and win more lawsuit than any man in . look here at , . v. . I will throw he over , or my name be not . Podder and another versus , . Overseer of Snaily parish against , . they can not prove it be common : I will defy th'ey ; the land 's mine . it no more belongs to the parish than it do to you or here . I will beat th'ey , if it cost I a thousand guinea . look over the papers ; you may if you like , my dear . do you write a good hand ? I will make you useful when we be at 's , depend on it , . now the dowager 's dead I want some one . " " she be as bad as he , " say . " she take the law of every one of she tradesman ; and turn away forty - eight footman in four year . " " she be close -- very close , " say the , simply ; " but she be a valyble woman to I , and save I a steward . " -- and in this confidential strain , and much to the amusement of the new - comer , the conversation continue for a considerable time . whatever 's quality might be , good or bad , he do not make the least disguise of they . he talk of himself incessantly , sometimes in the coarsest and vulgarest accent ; sometimes adopt the tone of a man of the world . and so , with injunction to to be ready at five in the morning , he bade she good night . " you will sleep with to - night , " he say ; " it be a big bed , and there be room for two . die in it . good night . " go off after this benediction , and the solemn Tinker , rushlight in hand , lead the way up the great bleak stone stair , past the great dreary drawing - room door , with the handle muff up in paper , into the great front bedroom , where have sleep she last . the bed and chamber be so funereal and gloomy , you might have fancied , not only that die in the room , but that she ghost inhabit it . spring about the apartment , however , with the greatest liveliness , and have pee into the huge wardrobe , and the closet , and the cupboard , and try the drawer which be lock , and examine the dreary picture and toilette appointment , while the old charwoman be say she prayer . " I should not like to sleep in this yeer be without a good conscience , , " say the old woman . " there be room for we and a half - dozen of ghost in it , " say . " tell I all about and , and everybody , my . " but old be not to be pump by this little cross -questioner ; and signify to she that bed be a place for sleeping , not conversation , set up in she corner of the bed such a snore as only the nose of innocence can produce . lay awake for a long , long time , think of the morrow , and of the new world into which she be go , and of she chance of success there . the rushlight flicker in the basin . the mantelpiece cast up a great black shadow , over half of a mouldy old sampler , which she defunct ladyship have work , no doubt , and over two little family picture of young lad , one in a college gown , and the other in a red jacket like a soldier . when she go to sleep , choose that one to dream about . at four o'clock , on such a roseate summer 's morning as even make great look cheerful , the faithful Tinker , have wake she bedfellow , and bid she prepare for departure , unbarred and unbolt the great hall door ( the clanging and clapping wherehave start the sleeping echoe in the street ) , and take she way into , summon a coach from a stand there . it be needless to particularize the number of the vehicle , or to state that the driver be statione thus early in the neighbourhood of , in hope that some young buck , reel homeward from the tavern , might need the aid of he vehicle , and pay he with the generosity of intoxication . it be likewise needless to say that the driver , if he have any such hope as those above state , be grossly disappointed ; and that the worthy Baronet whom he drive to the do not give he one single penny more than he fare . it be in vain that appeal and storm ; that he fling down 's bandbox in the gutter at the ' Neck , and swore he would take the law of he fare . " you would better not , " say one of the ostler ; " it be . " " so it be , , " cry the Baronet , approvingly ; " and I would like to see the man can do I . " " so should oi , " say , grinn sulkily , and mount the 's baggage on the roof of the coach .
. " keep the box for I , leader , " exclaim the member of parliament to the coachman ; who reply , " yes , , " with a touch of he hat , and rage in he soul ( for he have promise the box to a young gentleman from , who would have give a crown to a certainty ) , and be accommodate with a back seat inside the carriage , which might be say to be carry she into the wide world . how the young man from sulkily put he five great - coat in front ; but be reconcile when little be make to quit the carriage , and mount up beside he -- when he cover she up in one of he Benjamins , and become perfectly good - humoured -- how the asthmatic gentleman , the prim lady , who declare upon she sacred honour she have never travel in a public carriage before ( there be always such a lady in a coach -- Alas ! be ; for the coach , where be they ? ) , and the fat widow with the brandy - bottle , take they place inside -- how the porter ask they all for money , and get sixpence from the gentleman and five greasy halfpence from the fat widow -- and how the carriage at length drive away -- now thread the dark lane of , clatter by the of 's , jingl rapidly by the strangers 's entry of - , which , with 's , have now depart to the world of shadows -- how they pass the in , and see the dew rise up from the market - garden of -- how Turnhamgreen , , , be pass -- need not be tell here . but the writer of these page , who have pursue in former day , and in the same bright weather , the same remarkable journey , can not but think of it with a sweet and tender regret . where be the road now , and its merry incidents of life ? be there no or for the old honest pimple - nose coachman ? I wonder where be they , those good fellow ? be old alive or dead ? and the waiter , yea , and the inns at which they wait , and the cold round of beef inside , and the stunt ostler , with he blue nose and clinking pail , where be he , and where be he generation ? to those great geniuse now in petticoat , who shall write novel for the beloved reader 's child , these man and thing will be as much legend and history as , or , or . for they stage - coach will have become romance -- a team of four bay as fabulous as or . ah , how they coat shone , as the stable - man pull they clothes off , and away they go -- ah , how they tail shook , as with smoke side at the stage 's end they demurely walk away into the inn - yard . ! we shall never hear the horn se at midnight , or see the pike - gate fly open any more . Whither , however , be the light four -inside Trafalgar coach carry we ? let we be set down at 's without further divagation , and see how speed there . private and confidential to , , . ( free .-- . ) my Dearest , , with what mingle joy and sorrow do I take up the pen to write to my dearest friend ! oh , what a change between to - day and yesterday ! now I be friendless and alone ; yesterday I be at home , in the sweet company of a sister , whom I shall ever , ever cherish ! I will not tell you in what tear and sadness I pass the fatal night in which i separate from you . you go on to joy and happiness , with you mother and you devote young soldier by you side ; and I think of you all night , dance at the 's , the prettiest , I be sure , of all the young lady at the Ball . I be brotch by the groom in the old carriage to 's town house , where , after the groom have behave most rudely and insolently to I ( alas ! ' tbe safe to insult poverty and misfortune ! ) , I be give over to P.'s care , and make to pass the night in a old gloomy bed , and by the side of a horrid gloomy old charwoman , who keep the house . I do not sleep one single wink the whole night . be not what we silly girl , when we use to read at , imagine a baronet must have be . anything , indeed , less like can not be imagine . Fancy a old , stumpy , short , vulgar , and very dirty man , in old clothes and shabby old gaiter , who smoke a horrid pipe , and cook he own horrid supper in a saucepan . he speak with a country accent , and swore a great deal at the old charwoman , at the hackney coachman who drive we to the inn where the coach go from , and on which i make the journey Outside for the greater part of the way . I be awaken at daybreak by the charwoman , and have arrive at the inn , be at first place inside the coach . but , when we get to a place call , where the rain begin to fall very heavily -- will you believe it ?-- I be force to come outside ; for
for be a proprietor of the coach , and as a passenger come at , who want a inside place , I be obliged to go outside in the rain , where , however , a young gentleman from shelter I very kindly in one of he several great coat . this gentleman and the guard seem to know very well , and laugh at he a great deal . they both agree in call he a old screw ; which mean a very stingy , avaricious person . he never give any money to anybody , they say ( and this meanness I hate ) ; and the young gentleman make I remark that we drive very slow for the last two stage on the road , because be on the box , and because he be proprietor of the horse for this part of the journey . " but will not I flog th'ey on to , when I take the ribbon ? " say the young . " and sarve 'em right , master , " say the guard . when I comprehend the meaning of this phrase , and that master Jack intend to drive the rest of the way , and revenge himself on 's horse , of course I laugh too . a carriage and four splendid horse , cover with armorial bearing , however , await we at , four mile from 's , and we make we entrance to the baronet 's park in state . there be a fine avenue of a mile long lead to the house , and the woman at the lodge - gate ( over the pillars of which be a serpent and a dove , the supporter of the arm ) , make we a number of curtsy as she fling open the old iron carve door , which be something like those at odious . " there be a avenue , " say , " a mile long . there be six thousand pound of timber in they there tree . do you call that nothing ? " he pronounce avenue -- , and nothing -- NOTHINK , so droll ; and he have a , he hind from , into the carriage with he , and they talk about distraining , and sell up , and drain and subsoil , and a great deal about tenant and farming -- much more than I could understand . have be catch poaching , and have go to the workhouse at last . " serve he right , " say ; " he and he family have be cheat I on that farm these hundred and fifty year . " some old tenant , I suppose , who could not pay he rent . might have say " he and he family , " to be sure ; but rich baronet do not need to be careful about grammar , as poor governess must be . as we pass , I remark a beautiful church - spire rise above some old elm in the park ; and before they , in the midst of a lawn , and some outhouse , a old red house with tall chimney cover with ivy , and the window shin in the sun . " be that you church , sir ? " I say . " yes , hang it , " ( say , only he use , dear , a much Wickeder Word ) ; " how 's , ? be my brother , my dear -- my brother the parson . and the I call he , ha , ha ! " laugh too , and then look more grave and nodd he head , say , " I be afraid he be better , . he be out on he pony yesterday , look at we corn . " " look after he tithes , hang 'un ( only he use the same wicked word ) . will brandy and water never kill he ? he be as tough as old whatdyecallum -- old . " laugh again . " the young man be home from college . they have whop till he be well nigh dead . " " Whop my second keeper ! " roar out . " he be on the parson 's ground , sir , " reply ; and in a fury swore that if he ever catch th'ey poach on he ground , he would transport th'ey , by the lord he would . however , he say , " I have sell the presentation of the living , Hodson ; none of that breed shall get it , I war 'nt " ; and say he be quite right : and I have no doubt from this that the two brothers be at variance -- as brothers often be , and sister too . do not you remember the two at , how they use always to fight and quarrel -- and , how she be always thump ? presently , see two little boy gather stick in the wood , jump out of the carriage , at 's order , and rush upon they with he whip . " pitch into 'em , , " roar the baronet ; " flog they little soul out , and bring th'ey up to the house , the vagabonds ; I will commit th'ey as sure as my name 's . " and presently we hear 's whip cracke on the shoulders of the poor little blubbering wretch , and , see that the malefactor be in custody , drive on to the hall . all the servant be ready to meet we , and . . . here , my dear , I be interrupt last night by a dreadful thumping at my door : and who do you think it be ? in he night - cap and dressing -
- gown , such a figure ! as I shrank away from such a visitor , he come forward and seize my candle . " no candle after eleven o'clock , , " say he . " go to be in the dark , you pretty little hussy " ( that be what he call I ) , " and unless you wish I to come for the candle every night , mind and be in bed at eleven . " and with this , he and Horrocks the butler go off laughing . you may be sure I shall not encourage any more of they visit . they let loose two immense bloodhound at night , which all last night be yell and how at the moon . " I call the dog , " say ; " he be kill a man that dog have , and be master of a bull , and the mother I use to call ; but now I call she Aroarer , for she be too old to bite . Haw , hee ! " before the house of 's , which be a odious old - fashioned red brick mansion , with tall chimney and gable of the style of , there be a terrace flank by the family dove and serpent , and on which the great hall - door open . and oh , my dear , the great hall I be sure be as big and as glum as the great hall in the dear castle of . it have a large fireplace , in which we might put half 's school , and the grate be big enough to roast a ox at the very least . Round the room hang I do not know how many generation of Crawleys , some with beard and ruff , some with huge wig and to turn out , some dress in long straight stay and gowns that look as stiff as towers , and some with long ringlet , and oh , my dear ! scarcely any stay at all . at one end of the hall be the great staircase all in black oak , as dismal as may be , and on either side be tall door with stags 's head over they , lead to the billiard - room and the library , and the great yellow saloon and the morning - room . I think there be at least twenty bedroom on the first floor ; one of they have the bed in which slept ; and I have be take by my new pupil through all these fine apartment this morning . they be not render less gloomy , I promise you , by have the shutter always shut ; and there be scarce one of the apartment , but when the light be let into it , I expect to see a ghost in the room . we have a schoolroom on the second floor , with my bedroom lead into it on one side , and that of the young lady on the other . then there be 's apartment -- , he be call -- the eldest son , and 's room -- he be a officer like , and away with he regiment . there be no want of room I assure you . you might lodge all the people in in the house , I think , and have space to spare . half a hour after we arrival , the great dinner - bell be ring , and I come down with my two pupil ( they be very thin insignificant little chit of ten and eight year old ) . I come down in you dear muslin gown ( about which that odious be so rude , because you give it I ) ; for I be to be treat as one of the family , except on company day , when the young lady and I be to dine upstairs . well , the great dinner - bell rang , and we all assemble in the little drawing - room where my sits . she be the second , and mother of the young lady . she be a ironmonger 's daughter , and she marriage be think a great match . she look as if she have be handsome once , and she eye be always weep for the loss of she beauty . she be pale and meagre and high - shoulder , and have not a word to say for herself , evidently . she stepson , be likewise in the room . he be in full dress , as pompous as a undertaker . he be pale , thin , ugly , silent ; he have thin leg , no chest , hay - coloured whisker , and straw - coloured hair . he be the very picture of he saint mother over the mantelpiece -- of the noble house of . " this be the new governess , , " say , come forward and take my hand . " . " " o ! " say , and push he head once forward and begin again to read a great pamphlet with which he be busy . " I hope you will be kind to my girl , " say , with she pink eye always full of tear . " law , ma , of course she will , " say the eldest : and I see at a glance that I need not be afraid of that woman . " my lady be serve , " say the butler in black , in a immense white shirt - frill , that look as if it have be one of the 's ruff depict in the hall ; and so , take 's arm , she lead the way to the dining - room , whither I follow with my
my little pupil in each hand . be already in the room with a silver jug . he have just be to the cellar , and be in full dress too ; that be , he have take he gaiter off , and show he little dumpy leg in black worsted stocking . the sideboard be cover with glisten old plate -- old cup , both gold and silver ; old salver and cruet - stand , like and 's shop . everything on the table be in silver too , and two footman , with red hair and canary - coloured livery , stand on either side of the sideboard . say a long grace , and say amen , and the great silver dish - cover be remove . " what have we for dinner , ? " say the Baronet . " broth , I believe , , " answer . " aux navet , " add the butler gravely ( pronounce , if you please , moutongonavvy ) ; " and the soup be potage de mouton a l'Ecossaise . the side - dish contain pomme de terre au naturel , and choufleur a l'eau . " " 's , " say the , " and a devilish good thing . what ship be it , Horrocks , and when do you kill ? " " one of the black - face , : we kill on . " who take any ? " " steel , of , take the saddle and two leg , ; but he say the last be too young and confound woolly , . " " will you take some potage , ah -- ? say . " broth , my dear , " say , " though they call it by a french name . " " I believe it be the custom , sir , in decent society , " say , haughtily , " to call the dish as I have call it " ; and it be serve to we on silver soup plate by the footman in the canary coat , with the mouton aux navet . then " ale and water " be bring , and serve to we young lady in wine - glass . I be not a judge of ale , but I can say with a clear conscience I prefer water . while we be enjoy we repast , take occasion to ask what have become of the shoulders of the mutton . " I believe they be eat in the servants ' hall , " say my lady , humbly . " they be , my lady , " say Horrocks , " and precious little else we get there neither . " burst into a horse - laugh , and continue he conversation with . " that there little black pig of the 's breed must be uncommon fat now . " " it be not quite bus , , " say the butler with the gravest air , at which , and with he the young lady , this time , begin to laugh violently . " , , " say , " you laughter strike I as be exceedingly out of place . " " never mind , my lord , " say the , " we will try the porker on . kill un on morning , . sharp adore pork , do not you , ? " and I think this be all the conversation that I remember at dinner . when the repast be conclude a jug of hot water be place before , with a case - bottle containing , I believe , rum . serve myself and my pupil with three little glassis of wine , and a bumper be pour out for my lady . when we retire , she take from she work - drawer a enormous interminable piece of knitting ; the young lady begin to play at cribbage with a dirty pack of card . we have but one candle lighted , but it be in a magnificent old silver candlestick , and after a very few question from my lady , I have my choice of amusement between a volume of sermon , and a pamphlet on the corn -law , which have be read before dinner . so we sit for a hour until step be hear . " put away the card , girl , " cry my lady , in a great tremor ; " put down 's book , " ; and these order have be scarcely obey , when enter the room . " we will resume yesterday 's discourse , young lady , " say he , " and you shall each read a page by turn ; so that a -- short may have a opportunity of hear you " ; and the poor girl begin to spell a long dismal sermon deliver at , , on behalf of the mission for the . be it not a charming evening ? at ten the servant be tell to call and the household to prayer . come in first , very much flushed , and rather unsteady in he gait ; and after he the butler , the canary , 's man , three other man , smell very much of the stable , and four woman , one of whom , I remark , be very much overdressed , and who fling I a look of great scorn as she plump down on she knee . after have do harangue and expound , we receive we candle , and then we go to bed ; and then I be disturb in my writing , as I have describe to my dearest sweetest . good night . a thousand , thousand , thousand kiss ! .-- this morning , at five , I hear the shrieking of the little black pig
pig . and introduce I to it yesterday ; and to the stable , and to the kennel , and to the gardener , who be pick fruit to send to market , and from whom they beg hard a bunch of hot - house grape ; but he say that have number every " man Jack " of they , and it would be as much as he place be worth to give any away . the darling girl catch a colt in a paddock , and ask I if I would ride , and begin to ride themselves , when the groom , come with horrid oath , drive they away . be always knitt the worsted . be always tipsy , every night ; and , I believe , sit with , the butler . always read sermon in the evening , and in the morning be lock up in he study , or else ride to , on county business , or to , where he preach , on and , to the tenant there . a hundred thousand grateful love to you dear papa and mamma . be you poor brother recover of he rack -punch ? oh , dear ! oh , dear ! how man should beware of wicked punch ! ever and ever thine own Rebecca everything consider , I think it be quite as well for we dear , in , that and she be part . be a droll funny creature , to be sure ; and those description of the poor lady weeping for the loss of she beauty , and the gentleman " with hay - colou whisker and straw - coloured hair , " be very smart , doubtless , and show a great knowledge of the world . that she might , when on she knee , have be think of something better than 's ribbon , have possibly strike both of we . but my kind reader will please to remember that this history have " Vanity fair " for a title , and that Vanity fair be a very vain , wicked , foolish place , full of all sort of humbug and falseness and pretension . and while the moralist , who be hold forth on the cover ( a accurate portrait of you humble servant ) , profess to wear neither gow nor band , but only the very same long - eared livery in which he congregation be array : yet , look you , one be bound to speak the truth as far as one know it , whether one mount a cap and bell or a shovel hat ; and a deal of disagreeable matter must come out in the course of such a undertaking . I have hear a brother of the story - tell trade , at Naples , preach to a pack of good - for - nothing honest lazy fellow by the sea -shore , work himself up into such a rage and passion with some of the villain whose wick deeds he be describe and invent , that the audience could not resist it ; and they and the poet together would burst out into a roar of oath and execration against the fictitious monster of the tale , so that the hat go round , and the bajocchi tumble into it , in the midst of a perfect storm of sympathy . at the little theatre , on the other hand , you will not only hear the people yell out " ah gredin ! ah monstre : " and curse the tyrant of the play from the box ; but the actor themselves positively refuse to play the wicked part , such as those of infame Anglais , brutal Cossack , and what not , and prefer to appear at a smaller salary , in they real character as loyal . I set the two story one against the other , so that you may see that it be not from mere mercenary motive that the present performer be desirous to show up and trounce he villain ; but because he have a sincere hatred of they , which he can not keep down , and which must find a vent in suitable abuse and bad language . I warn my " kyind friend , " then , that I be go to tell a story of harrow villainy and complicat -- but , as I trust , intensely interesting -- crime . my rascal be no milk - and - water rascal , I promise you . when we come to the proper place we will not spare fine language -- no , no ! but when we be go over the quiet country we must perforce be calm . a tempest in a slop - basin be absurd . we will reserve that sort of thing for the mighty ocean and the lonely midnight . the present chapter be very mild . other -- but we will not anticipate those . and , as we bring we character forward , I will ask leave , as a man and a brother , not only to introduce they , but occasionally to step down from the platform , and talk about they : if they be good and kindly , to love they and shake they by the hand : if they be silly , to laugh at they confidentially in the reader 's sleeve : if they be wicked and heartless , to abuse they in the strongest term which politeness admit of . otherwise you might fancy it be I who be sneer at the practice of devotion , which find so ridiculous ; that it be I who laugh good - humouredly at the reeling old Silenus of a baronet -- whereas the laughter come from one who have no reverence except for prosperity , and no eye for
for anything beyond success . such people there be living and flourish in the world -- faithless , , : let we have at they , dear friend , with might and main . some there be , and very successful too , mere quack and fool : and it be to combat and expose such as those , no doubt , that be make . be a philosopher with a taste for what be call low life . he first marriage with the daughter of the noble have be make under the auspices of he parent ; and as he often tell in she lifetime she be such a confound quarrelsome high - breed jade that when she die he be hang if he would ever take another of she sort , at she ladyship 's demise he keep he promise , and select for a second wife , daughter of , ironmonger , of . what a happy woman be rose to be my ! let we set down the item of she happiness . in the first place , she give up , a young man who keep company with she , and in consequence of he disappointment in love , take to smuggle , poach , and a thousand other bad course . then she quarrell , as in duty bound , with all the friend and intimate of she youth , who , of course , could not be receive by my at 's -- nor do she find in she new rank and abode any person who be willing to welcome she . who ever do ? have three daughter who all hope to be . 's family be insult that one of the girl have not the preference in the marriage , and the remain baronet of the county be indignant at they comrade 's misalliance . never mind the commoner , whom we will leave to grumble anonymously . do not care , as he say , a brass farden for any one of they . he have he pretty rose , and what more need a man require than to please himself ? so he use to get drunk every night : to beat he pretty rose sometimes : to leave she in when he go to for the parliamentary session , without a single friend in the wide world . even , the rector 's wife , refuse to visit she , as she say she would never give the pa to a tradesman 's daughter . as the only endowment with which have gif be those of pink cheek and a white skin , and as she have no sort of character , nor talents , nor opinion , nor occupations , nor amusement , nor that vigour of soul and ferocity of temper which often fall to the lot of entirely foolish woman , she hold upon 's affections be not very great . she ros fade out of she cheek , and the pretty freshness leave she figure after the birth of a couple of child , and she become a mere machine in she husband 's house of no more use than the late 's grand piano . be a light - complexion woman , she wear light clothes , as most blonde will , and appear , in preference , in draggle sea -green , or slatternly sky - blue . she work that worsted day and night , or other piece like it . she have counterpane in the course of a few year to all the bed in . she have a small flower - garden , for which she have rather a affection ; but beyond this no other like or dislik . when she husband be rude to she she be apathetic : whenever he strike she she cry . she have not character enough to take to drink , and moan about , slipshod and in curl -paper all day . of -- ! this might have be , but for you , a cheery lass -- and a happy man and wife , in a snug farm , with a hearty family ; and a honest portion of pleasure , car , hope and struggle -- but a title and a coach and four be toy more precious than happiness in : and if the or be alive now , and want a tenth wife , do you suppose he could not get the prettiest girl that shall be present this season ? the languid dulness of they mamma do not , as it may be suppose , awaken much affection in she little daughter , but they be very happy in the servants 's hall and in the stable ; and the gardener have luckily a good wife and some good child , they get a little wholesome society and instruction in he lodge , which be the only education bestow upon they until come . she engagement be owe to the remonstrance of , the only friend or protector ever have , and the only person , besides she child , for whom she entertaine a little feeble attachment . take after the noble Binky , from whom he be descende , and be a very polite and proper gentleman . when he grow to man 's estate , and come back from , he begin to reform the slacken discipline of the hall , in spite of he father , who stand in awe of he . he be a man of such rigid refinement , that he would have starve rather than have din without a white neckcloth . once , when just from college , and when Horrock the butler bring he a letter without place it previously on a tray , he give that domestic a look , and administer to he a speech so cutting , that Horrocks ever after tremble before he
he ; the whole household bow to he : 's curl -paper come off earlier when he be at home : 's muddy gaiter disappear ; and if that incorrigible old man still adhere to other old habit , he never fuddle himself with rum - and - water in he son 's presence , and only talk to he servants in a very reserved and polite manner ; and those person remark that never swore at while he son be in the room . it be he who tatch the butler to say , " my lady be serve , " and who insist on hand she ladyship in to dinner . he seldom speak to she , but when he do it be with the most powerful respect ; and he never let she quit the apartment without rise in the most stately manner to open the door , and make a elegant bow at she egress . at he be call ; and there , I be sorry to say , he younger brother use to lick he violently . but though he parts be not brilliant , he make up for he lack of talent by meritorious industry , and be never know , during eight year at school , to be subject to that punishment which it be generally think none but a cherub can escape . at college he career be of course highly creditable . and here he prepare himself for public life , into which he be to be introduce by the patronage of he grandfather , , by study the ancient and modern orator with great assiduity , and by speak unceasingly at the debating societie . but though he have a fine flux of word , and deliver he little voice with great pomposity and pleasure to himself , and never advanc any sentiment or opinion which be not perfectly trite and stale , and support by a quotation ; yet he fail somehow , in spite of a mediocrity which ought to have insure any man a success . he do not even get the prize poem , which all he friend say he be sure of . after leave college he become private to , and be then appoint Attache to the Legation at , which post he fill with perfect honour , and bring home despatch , consist of pie , to the of the day . after remain ten year Attache ( several year after the lamented 's demise ) , and find the advancement slow , he at length give up the diplomatic service in some disgust , and begin to turn country gentleman . he write a pamphlet on on return to ( for he be a ambitious man , and always like to be before the public ) , and take a strong part in the question . then he become a friend of 's , whose politics he admire , and have that famous correspondence with the , on the . he be in , if not for the parliament session , at least in , for the religious meeting . in the country he be a magistrate , and a active visitor and speaker among those destitute of religious instruction . he be say to be pay he address to , 's third daughter , and whose sister , , write those sweet tract , " the 's , " and " the of . " 's account of he employment at 's be not caricature . he subject the servants there to the devotional exercise before mention , in which ( and so much the better ) he bring he father to join . he patronise a independent meeting - house in parish , much to the indignation of he uncle the rector , and to the consequent delight of , who be induce to go himself once or twice , which occasion some violent sermon at parish church , direct point - blank at the 's old Gothic pew there . , however , do not feel the force of these discourse , as he always take he nap during sermon - time . be very earnest , for the good of the nation and of the world , that the old gentleman should yield he up he place in parliament ; but this the elder constantly refuse to do . both be of course too prudent to give up the fifteen hundr a year which be bring in by the second seat ( at this period fill by , with carte blanche on the Slave question ) ; indeed the family estate be much embarrassed , and the income draw from the borough be of great use to the house of 's . it have never recover the heavy fine impos upon , first baronet , for peculation in the and . be a jolly fellow , eager to seize and to spend money ( alieni appeten , sui profusus , as would remark with a sigh ) , and in he day belove by all the county for the constant drunkenness and hospitality which be maintain at 's . the cellar be fill with burgundy then , the kennel with hound , and the stable with gallant hunters ; now , such horse as 's possess go to plough , or run in the coach ; and it be with a team of these very horse , on a off - day , that be bring to the hall ; for boor as he be , be a stickler for he dignity while at home , and seldom drive out but with four horse , and though he dine off boiled mutton , have always three footman to serve it . if mere parsimony could have make a man rich , might have become very wealthy -- if he have be a attorney in a country town ,
, with no capital but he brain , it be very possible that he would have turn they to good account , and might have achieve for himself a very considerable influence and competency . but he be unluckily endow with a good name and a large though encumber estate , both of which go rather to injure than to advance he . he have a taste for law , which cost he many thousand yearly ; and be a great deal too clever to be rob , as he say , by any single agent , allow he affair to be mismanage by a dozen , whom he all equally mistrusted . he be such a sharp landlord , that he could hardly find any but bankrupt tenant ; and such a close farmer , as to grudge almost the seed to the ground , whereupon revengeful grudge he the crop which she grant to more liberal husbandman . he speculate in every possible way ; he work mine ; buy canal - share ; horse coach ; take government contract , and be the busiest man and magistrate of he county . as he would not pay honest agent at he granite quarry , he have the satisfaction of finding that four overseer run away , and take fortune with they to . for want of proper precaution , he coal -mine fill with water : the government fling he contract of damaged beef upon he hand : and for he coach - horse , every mail proprietor in the kingdom know that he lose more horse than any man in the country , from underfeeding and buy cheap . in disposition he be sociable , and far from be proud ; nay , he rather prefer the society of a farmer or a horse - dealer to that of a gentleman , like my lord , he son : he be fond of drink , of swearing , of joke with the farmer ' daughter : he be never know to give away a shilling or to do a good action , but be of a pleasant , sly , laugh mood , and would cut he joke and drink he glass with a tenant and sell he up the next day ; or have he laugh with the poacher he be transport with equal good humour . he politeness for the fair sex have already be hint at by -- in a word , the whole baronetage , peerage , commonage of , do not contain a more cunning , mean , selfish , foolish , disreputable old man . that blood - red hand of 's would be in anybody 's pocket except he own ; and it be with grief and pain , that , as admirer of the british aristocracy , we find ourselves oblige to admit the existence of so many ill quality in a person whose name be in . one great cause why have such a hold over the affections of he father , result from money arrangement . the owed he son a sum of money out of the jointure of he mother , which he do not find it convenient to pay ; indeed he have a almost invincible repugnance to pay anybody , and could only be bring by force to discharge he debt . calculate ( for she become , as we shall hear speedily , induct into most of the secret of the family ) that the mere payment of he creditor cost the honourable Baronet several hundred yearly ; but this be a delight he could not forego ; he have a savage pleasure in make the poor wretch wait , and in shifting from court to court and from term to term the period of satisfaction . what be the good of be in parliament , he say , if you must pay you debt ? hence , indeed , he position as a senator be not a little useful to he . -- ! here be a man , who could not spell , and do not care to read -- who have the habit and the cunning of a boor : whose aim in life be pettifogge : who never have a taste , or emotion , or enjoyment , but what be sordid and foul ; and yet he have rank , and honour , and power , somehow : and be a dignitary of the land , and a pillar of the state . he be high sheriff , and ride in a golden coach . great minister and statesman court he ; and in Vanity fair he have a higher place than the most brilliant genius or spotless virtue . have a unmarried half - sister who inherit she mother 's large fortune , and though the Baronet propose to borrow this money of she on mortgage , decline the offer , and prefer the security of the fund . she have signify , however , she intention of leave she inheritance between 's second son and the family at the Rectory , and have once or twice pay the debt of in he career at college and in the army . be , in consequence , a object of great respect when she come to 's , for she have a balance at she banker 's which would have make she belove anywhere . what a dignity it give a old lady , that balance at the banker 's ! how tenderly we look at she fault if she be a relative ( and may every reader have a score of such ) , what a kind good - natured old creature we find she ! how the junior partner of and lead she smile to the carriage with the lozenge upon it , and the fat wheezy coachman ! how , when she come to pay we
we a visit , we generally find a opportunity to let we friend know she station in the world ! we say ( and with perfect truth ) I wish I have 's signature to a cheque for five thousand pound . she would not miss it , say you wife . she be my aunt , say you , in a easy careless way , when you friend ask if be any relative . you wife be perpetually send she little testimony of affection , you little girl work endless worst basket , cushion , and footstool for she . what a good fire there be in she room when she come to pay you a visit , although you wife lace she stay without one ! the house during she stay assume a festive , neat , warm , jovial , snug appearance not visible at other season . you yourself , dear sir , forget to go to sleep after dinner , and find yourself all of a sudden ( though you invariably lose ) very fond of a rubber . what good dinner you have -- game every day , - , and no end of fish from . even the servant in the kitchen share in the general prosperity ; and , somehow , during the stay of 's fat coachman , the beer be grow much stronger , and the consumption of tea and sugar in the nursery ( where she may take she meal ) be not regard in the least . be it so , or be it not so ? I appeal to the middle class . ah , gracious power ! I wish you would send I a old aunt -- a maiden aunt -- a aunt with a lozenge on she carriage , and a front of light coffee - colou hair -- how my child should work workbags for she , and my and I would make she comfortable ! sweet -- sweet vision ! Foolish --foolish dream ! to make Friends and now , be receive as a member of the amiable family whose portrait we have sketch in the foregoing page , it become naturally 's duty to make herself , as she say , agreeable to she benefactor , and to gain they confidence to the utmost of she power . who can but admire this quality of gratitude in a unprotected orphan ; and , if there enter some degree of selfishness into she calculation , who can say but that she prudence be perfectly justifiable ? " I be alone in the world , " say the friendless girl . " I have nothing to look for but what my own labour can bring I ; and while that little pink - face chit , with not half my sense , have ten thousand pound and a establishment secure , poor ( and my figure be far better than hers ) have only herself and she own wit to trust to . well , let we see if my wit can not provide I with a honourable maintenance , and if some day or the other I can not show my real superiority over she . not that I dislike poor : who can dislike such a harmless , good - natured creature ?--only it will be a fine day when I can take my place above she in the world , as why , indeed , should I not ? " thus it be that we little romantic friend for vision of the future for herself -- nor must we be scandalise that , in all she castle in the air , a husband be the principal inhabitant . of what else have young lady to think , but husband ? of what else do they dear mamma think ? " I must be my own mamma , " say ; not without a tingling consciousness of defeat , as she think over she little misadventure with . so she wisely determi to render she position with the 's family comfortable and secure , and to this end resolve to make friend of every one around she who could at all interfere with she comfort . as my be not one of these personage , and a woman , moreover , so indolent and void of character as not to be of the least consequence in she own house , soon find that it be not at all necessary to cultivate she good will -- indeed , impossible to gain it . she use to talk to she pupil about they " poor mamma " ; and , though she treat that lady with every demonstration of cool respect , it be to the rest of the family that she wisely direct the chief part of she attention . with the young people , whose applause she thoroughly gain , she method be pretty simple . she do not pester they young brain with too much learn , but , on the contrary , let they have they own way in regard to educate themselves ; for what instruction be more effectual than self - instruction ? the eldest be rather fond of book , and as there be in the old library at 's a considerable provision of work of light literature of the last century , both in the french and English language ( they have be purchase by the Secretary of the and at the period of he disgrace ) , and as nobody ever trouble the bookshelf but herself , be enable agreeably , and , as it be , in play , to impart a great deal of instruction to . she and thus read together many delightful french and English work , among which may be mention those of the learn , of the ingenious , of the graceful and fantastic the younger , whom we immortal
immortal poet so much admired , and of the universal . once , when ask what the young people be read , the governess replie " . " " oh , , " say , quite satisfied . " he history be more dull , but by no means so dangerous as that of . it be history you be read ? " " yes , " say ; without , however , add that it be the history of . on another occasion he be rather scandalised at find he sister with a book of french play ; but as the governess remark that it be for the purpose of acquire the french idiom in conversation , he be fain to be content . , as a diplomatist , be exceedingly proud of he own skill in speak the french language ( for he be of the world still ) , and not a little pleased with the compliment which the governess continually pay he upon he proficiency . 's taste be , on the contrary , more rude and boisterous than those of she sister . she know the sequester spot where the hen lay they egg . she could climb a tree to rob the nests of the feathered songster of they speckled spoil . and she pleasure be to ride the young colt , and to scour the plain like . she be the favourite of she father and of the stableman . she be the darling , and withal the terror of the cook ; for she discover the haunt of the jam - pots , and would attack they when they be within she reach . she and she sister be engage in constant battle . any of which peccadillo , if discover , she do not tell they to ; who would have tell they to the father , or worse , to ; but promise not to tell if would be a good girl and love she governess . with be respectful and obedient . she use to consult he on passage of which she could not understand , though she mother be a Frenchwoman , and which he would construe to she satisfaction : and , besides give she he aid in profane literature , he be kind enough to select for she book of a more serious tendency , and address to she much of he conversation . she admire , beyond measure , he speech at the - ; take a interest in he pamphlet on malt : be often affect , even to tear , by he discourse of a evening , and would say -- " oh , thank you , sir , " with a sigh , and a look up to heaven , that make he occasionally condescmend to shake hand with she . " be everything , after all , " would that aristocratic religionist say . " how be awaken by my word , when not one of the people here be touch . I be too fine for they -- too delicate . I must familiarise my style -- but she understand it . she mother be a Montmorency . " indeed it be from this famous family , as it appear , that , by the mother 's side , be descende . of course she do not say that she mother have be on the stage ; it would have shock 's religious scruple . how many noble emigre have this horrid revolution plunge in poverty ! she have several story about she ancestor ere she have be many month in the house ; some of which happen to find in 's dictionary , which be in the library , and which strengthen he belief in they truth , and in the high - breeding of . be we to suppose from this curiosity and pry into dictionary , could we heroine suppose that be interested in she ?-- no , only in a friendly way . have we not state that he be attach to ? he take to task once or twice about the propriety of play at backgammon with , say that it be a godless amusement , and that she would be much better engage in reading " 's , " or " the of , " or any work of a more serious nature ; but say she dear mother use often to play the same game with the old and the venerable , and so find a excuse for this and other worldly amusement . but it be not only by play at backgammon with the Baronet , that the little governess render herself agreeable to she employer . she find many different way of be useful to he . she read over , with indefatigable patience , all those law papers , with which , before she come to 's , he have promise to entertain she . she volunteere to copy many of he letter , and adroitly alte the spelling of they so as to suit the usage of the present day . she become interested in everything appertain to the estate , to the farm , the park , the garden , and the stable ; and so delightful a companion be she , that the Baronet would seldom take he after - breakfast walk without she ( and the child of course ) , when she would give she advice as to the tree which be to be lop in the shrubbery , the garden - bed to be dug , the crop which be to be cut , the horse which be to go to cart or plough . before she have be a year at 's she have quite win the 's confidence ; and the conversation at the dinner - table , which before use to be hold between he and Horrocks the butler , be now
now almost exclusively between and . she be almost mistress of the house when be absent , but conduct herself in she new and exalt situation with such circumspection and modesty as not to offend the authority of the kitchen and stable , among whom she behaviour be always exceedingly modest and affable . she be quite a different person from the haughty , shy , dissatisfie little girl whom we have know previously , and this change of temper prove great prudence , a sincere desire of amendment , or at any rate great moral courage on she part . whether it be the heart which dictate this new system of complaisance and humility adopt by we , be to be prove by she after - history . a system of hypocrisy , which last through whole year , be one seldom satisfactorily practise by a person of one - and - twenty ; however , we reader will recollect , that , though young in year , we heroine be old in life and experience , and we have write to no purpose if they have not discover that she be a very clever woman . the elder and younger son of the house of were , like the gentleman and lady in the weather - box , never at home together -- they hate each other cordially : indeed , , the dragoon , have a great contempt for the establishment altogether , and seldom come thither except when he aunt pay she annual visit . the great good quality of this old lady have be mention . she possess seventy thousand pound , and have almost adopted . she dislike she elder nephew exceedingly , and despise he as a milksop . in return he do not hesitate to state that she soul be irretrievably lose , and be of opinion that he brother 's chance in the next world be not a whit better . " she be a godless woman of the world , " would say ; " she live with atheist and Frenchmen . my mind shudder when I think of she awful , awful situation , and that , near as she be to the grave , she should be so give up to vanity , licentiousness , profaneness , and folly . " in fact , the old lady decline altogether to hear he hour 's lecture of a evening ; and when she come to 's alone , he be obliged to pretermit he usual devotional exercis . " shut up you sarmon , , when come down , " say he father ; " she have write to say that she will not stand the preachifying . " " o , sir ! consider the servants . " " the servant be hang , " say ; and he son think even worse would happen be they deprive of the benefit of he instruction . " why , hang it , ! " say the father to he remonstrance . " you would not be such a flat as to let three thousand a year go out of the family ? " " what be money compare to we soul , sir ? " continue . " you mean that the old lady will not leave the money to you ? " -- and who know but it be 's meaning ? be certainly one of the reprobate . she have a snug little house in , and , as she eat and drank a great deal too much during the season in , she go to or for the summer . she be the most hospitable and jovial of old vestal , and have be a beauty in she day , she say . ( all old woman be beauty once , we very well know . ) she be a bel esprit , and a dreadful for those day . she have be in ( where just , they say , inspire she with a unfortunate passion ) , and love , ever after , french novel , french cookery , and french wine . she read , and have by heart ; talk very lightly about divorce , and most energetically of the rights of woman . she have picture of in every room in the house : when that statesman be in opposition , I be not sure that she have not flng a main with he ; and when he come into office , she take great credit for bring over to he and he colleague for 's , although would have come over himself , without any trouble on the honest lady 's part . it be needless to say that be bring to change he view after the death of the great Whig statesman . this worthy old lady take a fancy to when a boy , send he to ( in opposition to he brother at ) , and , when the young man be request by the authority of the first-named to quit after a residence of two year , she buy he he commission in the . a perfect and celebrate " blood , " or dandy about town , be this young officer . Boxing , rat -hunt , the five court , and four - in - hand driving be then the fashion of we british aristocracy ; and he be a adept in all these noble science . and though he belong to the household troops , who , as it be they duty to rally round the , have not show they valour in foreign service yet , have already ( apropo of play , of which he be immoderately fond ) fight three bloody duel , in which he give ample proof of he contempt for death . " and for what follow after death , " would observe , throw he gooseberry -
- colou eye up to the ceiling . he be always think of he brother 's soul , or of the soul of those who differ with he in opinion : it be a sort of comfort which many of the serious give themselves . Silly , romantic , far from be horrify at the courage of she favourite , always use to pay he debt after he duel ; and would not listen to a word that be whisper against he morality . " he will sow he wild oat , " she would say , " and be worth far more than that pule hypocrite of a brother of he . " these honest folk at the hall ( whose simplicity and sweet rural purity surely show the advantage of a country life over a town one ) , we must introduce the reader to they relative and neighbour at the Rectory , and he wife . the be a tall , stately , jolly , shovel - hat man , far more popular in he county than the Baronet he brother . at college he pull stroke - oar in the , and have thrash all the best bruiser of the " town . " he carry he taste for boxing and athletic exercise into private life ; there be not a fight within twenty mile at which he be not present , nor a race , nor a course match , nor a regatta , nor a ball , nor a election , nor a visitation dinner , nor indeed a good dinner in the whole county , but he find mean to attend it . you might see he bay mare and gig- lamp a score of mile away from he , whenever there be any dinner - party at , or at , or at , or at the great lord of the county , with all of whom he be intimate . he have a fine voice ; sang " a southerly wind and a cloudy sky " ; and give the " whoop " in chorus with general applause . he ride to hound in a pepper - and - salt frock , and be one of the best fisherman in the county . , the rector 's wife , be a smart little body , who write this worthy divine 's sermon . be of a domestic turn , and keep the house a great deal with she daughter , she rule absolutely within the Rectory , wisely give she husband full liberty without . he be welcome to come and go , and dine abroad as many day as he fancy dictate , for . be a save woman and know the price of port wine . ever since carry off the young rector of 's ( she be of a good family , daughter of the late .- , and she and she mother play for and win he at ) , she have be a prudent and thrifty wife to he . in spite of she care , however , he be always in debt . it take he at least ten year to pay off he college bill contract during he father 's lifetime . in the year 179 -, when he be just clear of these incumbrance , he give the odd of 100 to 1 ( in twenty ) against , who win the . the rector be obliged to take up the money at a ruinous interest , and have be struggle ever since . he sister help he with a hundr now and then , but of course he great hope be in she death -- when " hang it " ( as he would say ) , " must leave I half she money . " so that the and he brother have every reason which two brothers possibly can have for be by the ear . have have the better of in innumerable family transaction . yong not only do not hunt , but set up a meeting house under he uncle 's very nose . , it be know , be to come in for the bulk of 's property . these money transaction -- these speculation in life and death -- these silent battle for reversionary spoil -- make brothers very love towards each other in . I , for my part , have know a five - pound note to interpose and knock up a half century 's attachment between two breth ; and can not but admire , as I think what a fine and durable thing love be among worldly people . it can not be suppose that the arrival of such a personage as at 's , and she gradual establishment in the good graces of all people there , could be unremark by . , who know how many day the sirloin of beef last at the hall ; how much linen be get ready at the great wash ; how many peach be on the south wall ; how many dos she ladyship take when she be ill -- for such point be matter of intense interest to certain person in the country -- . , I say , could not pass over the governess without make every inquiry respect she history and character . there be always the best understanding between the servants at the Rectory and the Hall . there be always a good glass of ale in the kitchen of the former place for the hall people , whose ordinary drink be very small -- and , indeed , the rector 's lady know exactly how much malt go to every barrel of beer -- tie of relationship exist between the hall and Rectory domestic , as between they master ; and through these channel each family be perfectly well acquaint with the doings of the other . that , by
by the way , may be set down as a general remark . when you and you brother be friend , he doings be indifferent to you . when you have quarrell , all he outgoing and incoming you know , as if you be he spy . very soon then after she arrival , begin to take a regular place in 's bulletin from the Hall . it be to this effect : " the black porker 's kill -- weigh x stone -- salt the side -- pig 's pudding and leg of pork for dinner . from , over with about put in -- at meeting ( with all the name of the people who attend ) -- my lady as usual -- the young lady with the governess . " then the report would come -- the new governess be a rare manager -- be very sweet on she -- too -- he be read tract to she -- " what a abandon wretch ! " say little , eager , active , black - face . finally , the report be that the governess have " come round " everybody , write 's letter , do he business , manage he account -- have the upper hand of the whole house , my lady , , the girl and all -- at which . declare she be a artful hussy , and have some dreadful design in view . thus the doings at the hall be the great food for conversation at the Rectory , and 's bright eye spy out everything that take place in the enemy 's camp -- everything and a great deal besides . to , the , . Rectory , 's , -- . my dear madam ,-- although it be so many year since I profit by you delightful and invaluable instruction , yet I have ever retain the and most reverential regard for , and . I hope you health be good . the world and the cause of education can not afford to lose for Years . when my friend , , mention that she dear girl require a instructress ( I be too poor to engage a governess for mine , but be I not educate at ? ) --" who , " I exclaim , " can we consult but the excellent , the incomparable ? " in a word , have you , dear madam , any lady on you list , whose service might be make available to my kind friend and neighbour ? I assure you she will take no governess but of you choosing . my dear husband be pleased to say that he like everything which come from 's . how I wish I could present he and my beloved girl to the friend of my youth , and the Admired of the great lexicographer of we country ! if you ever travel into , beg I to say , he hope you will adorn we rural RECTORy with you presence . ' tTis the humble but happy home of you affectionate 's brother , the baronet , with whom we be not , alas ! upon those term of in which it become to DWELL , have a governess for he little girl , who , I be tell , have the good fortune to be educate at . I hear various report of she ; and as I have the tenderest interest in my dearest little niece , whom I wish , in spite of family difference , to see among my own child -- and as I long to be attentive to any pUPIl of yours -- do , my dear , tell I the history of this young lady , whom , for you sake , I be most anxious to befriend .-- to . , , 18-- . dear madam ,-- I have the honour to acknowledge you polite communication , to which I promptly reply . ' Tis most gratify to one in my most arduous position to find that my maternal car have elicit a responsive affection ; and to recognize in the amiable my excellent pupil of former year , the sprightly and accomplish . I be happy to have under my charge now the daughter of many of those who be you contemporary at my establishment -- what pleasure it would give I if you own beloved young lady have need of my instructive superintendence ! present my respectful compliment to , I have the honour ( epistolarily ) to introduce to she ladyship my two friend , and . either of these young lady be perfectly qualified to instruct in , , and the rudiment of ; in mathematics and history ; in spanish , french , italian , and geography ; in music , vocal and instrumental ; in dancing , without the aid of a master ; and in the element of natural science . in the use of the globe both be proficient . in addition to these , who be daughter of the late ( of , ) , can instruct in the language , and the element of constitutional law . but as she be only eighteen year of age , and of exceedingly pleasing personal appearance , perhaps this young lady may be objectionable in 's family . , on the other hand , be not personally well - favour . she be - twenty - nine ; she face be much pit with the small - pox . she have a halt in she gait , red hair , and a trifling obliquity of vision . both lady be endow with and . they term , of course , be such as they accomplishment merit . with my most grateful respects to the , I have the honour to be , dear madam , you most faithful and obedient servant , . p.s. the
the , whom you mention as governess to , . , , be a pupil of mine , and I have nothing to say in she disfavour . though she appearance be disagreeable , we can not control the operation of nature : and though she parent be disreputable ( she father be a painter , several time bankrupt , and she mother , as I have since learn , with horror , a dancer at the ) ; yet she talents be considerable , and I can not regret that I receive she out of . my dread be , lest the principles of the mother -- who be represent to I as a french Countess , force to emigrate in the late revolutionary horror ; but who , as I have since find , be a person of the very lowest order and moral -- should at any time prove to be Hereditary in the unhappy young woman whom I take as a outcast . but she principles have hithertoo be correct ( I believe ) , and I be sure nothing will occur to injure they in the elegant and refin circle of the eminent . to . I have not write to my beloved for these many week past , for what news be there to tell of the saying and doings at , as I have christen it ; and what do you care whether the turnip crop be good or bad ; whether the fat pig weigh thirteen stone or fourteen ; and whether the beasts thrive well upon mangelwurzel ? every day since I last wrote have be like it be neighbour . before breakfast , a walk with and he spud ; after breakfast study ( such as they be ) in the schoolroom ; after schoolroom , read and write about lawyer , lease , coal -mine , canal , with ( whose secretary I be become ) ; after dinner , 's discourse on the baronet 's backgammon ; during both of which amusement my lady look on with equal placidity . she have become rather more interesting by be ailing of late , which have bring a new visitor to the , in the person of a young doctor . well , my dear , young woman need never despair . the young doctor give a certain friend of yours to understand that , if she choose to be , she be welcome to ornament the surgery ! I tell he impudence that the gilt pestle and mortar be quite ornament enough ; as if I be bear , indeed , to be a country surgeon 's wife ! go home seriously indispose at he rebuff , take a cooling dratch , and be now quite cured . applaude my resolution highly ; he would be sorry to lose he little secretary , I think ; and I believe the old wretch like I as much as it be in he nature to like any one . marry , indeed ! and with a country apothecary , after -- no , no , one can not so soon forget old associations , about which I will talk no more . let we return to . for some time past it be no longer . my dear , have arrive with she fat horse , fat servants , fat spaniel -- the great rich , with seventy thousand pound in the five per cents. , whom , or I have better say which , she two brothers adore . she look very apoplectic , the dear soul ; no wonder she brother be anxious about she . you should see they struggle to settle she cushion , or to hand she coffee ! " when I come into the country , " she say ( for she have a great deal of humour ) , " I leave my toady , , at home . my brother be my toady here , my dear , and a pretty pair they be ! " when she come into the country we hall be thrown open , and for a month , at least , you would fancy old be come to life again . we have dinner - party , and drive out in the coach - and - four the footman put on they newest canary - colou livery ; we drink claret and champagne as if we be accustom to it every day . we have wax candles in the schoolroom , and fire to warm ourselves with . be make to put on the brightest pea-green in she wardrobe , and my pupil leave off they thick shoe and tight old tartan peliss , and wear silk stocking and muslin frock , as fashionable baronet ' daughter should . Rose come in yesterday in a sad plight -- the sow ( a enormous pet of hers ) run she down , and destroy a most lovely flowered lilac silk dress by dancing over it -- have this happen a week ago , would have swear frightfully , have box the poor wretch 's ears , and put she upon bread and water for a month . all he say be , " I will serve you out , , when you aunt 's gone , " and laugh off the accident as quite trivial . let we hope he wrath will have pass away before 's departure . I hope so , for 's sake , I be sure . what a charme reconciler and peacemaker money be ! another admirable effect of and she seventy thousand pound be to be see in the conduct of the two brother . I mean the baronet and the rector , not we brother -- but the former , who hate each other all the year round , become quite loving at . I write to you last year how the abominable
abominable horse - racing rector be in the habit of preaching clumsy sermon at we at church , and how snor in answer . when arrive there be no such thing as quarrell heard of -- the visit the Rectory , and vice versa --to parson and the Baronet talk about the pig and the poacher , and the county business , in the most affable manner , and without quarrell in they cup , I believe -- indeed will not hear of they quarrelling , and vow that she will leave she money to the if they offend she . if they be clever people , those , they might have it all , I think ; but the be a clergyman like he cousin , and mortally offend ( who have fle thither in a fit of rage against she impracticable breth ) by some strait - lace notion of morality . he would have prayer in the house , I believe . we sermon book be shut up when arrive , and , whom she abominate , find it convenient to go to town . on the other hand , the young dandy -- " blood , " I believe , be the term -- make he appearance , and I suppose you will like to know what sort of a person he be . well , he be a very large young dandy . he be six foot high , and speak with a great voice ; and swear a great deal ; and order about the servants , who all adore he nevertheless ; for he be very generous of he money , and the domestic will do anything for he . last week the keeper almost kill a bailiff and he man who come down from to arrest the , and who be find lurking about the wall -- they beat they , duck they , and be go to shoot they for poacher , but the baronet interfere . the have a hearty contempt for he father , I can see , and call he a old put , a old SNOB , a old Chaw - Bacon , and numberless other pretty names . he have a Dreadful reputation among the ladie . he bring he hunter home with he , life with the Squires of the county , ask whom he please to dinner , and dare not say no , for fear of offend , and miss he legacy when she die of she apoplexy . shall I tell you a compliment the pay I ? I must , it be so pretty . one evening we actually have a dance ; there be and he family , Sir Giles and he young lady , and I do not know how many more . well , I hear he say -- " by , she be a neat little filly ! " mean you humble servant ; and he do I the honour to dance two country - dance with I . he get on pretty gaily with the young Squires , with whom he drink , bet , ride , and talk about hunting and shoot ; but he say the country girl be Bore ; indeed , I do not think he be far wrong . you should see the contempt with which they look down on poor I ! when they dance I sit and play the piano very demurely ; but the other night , come in rather flush from the dining - room , and see I employ in this way , he swore out loud that I be the best dancer in the room , and take a great oath that he would have the fiddler from . " I will go and play a country - dance , " say . , very readily ( she be a little , black - face old woman in a turban , rather crook , and with very twinkling eye ) ; and after the and you poor little have perform a dance together , do you know she actually do I the honour to compliment I upon my step ! such a thing be never hear of before ; the proud . , first cousin to the of , who will not condescmend to visit , except when she sister be in the country . poor ! during most part of these gaiety , she be upstairs take pill . have all of a sudden take a great fancy to I . " my dear , " she say , " why not bring over you girl to the Rectory ?--their cousin will be so happy to see they . " I know what she mean . do not teach we the piano for nothing ; at which price hope to get a professor for she child . I can see through she scheme , as though she tell they to I ; but I shall go , as I be determined to make myself agreeable -- be it not a poor governess 's duty , who have not a friend or protector in the world ? the rector 's wife pay I a score of compliment about the progress my pupil make , and think , no doubt , to touch my heart -- poor , simple , country soul !-- as if I care a fig about my pupil ! you and you pink silk , dearest , be say to become I very well . they be a good deal wear now ; but , you know , we poor girl can not afford des fraich toilette . happy , happy you ! who have but to drive to 's , and a dear mother who will give you any thing you ask . farewell , dearest girl , you affectionate . P.S.-- I wish you could have see the face of the
the ( 's daughter , my dear ) , fine young lady , with dress from , when select poor I for a partner ! when ( whose artifice we ingenious have so soon discover ) have procure from the promise of a visit , she induce the all - powerful to make the necessary application to , and the good - nature old lady , who love to be gay herself , and to see every one gay and happy round about she , be quite char , and ready to establish a reconciliation and intimacy between she two brother . it be therefore agree that the young people of both family should visit each other frequently for the future , and the friendship of course last as long as the jovial old mediatrix be there to keep the peace . " why do you ask that scoundrel , , to dine ? " say the rector to he lady , as they be walk home through the park . " I do not want the fellow . he look down upon we country people as so many blackamoor . he be never contend unless he get my yellow - seal wine , which cost I ten shilling a bottle , hang he ! besides , he be such a infernal character -- he be a gambler -- he be a drunkard -- he be a profligate in every way . he shot a man in a duel -- he be over head and ear in debt , and he be rob I and mine of the best part of 's fortune . say she have he " -- here the rector shook he fist at the moon , with something very like a oath , and add , in a melancholious tone , " -- down in she will for fifty thousand ; and there will not be above thirty to divide . " " I think she be go , " say the rector 's wife . " she be very red in the face when we leave dinner . I be oblige to unlace she . " " she drank seven glass of champagne , " say the reverend gentleman , in a low voice ; " and filthy champagne it be , too , that my brother poison we with -- but you woman never know what be what . " " we know nothing , " say . " she drank cherry - brandy after dinner , " continue he Reverence , " and take curacao with she coffee . I would not take a glass for a five - pound note : it kill I with heartburn . she can not stand it , Crawley -- she must go -- flesh and blood will not bear it ! and I lay five to two , drop in a year . " Indulge in these solemn speculation , and think about he debt , and he son at , and at , and the four girl , who be no beauty , poor thing , and would not have a penny but what they get from the aunt 's expect legacy , the rector and he lady walk on for a while . " can not be such a infernal villain as to sell the reversion of the living . and that Methodist milksop of a eldest son look to , " continue , after a pause . " will do anything , " say the rector 's wife . " we must get to make he promise it to . " " will promise anything , " reply the brother . " he promise he would pay my college bill , when my father di ; he promise he would build the new wing to the Rectory ; he promise he would let I have 's field and the six- acre -- and much he execute he promise ! and it be to this man 's son -- this scoundrel , gambler , swindler , murderer of a , that leave the bulk of she money . I say it be un - . by , it be . the infamous dog have get every vice except hypocrisy , and that belong to he brother . " " Hush , my dearest love ! we be in 's grounds , " interpose he wife . " I say he have get every vice , . do not , bully I . do not he shoot ? do not he rob young at the - ? do not he cross the fight between and the , by which I lose forty pound ? you know he do ; and as for the woman , why , you hear that before I , in my own magistrate 's room . " " for heaven 's sake , , " say the lady , " spare I the detail . " " and you ask this villain into you house ! " continue the exasperated rector . " you , the mother of a young family -- the wife of a clergyman of the of . by ! " " , you be a fool , " say the rector 's wife scornfully . " well , , fool or not -- and I do not say , , I be so clever as you be , I never do . but I will not meet , that be flat . I will go over to , that I will , and see he black greyhound , ; and I will run against he for fifty . by , I will ; or against any dog in . but I will not meet that . " " , you be intoxicate , as usual , " reply he wife . and the next morning , when the rector woke , and call for small beer , she
she put he in mind of he promise to visit on , and as he know he should have a wet night , it be agree that he might gallop back again in time for church on morning . thus it will be see that the parishioner of be equally happy in they and in they rector . have not long be establish at the before 's fascination have win the heart of that good - nature rake , as they have of the country innocent whom we have be describe . take she accustom drive , one day , she think fit to order that " that little governess " should accompany she to . before they have return have make a conquest of she ; have make she laugh four time , and amuse she during the whole of the little journey . " not let dine at table ! " say she to , who have arrange a dinner of ceremony , and ask all the neighbour baronet . " my dear creature , do you suppose I can talk about the nursery with , or discuss justice ' business with that goose , old ? I insist upon appear . let remain upstairs , if there be no room . but little ! why , she be the only person fit to talk to in the county ! " of course , after such a peremptory order as this , , the governess , receive command to dine with the illustrious company below stair . and when have , with great pomp and ceremony , hand in to dinner , and be prepare to take he place by she side , the old lady cry out , in a shrill voice , " ! ! come you and sit by I and amuse I ; and let sit by . " when the party be over , and the carriage have roll away , the insatiable would say , " come to my dressing room , , and let we abuse the company " -- which , between they , this pair of friend do perfectly . wheeze a great deal at dinner ; have a particularly noisy manner of imbib he soup , and she ladyship a wink of the left eye ; all of which caricature to admiration ; as well as the particular of the night 's conversation ; the politics ; the war ; the quarter - session ; the famous run with the H.H. , and those heavy and dreary theme , about which country gentleman converse . as for the 's toilette and 's famous yellow hat , tore they to tatter , to the infinite amusement of she audience . " my dear , you be a perfect trouvaille , " would say . " I wish you could come to I in , but I could not make a butt of you as I do of poor no , no , you little sly creature ; you be too clever -- be not she , ? " ( who be dress the very small remnant of hair which remain on 's pate ) , fling up she head and say , " I think be very clever , " with the most kill sarcastic air . in fact , have that natural jealousy which be one of the main principles of every honest woman . after rebuff , order that should lead she in to dinner every day , and that should follow with she cushion -- or else she would have 's arm and with the pillow . " we must sit together , " she say . " we be the only three in the county , my love " -- in which case , it must be confess , that religion be at a very low ebb in the county of Hants . besides be such a fine religionist , be , as we have say , a Ultra-liberal in opinion , and always take occasion to express these in the most candid manner . " what be birth , my dear ! " she would say to -- " look at my brother ; look at the , who have be here since ; look at poor at the parsonage -- be any one of they equal to you in intelligence or breed ? equal to you -- they be not even equal to poor dear , my companion , or , my butler . you , my love , be a little paragon -- positively a little jewel -- you have more brain than half the shire -- if merit have its reward you ought to be a Duchess -- no , there ink to be no duchess at all -- but you ought to have no superior , and I consider you , my love , as my equal in every respect ; and -- will you put some coal on the fire , my dear ; and will you pick this dress of mine , and alter it , you who can do it so well ? " so this old philanthropist use to make she equal run of she errand , execute she millinery , and read she to sleep with french novel , every night . at this time , as some old reader may recollect , the genteel world have be throw into a considerable state of excitement by two event , which , as the papers say , might give employment to the gentleman of the long robe . have run away with , the of 's daughter and heiress ; and poor , a gentleman who , up to forty , have maintain a most respectable character and rear a numerous family , suddenly and outrageously leave he home , for the sake of , the actress , who be sixty - five year of age .
. " that be the most beautiful part of dear 's character , " say . " he go to the deuce for a woman . there must be good in a man who will do that . I adore all impudent match .-- what I like best , be for a nobleman to marry a miller 's daughter , as do -- it make all the woman so angry -- I wish some great man would run away with you , my dear ; I be sure you be pretty enough . " " two post -boy !-- oh , it would be delightful ! " own . " and what I like next best , be for a poor fellow to run away with a rich girl . I have set my heart on run away with some one . " " a rich some one , or a poor some one ? " " why , you goose ! have not a shilling but what I give he . he be crible dette -- he must repair he fortune , and succeed in the world . " " be he very clever ? " ask . " Clever , my love ?-- not a idea in the world beyond he horse , and he regiment , and he hunt , and he play ; but he must succeed -- he be so delightfully wick . do not you know he have hit a man , and shoot a injured father through the hat only ? he be adore in he regiment ; and all the young man at 's and the - swear by he . " when write to she beloved friend the account of the little ball at 's , and the manner in which , for the first time , have distinguished she , she do not , strange to relate , give a altogether accurate account of the transaction . the have distinguished she a great number of time before . the have meet she in a half - score of walk . the have lighte upon she in a half - hundred of corridor and passage . the have hang over she piano twenty time of a evening ( my be now upstairs , be ill , and nobody heed she ) as sharp sang . the have write she note ( the best that the great blundering dragoon could devise and spell ; but dulness get on as well as any other quality with woman ) . but when he put the first of the note into the leaf of the song she be singe , the little governess , rise and look he steadily in the face , take up the triangular missive daintily , and wave it about as if it be a cocked hat , and she , advanc to the enemy , pop the note into the fire , and make he a very low curtsey , and go back to she place , and begin to s away again more merrily than ever . " what be that ? " say , interrupt in she after - dinner doze by the stoppage of the music . " it be a false note , " say with a laugh ; and fume with rage and mortification . see the evident partiality of for the new governess , how good it be of not to be jealous , and to welcome the young lady to the Rectory , and not only she , but , she husband 's rival in the 's five per cents ! they become very fond of each other 's society , and she nephew . he give up hunting ; he decline entertainment at : he would not dine with the mess of the at : he great pleasure be to stroll over to parsonage -- whither come too ; and as they mamma be ill , why not the child with ? so the child ( little dear ! ) come with ; and of a evening some of the party would walk back together . not -- she prefer she carriage -- but the walk over the Rectory field , and in at the little park wicket , and through the dark plantation , and up the checker avenue to 's , be charme in the moonlight to two such lover of the picturesque as the and . " of those star , those star ! " would say , turn she twinkl green eye up towards they . " I feel myself almost a spirit when I gaze upon they . " " o -- ah -- -- yes , so do I exactly , , " the other enthusiast reply . " you do not mind my cigar , do you , ? " love the smell of a cigar out of door beyond everything in the world -- and she just taste one too , in the prettiest way possible , and give a little puff , and a little scream , and a little giggle , and restore the delicacy to the , who twirl he moustache , and straightway puff it into a blaze that glow quite red in the dark plantation , and swore -- " -- aw --Gad -- aw -- it be the finest segaw I ever smoke in the world aw , " for he intellect and conversation be alike brilliant and become to a heavy young dragoon . , who be take he pipe and beer , and talk to about a " ship " that be to be kill , espy the pair so occupy from he study - window , and with dreadful oath swore that if it be not for Crawley , he would take and bundle un out of door , like a rogue as he be . " he be a bad 'n , sure enough ,
, " remark ; " and he man Flether be wuss , and have make such a row in the housekeeper 's room about the dinner and hale , as no lord would make -- but I think be a match for , , " he add , after a pause . and so , in truth , she be -- for father and son too . quite a we must now take leave of , and those amiable people practise the rural virtue there , and travel back to , to inquire what have become of " we do not care a fig for she , " write some unknown correspondent with a pretty little handwriting and a pink seal to she note . " she be fade and insipid , " and add some more kind remark in this strain , which I should never have repeat at all , but that they be in truth prodigiously complimentary to the young lady whom they concern . have the beloved reader , in he experience of society , never hear similar remark by good - natured female friend ; who always wonder what you can see in that be so fascinating ; or what could induce Major Jones to propose for that silly insignificant simper , who have nothing but she wax - doll face to recommend she ? what be there in a pair of pink cheek and blue eye forsooth ? these dear Moralist ask , and hind wisely that the gift of genius , the accomplishment of the mind , the mastery of 's question , and a ladylike knowledge of botany and geology , the knack of make poetry , the power of rattling sonata in the Herz - manner , and so forth , be far more valuable endowment for a female , than those fugitive charms which a few year will inevitably tarnish . it be quite edifying to hear woman speculate upon the worthlessness and the duration of beauty . but though virtue be a much finer thing , and those hapless creature who suffer under the misfortune of good look ought to be continually put in mind of the fate which await they ; and though , very likely , the heroic female character which lady admire be a more glorious and beautiful object than the kind , fresh , smile , artless , tender little domestic goddess , whom man be inclin to worship -- yet the latter and inferior sort of woman must have this consolation -- that the man do admire they after all ; and that , in spite of all we kind friend ' warning and protest , we go on in we desperate error and folly , and shall to the end of the chapter . indeed , for my own part , though I have be repeatedly tell by person for whom I have the greatest respect , that be a insignificant chit , and have nothing but she petit minois chiffonne , and . have not a word to say for herself ; yet I know that I have have the most delightful conversation with ( of course , my dear madam , they be inviolable ) : I see all the man in a cluster round 's chair : all the young fellow battle to dance with ; and so I be temp to think that to be despise by she sex be a very great compliment to a woman . the young lady in 's society do this for she very satisfactorily . for instance , there be scarcely any point upon which the , 's sister , and the agree so well as in they estimate of she very trifl merit : and they wonder that they brother could find any charms in she . " we be kind to she , " the say , a pair of fine black - browed young lady who have have the best of governess , master , and milliner ; and they treat she with such extreme kindness and condescension , and patronise she so insufferably , that the poor little thing be in fact perfectly dumb in they presence , and to all outward appearance as stupid as they think she . she make effort to like they , as in duty bound , and as sister of she future husband . she pass " long morning " with they -- the most dreary and serious of forenoon . she drive out solemnly in they great family coach with they , and they governess , that raw - bone . they take she to the ancient concert by way of a treat , and to the oratorio , and to 's to see the charity child , where in such terror be she of she friend , she almost do not dare be affect by the hymn the child sang . they house be comfortable ; they papa 's table rich and handsome ; they society solemn and genteel ; they self - respect prodigious ; they have the best pew at the Foundling : all they habits be pompous and orderly , and all they amusement intolerably dull and decorous . after every one of she visit ( and oh how glad she be when they be over ! ) and , and , the vestal governess , ask each other with increase wonder , " what could find in that creature ? " how be this ? some carp reader exclaim . how be it that , who have such a number of friend at school , and be so beloved there , come out into the world and be spur by she discriminating sex ? my dear sir , there be no man at 's establishment except the old dancing - master ; and you would not have have the girl fall out about he ? when , they
they handsome brother , run off directly after breakfast , and dine from home half - a - dozen time a week , no wonder the neglect sister feel a little vexation . when young ( of the firm of , & , , ) , who have be make up to the last two season , actually ask to dance the cotillon , could you expect that the former young lady should be pleased ? and yet she say she be , like a artless forgive creature . " I be so deligh you like dear , " she say quite eagerly to Bullock after the dance . " she have engage to my brother ; there be not much in she , but she be the best - natured and most unaffected young creature : at home we be all so fond of she . " dear girl ! who can calculate the depth of affection express in that enthusiastic so ? and these two affectionate young woman so earnestly and frequently impress upon 's mind the enormity of the sacrifice he be make , and he romantic generosity in throw himself away upon , that I be not sure but that he really think he be one of the most deserve character in the british army , and give himself up to be love with a good deal of easy resignation . somehow , although he leave home every morning , as be state , and dine abroad six day in the week , when he sister believe the infatuated youth to be at 's apron - string : he be not always with , whilst the world suppose he at she foot . certain it be that on more occasion than one , when call to look for he friend , ( who be very attentive to the , and anxious to hear he military story , and to know about the health of he dear ) , would laughingly point to the opposite side of the square , and say , " oh , you must go to the ' to ask for ; we never see he from morning till night . " at which kind of speech the would laugh in rather a absurd constrain manner , and turn off the conversation , like a consummate man of the world , to some topic of general interest , such as the , the 's last ball at , or the weather -- that bless to society . " what a innocent it be , that pet of yours , " would then say to , upon the 's departure . " do you see how he blush at the mention of poor on duty ? " " it be a pity have not some of he modesty , , " reply the elder sister , with a toss of he head . " Modesty ! Awkwardness you mean , . I do not want to trample a hole in my muslin frock , as do in yours at '. " " in you frock , he , he ! how could he ? be not he dance with ? " the fact be , when blush so , and look so awkward , he remember a circumstance of which he do not think it be necessary to inform the young lady , viz. , that he have be call at 's house already , on the pretence of see , of course , and be not there , only poor little , with rather a sad wistful face , seat near the drawing - room window , who , after some very trifling stupid talk , venture to ask , be there any truth in the report that the regiment be soon to be order abroad ; and have see that day ? the regiment be not order abroad as yet ; and have not see . " he be with he sister , most likely , " the say . " should he go and fetch the truant ? " so she give he she hand kindly and gratefully : and he cross the square ; and she wait and wait , but never come . poor little tender heart ! and so it go on hoping and beat , and long and trust . you see it be not much of a life to describe . there be not much of what you call incident in it . only one feeling all day -- when will he come ? only one think to sleep and wake upon . I believe be play billiards with in at the time when be ask about he ; for be a jolly sociable fellow , and excellent in all game of skill . once , after three day of absence , put on she bonnet , and actually invade the house . " what ! leave we brother to come to we ? " say the young lady . " have you have a quarrel , ? do tell we ! " no , indeed , there have be no quarrel . " who could quarrel with he ? " say she , with she eye fill with tear . she only come over to -- to see she dear friend ; they have not meet for so long . and this day she be so perfectly stupid and awkward , that the and they governess , who star after she as she go sadly away , wonder more than ever what could see in poor little . of course they do . how be she to bear that timid little heart for the inspection of those young lady with they bold black eye ? it be best that it should shrink and hide itself . I know the be excellent critic of a shawl , or a pink satin slip ; and when have hers
hers dyed purple , and make into a spencer ; and when have she ermine tippet twist into a muff and trimming , I warrant you the change do not escape the two intelligent young woman before mention . but there be thing , look you , of a finer texture than fur or satin , and all 's glory , and all the wardrobe of the of -- thing whereon the beauty escape the eye of many connoisseur . and there be sweet modest little soul on which you light , fragrant and bloom tenderly in quiet shady place ; and there be garden - ornament , as big as brass warming - pans , that be fit to stare the sun itself out of countenance . be not of the sunflower sort ; and I say it be out of the rule of all proportion to draw a violet of the size of a double dahlia . no , indeed ; the life of a good young girl who be in the paternal nest as yet , can not have many of those thrill incident to which the heroine of romance commonly lay claim . Snare or shot may take off the old bird forage without -- hawk may be abroad , from which they escape or by whom they suffer ; but the young one in the nest have a pretty comfortable unromantic sort of existence in the down and the straw , till it come to they turn , too , to get on the wing . while be on she own wing in the country , hopp on all sort of twig , and amid a multiplicity of trap , and peck up she food quite harmless and successful , lay snug in she home of ; if she go into the world , it be under the guidance of the elder ; nor do it seem that any evil could befall she or that opulent cheery comfortable home in which she be affectionately shelter . have she morning duty , and she daily drive , and the delightful round of visit and shopping which form the amusement , or the profession as you may call it , of the rich lady . conduct he mysterious operation in the City -- a stirring place in those day , when war be rage all over , and empire be be stak ; when the " Courier " newspaper have ten of thousand of subscriber ; when one day bring you a battle of , another a burning of , or a newsman 's horn blow down about dinner - time , announce such a fact as -- " of -- six hundred thousand man engage -- total defeat of the french -- two hundred thousand kill . " once or twice come home with a very grave face ; and no wonder , when such news as this be agitat all the heart and all the stock of . meanwhile matter go on in , , just as if matter in be not in the least disorganise . the retreat from make no difference in the number of meal take in the servants ' hall ; the ally pour into , and the dinner - bell rang at five o'clock just as usual . I do not think poor car anything about and , or be fairly interested in the war until the abdication of the emperor ; when she clap she hand and say prayer -- oh , how grateful ! and fling herself into 's arm with all she soul , to the astonishment of everybody who witness that ebullition of sentiment . the fact be , peace be declare , be go to be at rest ; the be overthrown , and 's regiment would not be order on service . that be the way in which reason . the fate of be to she . he danger be over , she sang . he be she : she emperor : she allie monarch and august prince regent . he be she sun and moon ; and I believe she think the grand illumination and ball at the , give to the sovereign , be especially in honour of . we have talk of shift , self , and poverty , as those dismal instructor under whom poor get she education . now , love be 's last tutoress , and it be amazing what progress we young lady make under that popular teacher . in the course of fifteen or eighteen month ' daily and constant attention to this eminent finishing governess , what a deal of secret learn , which and the black - eyed young lady over the way , which old of herself , have no cognizance of ! as , indeed , how should any of those prim and reputable virgin ? with and the tender passion be out of the question : I would not dare to breathe such a idea regard they . , it be true , be " attach " to , of the firm of , & ; but hers be a most respectable attachment , and she would have take just the same , she mind be fix -- as that of a well - breed young woman should be -- upon a house in , a country house at , a handsome chariot , and two prodigious tall horse and footman , and a fourth of the annual profit of the eminent firm of & Bullock , all of which advantages be represent in the person of . have orange blossom be invent then ( those touch emblem of female purity import by we from , where people 's daughter be universally sell in marriage ) , , I say , would have assume the spotless wreath , and step into the travel carriage by the side of gouty , old ,
, bald - head , bottle - nose ; and devote she beautiful existence to he happiness with perfect modesty -- only the old gentleman be marry already ; so she bestow she young affections on the junior partner . sweet , blooming , orange flowers ! the other day I see ( that be ) , array in they , trip into the travelling carriage at 's , , and hobble in after . with what a engage modesty she pull down the blind of the chariot -- the dear innocent ! there be half the carriage of Vanity fair at the wedding . this be not the sort of love that finish 's education ; and in the course of a year turn a good young girl into a good young woman -- to be a good wife presently , when the happy time should come . this young person ( perhaps it be very imprudent in she parent to encourage she , and abet she in such idolatry and silly romantic idea ) love , with all she heart , the young officer in 's service with whom we have make a brief acquaintance . she think about he the very first moment on waking ; and he be the very last name mention in she prayer . she never have see a man so beautiful or so clever : such a figure on horseback : such a dancer : such a hero in general . talk of the 's bow ! what be it to 's ? she have see , whom everybody praise so . compare such a person as that to she ! not amongst all the beaux at the ( and there be beaux in those day with actual opera hat ) be there any one to equal he . he be only good enough to be a fairy prince ; and oh , what magnanimity to stoop to such a humble ! would have try to check this blind devotion very likely , have she be 's confidante ; but not with much success , depend upon it . it be in the nature and instinct of some woman . some be make to scheme , and some to love ; and I wish any respecte bachelor that read this may take the sort that best like he . while under this overpowering impression , neglect she twelve dear friend at most cruelly , as such selfish people commonly will do . she have but this subject , of course , to think about ; and be too cold for a confidante , and she could not bring she mind to tell , the woolly - hair young heiress from 's . she have little home for the holiday ; and my belief be , she make a confidante of she , and promise that should come and live with she when she be married , and give a great deal of information regard the passion of love , which must have be singularly useful and novel to that little person . Alas , alas ! I fear poor have not a well - regulate mind . what be she parent do , not to keep this little heart from beat so fast ? do not seem much to notice matter . he be graver of late , and he affair absorb he . be of so easy and uninquisitive a nature that she be not even jealous . be away , be besiege by a irish widow at . have the house to herself -- ah ! too much to herself sometimes -- not that she ever doubt ; for , to be sure , must be at the ; and he can not always get leave from ; and he must see he friend and sister , and mingle in society when in town ( he , such a ornament to every society ! ) ; and when he be with the regiment , he be too tired to write long letter . I know where she keep that packet she have -- and can steal in and out of she chamber like -- like ? no -- that be a bad part . I will only act , and peep harmless into the bed where faith and beauty and innocence lie dream . but if be be short and soldierlike letter , it must be confess , that be 's letter to to be publish , we should have to extend this novel to such a multiplicity of volume as not the most sentimental reader could support ; that she not only fill sheet of large paper , but cross they with the most astonishing perverseness ; that she write whole page out of poetry - book without the least pity ; that she underlin word and passage with quite a frantic emphasis ; and , in fine , give the usual token of she condition . she be not a heroine . she letter be full of repetition . she write rather doubtful grammar sometimes , and in she verse take all sort of libertie with the metre . but oh , mesdame , if you be not allow to touch the heart sometimes in spite of syntax , and be not to be love until you all know the difference between trimeter and tetrameter , may all go to the deuce , and every schoolmaster perish miserably ! and I fear the gentleman to whom 's letter be address be rather a obdurate critic . such a number of note follow about the country , that he become almost asham of the joke of he mess - room companion regard they , and order he servant never to deliver they except at he private apartment . he be see light he cigar with one , to the horror of , who , it be my belief , would
would have give a bank - note for the document . for some time strove to keep the liaison a secret . there be a woman in the case , that he admit . " and not the first either , " say to . " that be a devil of a fellow . there be a judge 's daughter at go almost mad about he ; then there be that beautiful quadroon girl , Pye , at 's , you know ; and since he be be home , they say he be a regular , by . " and think that to be a " regular , by " be one of the finest quality a man could possess , and 's reputation be prodigious amongst the young man of the regiment . he be famous in field - sport , famous at a song , famous on parade ; free with he money , which be bountifully supply by he father . he coat be better make than any man 's in the regiment , and he have more of they . he be adore by the man . he could drink more than any officer of the whole mess , include old , the colonel . he could spar better than , the private ( who would have be a corporal but for he drunkenness , and who have be in the prize - ring ) ; and be the best batter and bowler , out and out , of the regimental club . he ride he own horse , , and win the cup at races . there be other people besides who worship he . and think he a sort of ; take he to be a Admirable Crichton ; and acknowledge he be a elegant young fellow , and put she in mind of , 's second son . well , and and the rest indulge in most romantic conjecture regard this female correspondent of 's -- opin that it be a Duchess in who be in love with he -- or that it be a General 's daughter , who be engage to somebody else , and madly attach to he -- or that it be a member of parliament 's lady , who propose four horse and a elopement -- or that it be some other victim of a passion delightfully excit , romantic , and disgraceful to all party , on none of which conjecture would throw the least light , leave he young admirer and friend to invent and arrange they whole history . and the real state of the case would never have be know at all in the regiment but for 's indiscretion . the be eat he breakfast one day in the mess - room , while , the assistant - surgeon , and the two above - named worthy be speculat upon 's intrigue -- Stubble hold out that the lady be a Duchess about 's court , and Cackle vow she be a opera- singer of the worst reputation . at this idea become so moved , that though he mouth be full of egg and bread - and - butter at the time , and though he ought not to have speak at all , yet he could not help blur out , " , you be a stupid fool . you be always talk nonsense and scandal . Osborne be not go to run off with a Duchess or ruin a milliner . be one of the most charme young woman that ever liv . he be be engage to she ever so long ; and the man who call she name have better not do so in my hearing . " with which , turn exceedingly red , cease speak , and almost chok himself with a cup of tea . the story be over the regiment in half - a - hour ; and that very evening write off to she sister at not to hurry from -- young Osborne be prematurely engage already . she compliment the in a appropriate speech over a glass of whisky - toddy that evene , and he go home perfectly furious to quarrel with ( who have decline 's party , and sit in he own room play the flute , and , I believe , write poetry in a very melancholy manner ) -- to quarrel with for betraie he secret . " who the deuce ask you to talk about my affair ? " shoute indignantly . " why the devil be all the regiment to know that I be go to be marry ? why be that tattl old harridan , , to make free with my name at she would --d supper - table , and advertise my engagement over the three kingdom ? after all , what right have you to say I be engage , or to meddle in my business at all , ? " " it seem to I , " begin . " seem be hang , , " he junior interrupt he . " I be under obligation to you , I know it , a d --d deal too well too ; but I will not be always sermonise by you because you be five year my senior . I be hang if I will stand you air of superiority and infernal pity and patronage . Pity and patronage ! I should like to know in what I be you inferior ? " " be you engage ? " interpose . " what the be that to you or any one here if I be ? " " be you asham of it ? " resume . " what right have you to ask I that question , sir ? I should like to know , " say . " , you do not mean to say you want to break off ?
? " ask , start up . " in other word , you ask I if I be a man of honour , " say , fiercely ; " be that what you mean ? you have adopt such a tone regard I lately that I be ------ if I will bear it any more . " " what have I do ? I have tell you you be neglect a sweet girl , . I have tell you that when you go to town you ought to go to she , and not to the gambling - house about 's . " " you want you money back , I suppose , " say , with a sneer . " of course I do -- I always do , do not I ? " say . " you speak like a generous fellow . " " no , hang it , , I beg you pardon " -- here interpose in a fit of remorse ; " you have be my friend in a hundred way , know . you have get I out of a score of scrap . when of the win that sum of money of I I should have be do but for you : I know I should . but you should not deal so hardly with I ; you should not be always catechise I . I be very fond of ; I adore she , and that sort of thing . do not look angry . she be faultless ; I know she be . but you see there be no fun in win a thing unless you play for it . hang it : the regiment 's just back from the West Indies , I must have a little fling , and then when I be marry I will reform ; I will upon my honour , now . and -- I say -- -- do not be angry with I , and I will give you a hundr next month , when I know my father will stand something handsome ; and I will ask for leave , and I will go to town , and see to - morrow -- there now , will that satisfy you ? " " it be impossible to be long angry with you , , " say the good - nature ; " and as for the money , old boy , you know if I want it you would share you last shilling with I . " " that I would , by , , " say , with the greatest generosity , though by the way he never have any money to spare . " only I wish you have sow those wild oat of yours , . if you could have see poor little 's face when she ask I about you the other day , you would have pitch those billiard - ball to the deuce . go and comfort she , you rascal . go and write she a long letter . do something to make she happy ; a very little will . " " I believe she be d --d fond of I , " the say , with a self - satisfied air ; and go off to finish the evening with some jolly fellows in the mess - room . meanwhile , in , be look at the moon , which be shine upon that peaceful spot , as well as upon the square of the barrack , where be quarter , and think to herself how she hero be employ . perhaps he be visit the sentry , think she ; perhaps he be bivouack ; perhaps he be attend the couch of a wounded comrade , or study the art of war up in he own desolate chamber . and she kind thought sp away as if they be angels and have wing , and fly down the river to and , strove to peep into the barrack where be . . . . all thing consider , I think it be as well the gate be shut , and the sentry allow no one to pass ; so that the poor little white - rob angel could not hear the song those young fellow be roar over the whisky - punch . the day after the little conversation at barrack , young , to show that he would be as good as he word , prepare to go to town , thereby incurr 's applause . " I should have like to make she a little present , " say to he friend in confidence , " only I be quite out of cash until my father tip up . " but would not allow this good nature and generosity to be balk , and so accommodate with a few pound note , which the latter take after a little faint scruple . and I dare say he would have buy something very handsome for ; only , get off the coach in , he be attract by a handsome shirt-pin in a jeweller 's window , which he could not resist ; and have pay for that , have very little money to spare for indulging in any further exercise of kindness . never mind : you may be sure it be not he present want . when he come to , she face light up as if he have be sunshine . the little care , fear , tear , timid misgiving , sleepless fancie of I do not know how many day and night , be forget , under one moment 's influence of that familiar , irresistible smile . he beam on she from the drawing - room door --magnificent , with ambrosial whisker , like a god . , whose face as he announce ( have confer a brevet rank on that young officer ) blaze with
with a sympathetic grin , see the little girl start , and flush , and jump up from she watch - place in the window ; and retreate : and as soon as the door be shut , she go flutter to 's heart as if it be the only natural home for she to nestle in . oh , thou poor pante little soul ! the very finest tree in the whole forest , with the straightest stem , and the strongest arm , and the thickest foliage , wherein you choose to build and coo , may be mark , for what you know , and may be down with a crash ere long . what a old , old simile that be , between man and timber ! in the meanwhile , kiss she very kindly on she forehead and glisten eye , and be very gracious and good ; and she think he diamond shirt-pin ( which she have not know he to wear before ) the prettiest ornament ever see . the observant reader , who have mark we yong 's previous behaviour , and have preserve we report of the brief conversation which he have just have with , have possibly come to certain conclusion regard the character of . some cynical have say that there be two party to a love - transaction : the one who love and the other who condescend to be so treat . perhaps the love be occasionally on the man 's side ; perhaps on the lady 's . perhaps some infatuated swain have ere this mistaken insensibility for modesty , dulness for maiden reserve , mere vacuity for sweet bashfulness , and a goose , in a word , for a swan . perhaps some beloved female subscriber have array a ass in the splendour and glory of she imagination ; admire he dulness as manly simplicity ; worship he selfishness as manly superiority ; treat he stupidity as majestic gravity , and use he as the brilliant fairy do a certain weaver at Athens . I think I have see such comedy of error go on in the world . but this be certain , that believe she lover to be one of the most gallant and brilliant man in the empire : and it be possible thought so too . he be a little wild : how many young man be ; and do not girl like a rake better than a milksop ? he have not sow he wild oat as yet , but he would soon : and quit the army now that peace be proclaim ; the Corsican monster lock up at ; promotion by consequence over ; and no chance leave for the display of he undoubted military talents and valour : and he allowance , with 's settlement , would enable they to take a snug place in the country somewhere , in a good sporting neighbourhood ; and he would hunt a little , and farm a little ; and they would be very happy . as for remain in the army as a married man , that be impossible . in lodging in a county town ; or , worse still , in the or , with a society of officer , and patronize by ! die with laughing at 's story about . he love she much too fondly to subject she to that horrid woman and she vulgarity , and the rough treatment of a soldier 's wife . he do not care for himself -- not he ; but he dear little girl should take the place in society to which , as he wife , she be entitle : and to these proposal you may be sure she acced , as she would to any other from the same author . hold this kind of conversation , and build numberless castle in the air ( which adorn with all sort of flower - garden , rustic walks , country church , school , and the like ; while have he mind 's eye direct to the stable , the kennel , and the cellar ) , this young pair pass away a couple of hour very pleasantly ; and as the have only that single day in town , and a great deal of most important business to transact , it be propose that should dine with she future sister - in - law . this invitation be accept joyfully . he conduct she to he sister ; where he leave she talk and prattl in a way that astonished those lady , who think that might make something of she ; and he then go off to transact he business . in a word , he go out and eat ex at a pastry - cook 's shop in ; try a new coat in ; drop in at the ' , and call for ; play eleven game at billiards with the , of which he win eight , and return to half a hour late for dinner , but in very good humour . it be not so with old . when that come from the City , and be welcome in the drawing - room by he daughter and the elegant , they see at once by he face -- which be puffy , solemn , and yellow at the best of time -- and by the scowl and twitching of he black eyebrow , that the heart within he large white waistcoat be disturbed and uneasy . when step forward to salute he , which she always do with great trembling and timidity , he give a surly grunt of recognition , and drop the little hand out of he great hirsute paw without any attempt to hold it there . he look round gloomily at he eldest daughter ; who , comprehend the meaning of he look ,
, which ask unmistakably , " why the devil be she here ? " say at once : " be in town , ; and have go to the horse Guards , and will be back to dinner . " " o he be , be he ? I will not have the dinner keep wait for he , " ; with which this worthy man lapse into he particular chair , and then the utter silence in he genteel , well - furnish drawing - room be only interrupt by the alarmed ticking of the great french clock . when that chronometer , which be surmount by a cheerful brass group of the sacrifice of , toll five in a heavy cathedral tone , pull the bell at he right hand -- violently , and the butler rush up . " dinner ! " roar . " be not come in , sir , " interpose the man . " , sir . be I master of the house ? ! " scowl . tremble . a telegraphic communication of eye pass between the other three lady . the obedient bell in the lower region begin ring the announcement of the meal . the tolling over , the head of the family thrust he hand into the great tail - pocket of he great blue coat with brass button , and without wait for a further announcement strode downstairs alone , scowl over he shoulder at the four female . " what be the matter now , my dear ? " ask one of the other , as they rise and tripp gingerly behind the sire . " I suppose the fund be fall , " whisper ; and so , trembl and in silence , this hush female company follow they dark leader . they take they place in silence . he grow out a blessing , which sound as grufinitely as a curse . the great silver dish - cover be remove . tremble in she place , for she be next to the awful , and alone on she side of the table -- the gap be occasion by the absence of . " ? " say , clutch the ladle , fix he eye on she , in a sepulchral tone ; and have help she and the rest , do not speak for a while . " take 's plate away , " at last he say . " she can not eat the soup -- no more can I . it be beastly . take away the soup , Hicks , and to - morrow turn the cook out of the house , . " have conclude he observation upon the soup , make a few curt remark respect the fish , also of a savage and satirical tendency , and curse Billingsgate with a emphasis quite worthy of the place . then he lapse into silence , and swallow sundry glass of wine , look more and more terrible , till a brisk knock at the door told of 's arrival when everybody begin to rally . " he could not come before . have keep he wait at the . never mind soup or fish . give he anything -- he do not care what . capital mutton -- capital everything . " he good humour contrast with he father 's severity ; and he rattle on unceasingly during dinner , to the delight of all -- of one especially , who need not be mention . as soon as the young lady have discuss the orange and the glass of wine which form the ordinary conclusion of the dismal banquet at 's house , the signal to make sail for the drawing - room be give , and they all arise and depart . hope would soon join they there . she begin play some of he favourite waltze ( then newly import ) at the great carved - leg , leather - case grand piano in the drawing - room overhead . this little artifice do not bring he . he be deaf to the waltze ; they grow fainter and fainter ; the discomfited performer leave the huge instrument presently ; and though she three friend perform some of the loudest and most brilliant new piece of they repertoire , she do not hear a single note , but sate think , and bod evil . 's scowl , terrific always , have never before look so deadly to she . he eye follow she out of the room , as if she have be guilty of something . when they bring she coffee , she start as though it be a cup of poison which , the butler , wish to propose to she . what mystery be there lurk ? oh , those woman ! they nurse and cuddle they presentiment , and make darling of they ugliest thought , as they do of they deformed child . the gloom on the paternal countenance have also impressed with anxiety . with such eyebrow , and a look so decidedly bilious , how be he to extract that money from the governor , of which be consumedly in want ? he begin praise he father 's wine . that be generally a successful means of cajol the old gentleman . " we never get such in the west Indy , sir , as yours . take off three bottle of that you send I down , under he belt the other day . " " do he ? " say the old gentleman . " it stand I in eight shilling a bottle . " " will you take six guinea a dozen for it , sir ? " say , with a laugh . " there be one of the greatest man in the kingdom want some . " " do he ? " grow the senior
senior . " wish he may get it . " " when be at , sir , give he a breakfast , and ask I for some of the wine . the like it just as well -- want a pipe for the - in - . he be he 's right - hand man . " " it be devilish fine wine , " say the , and they look more good - humoured ; and be go to take advantage of this complacency , and bring the supply question on the mahogany , when the father , relapse into solemnity , though rather cordial in manner , bay he ring the bell for claret . " and we will see if that be as good as the , , to which he be welcome , I be sure . and as we be drink it , I will talk to you about a matter of importance . " hear the claret bell ring as she sit nervously upstairs . she think , somehow , it be a mysterious and presentimental bell . of the presentiment which some people be always have , some surely must come right . " what I want to know , , " the old gentleman say , after slowly smack he first bumper --" what I want to know be , how you and -- ah -- that little thing upstairs , be carry on ? " " I think , sir , it be not hard to see , " say , with a self - satisfied grin . " pretty clear , sir .-- what capital wine ! " " what d' you mean , pretty clear , sir ? " " why , hang it , sir , do not push I too hard . I be a modest man . I -- ah -- I do not set up to be a lady - killer ; but I do own that she be as devilish fond of I as she can be . anybody can see that with half a eye . " " and you yourself ? " " why , sir , do not you order I to marry she , and be not I a good boy ? have not we Papa settle it ever so long ? " " a pretty boy , indeed . have not I hear of you doings , sir , with , of the , the Honourable and that set . have a care sir , have a care . " the old gentleman pronounce these aristocratic name with the greatest gusto . whenever he meet a great man he grovell before he , and my - lord he as only a free - bear can do . he come home and look out he history in the Peerage : he introduce he name into he daily conversation ; he brag about he Lordship to he daughter . he fall down prostrate and bask in he as a beggar do in the sun . be alarm when he hear the name . he fear he father might have be inform of certain transaction at play . but the old moralist ease he by say serenely : " well , well , young man will be young man . and the comfort to I be , , that live in the best society in , as I hope you do ; as I think you do ; as my means will allow you to do -- " " thank you , sir , " say , make he point at once . " one can not live with these great folk for nothing ; and my purse , sir , look at it " ; and he hold up a little token which have be net by , and contain the very last of 's pound note . " you sha not want , sir . the british merchant 's son sha not want , sir . my guinea be as good as theirs , , my boy ; and I do not grudge th'ey . call on as you go through the to - morrow ; he will have something for you . I do not grudge money when I know you be in good society , because I know that good society can never go wrong . there be no pride in I . I be a humbly bear man -- but you have have advantages . make a good use of th'ey . mix with the young nobility . there be many of them who can not spend a dollar to you guinea , my boy . and as for the pink bonnet ( here from under the heavy eyebrow there come a knowing and not very pleasing leer ) -- why boy will be boy . only there be one thing I order you to avoid , which , if you do not , I will cut you off with a shilling , by ; and that be gambl . " " oh , of course , sir , " say . " but to return to the other business about : why should not you marry higher than a stockbroker 's daughter , -- that be what I want to know ? " " it be a family business , sir , " . say , crack filbert . " you and make the match a hundred year ago . " " I do not deny it ; but people 's position alter , sir . I do not deny that make my fortune , or rather put I in the way of acquiring , by my own talents and genius , that proud position , which , I may say , I occupy in the tallow trade and the City of . I have show my gratitude to ; and he be try it of late
late , sir , as my cheque - book can show . ! I tell you in confidence I do not like the look of 's affair . my chief clerk , , do not like the look of 'em , and he be a old file , and know ' change as well as any man in . & be look shy at he . he be be dabbl on he own account I fear . they say the be he , which be take by the privateer . and that be flat -- unless I see 's ten thousand down you do not marry she . I will have no lame duck 's daughter in my family . pass the wine , sir -- or ring for coffee . " with which spread out the evening paper , and know from this signal that the colloquy be end , and that he papa be about to take a nap . he hurry upstairs to in the highest spirit . what be it that make he more attentive to she on that night than he have be for a long time -- more eager to amuse she , more tender , more brilliant in talk ? be it that he generous heart warm to she at the prospect of misfortune ; or that the idea of lose the dear little prize make he value it more ? she live upon the recollection of that happy evening for many day afterwards , remembere he word ; he look ; the song he sang ; he attitude , as he lean over she or look at she from a distance . as it seem to she , no night ever pass so quickly at 's house before ; and for once this young person be almost provoke to be angry by the premature arrival of with she shawl . come and take a tender leave of she the next morning ; and then hurrie off to the , where he visit , he father 's head man , and receive from that gentleman a document which he exchange at & 's for a whole pocketful of money . as enter the house , old be pass out of the banker 's parlour , look very dismal . but he godson be much to elate to mark the worthy stockbroker 's depression , or the dreary eye which the kind old gentleman cast upon he . young do not come grinn out of the parlour with he as have be he will not in former year . and as the swinging door of , & . close upon , , the cashier ( whose benevolent occupation it be to hand out crisp bank - note from a drawer and dispense sovereign out of a copper shovel ) , wink at , the clerk at the desk on he right . wink again . " no go , " whisper . " not at no price , " say . " , sir , how will you take it ? " cramm eagerly a quantity of note into he pocket , and pay Dobbin fifty pound that very evening at mess . that very evening write he the tenderest of long letter . she heart be overflow with tenderness , but it still forebod evil . what be the cause of 's dark look ? she ask . have any difference arisen between he and she papa ? she poor papa return so melancholy from the City , that all be alarmed about he at home -- in fine , there be four page of love and fear and hope and foreboding . " poor little -- dear little . how fond she be of I , " say , as he peruse the missive --" and , what a headache that mix punch have give I ! " poor little , indeed . at about this time there drive up to a exceedingly snug and well - appoint house in , a travel chariot with a lozenge on the panel , a discontent female in a green veil and crimp curl on the rumble , and a large and confidential man on the box . it be the equipage of we friend , return from Hants . the carriage window be shut ; the fat spaniel , whose head and tongue ordinarily loll out of one of they , repose on the lap of the discontented female . when the vehicle stop , a large round bundle of shawl be take out of the carriage by the aid of various domestic and a young lady who accompany the heap of cloak . that bundle contain , who be convey upstairs forthwith , and put into a bed and chamber warm properly as for the reception of a invalid . Messenger go off for she physician and medical man . they come , consult , prescribe , vanish . the young companion of , at the conclusion of they interview , come in to receive they instruction , and administer those antiphlogistic medicines which the eminent man order . of the ride up from the next day ; he black charger pawed the straw before he invalid aunt 's door . he be most affectionate in he inquiry regard that amiable relative . there seem to be much source of apprehension . he find 's ( the discontented female ) unusually sulky and despondent ; he find , she dame de compagnies , in tear alone in the drawing - room . she have hasten home , hear of she beloved friend 's illness . she wish to fly to she couch , that couch which she , , have so often smoothe in the hour of sickness . she be deny admission to 's apartment . a stranger be administer she medicine -- a stranger from the country -- a odious miss ...
... -- tears chok the utterance of the dame de compagnies , and she bury she crush affections and she poor old red nose in she pocket handkerchief . send up he name by the sulky femme de chambre , and 's new companion , come trippe down from the sick - room , put a little hand into he as he step forward eagerly to meet she , give a glance of great scorn at the bewildered Briggs , and beckon the young out of the back draw - room , lead he downstairs into that now desolate dining - parlour , where so many a good dinner have be celebrate . here these two talk for ten minute , discuss , no doubt , the symptom of the old invalid above stair ; at the end of which period the parlour bell be ring briskly , and answer on that instant by , 's large confidential butler ( who , indeed , happen to be at the keyhole during the most part of the interview ) ; and the captain come out , curl he mustachio , mount the black charger paw among the straw , to the admiration of the little blackguard boy collect in the street . he look in at the dining - room window , manage he horse , which curvet and cape beautifully -- for one instant the young person might be see at the window , when she figure vanish , and , doubtless , she go upstairs again to resume the affect duty of benevolence . who could this young woman be , I wonder ? that even a little dinner for two person be laid in the dining - room -- when , the lady 's maid , push into she mistress 's apartment , and bust about there during the vacancy occasion by the departure of the new nurse -- and the latter and sit down to the neat little meal . be so much chok by emotion that she could hardly take a morsel of meat . the young person carve a fowl with the utmost delicacy , and ask so distinctly for egg - sauce , that poor Briggs , before whom that delicious condiment be place , start , make a great clattering with the ladle , and once more fell back in the most gush hysterical state . " have you not better give a glass of wine ? " say the person to , the large confidential man . he do so . seize it mechanically , gas it down convulsively , moan a little , and begin to play with the chicken on she plate . " I think we shall be able to help each other , " say the person with great suavity : " and shall have no need of 's kind service . , if you please , we will ring when we want you . " he go downstairs , where , by the way , he vent the most horrid curse upon the unoffending footman , he subordinate . " it be a pity you take on so , , " the young lady say , with a cool , slightly sarcastic , air . " my dearest friend be so ill , and wo - of -o not see I , " gurgle out Briggs in a agony of renew grief . " she be not very ill any more . Conseal yourself , dear . she have only overeat herself -- that be all . she be greatly better . she will soon be quite restore again . she be weak from be cup and from medical treatment , but she will rally immediately . pray conseal yourself , and take a little more wine . " " but why , why will not she see I again ? " bleate out . " oh , , , after three - and - twenty year ' tenderness ! be this the return to you poor , poor ? " " do not cry too much , poor , " the other say ( with ever so little of a grin ) ; " she only will not see you , because she say you do not nurse she as well as I do . it be no pleasure to I to sit up all night . I wish you might do it instead . " " have I not tend that dear couch for year ? " say , " and now -- " " now she prefer somebody else . well , sick people have these fancie , and must be humoured . when she be well I shall go . " " never , never , " exclaim , madly inhal she salt - bottle . " never be well or never go , ? " the other say , with the same provoke good - nature . " Pooh -- she will be well in a fortnight , when I shall go back to my little pupil at 's , and to they mother , who be a great deal more sick than we friend . you need not be jealous about I , my dear . I be a poor little girl without any friend , or any harm in I . I do not want to supplant you in 's good graces . she will forget I a week after I be go : and she affection for you have be the work of year . give I a little wine if you please , my dear , and let we be friend . I be sure I want friend . " the placable and soft - hear speechlessly push out she hand at this appeal ; but she feel the desertion most keenly for all that , and bitterly , bitterly moan the fickleness of she . at the end
end of half a hour , the meal over , ( for such , astonish to state , be the name of she who have be describe ingeniously as " the person " hitherto ) , go upstairs again to she patient 's room , from which , with the most engage politeness , she eliminate poor Firkin . " thank you , , that will quite do ; how nicly you make it ! I will ring when anything be want . " " thank you " ; and come downstairs in a tempest of jealousy , only the more dangerous because she be force to confine it in she own bosom . could it be the tempest which , as she pass the landing of the first floor , blow open the draw - room door ? no ; it be stealthily open by the hand of . Brigg have be on the watch . Brigg too well hear the creaking descend the stair , and the clink of the spoon and gruel - basin the neglect female carry . " well , ? " say she , as the other enter the apartment . " well , ? " " Wuss and wuss , , " say , wag she head . " be she not better then ? " " she never speak but once , and I ask she if she feel a little more easy , and she tell I to hold my stupid tongue . oh , , I never think to have see this day ! " and the water - work again begin to play . " what sort of a person be this , ? I little thought , while enjoy my revel in the elegant home of my firm friend , the and he amiable lady , to find a stranger have take my place in the affections of my dearest , my still dearest ! " , it will be see by she language , be of a literary and sentimental turn , and have once publish a volume of poem --" Trill of the " -- by subscription . " , they be all infatyate about that young woman , " reply . " would not have let she go , but he da not refuse anything . at the Rectory jist as bad -- never happy out of she sight . the Capting quite wild about she . mortial jealous . since be take ill , she will not have nobody near she but , I can not tell for where nor for why ; and I think somethink have bewidge everybody . " pass that night in constant watch upon ; the next night the old lady slept so comfortably , that have time for several hour ' comfortable repose herself on the sofa , at the foot of she patroness 's bed ; very soon , be so well that she sit up and laugh heartily at a perfect imitation of and she grief , which describe to she . Brigg ' weeping snuffle , and she manner of use the handkerchief , be so completely render that become quite cheerful , to the admiration of the doctor when they visit she , who usually find this worthy woman of the world , when the least sickness attack she , under the most abject depression and terror of death . come every day , and receive bulletin from respect he aunt 's health . this improve so rapidly , that poor be allow to see she patroness ; and person with tender heart may imagine the smothered emotion of that sentimental female , and the affect nature of the interview . like to have in a good deal soon . use to she to she face with the most admirable gravity , thereby render the imitation doubly piquant to she worthy patroness . the cause which have lead to the deplorable illness of , and she departure from she brother 's house in the country , be of such a unromantic nature that they be hardly fit to be explain in this genteel and sentimental novel . for how be it possible to hind of a delicate female , live in good society , that she eat and drank too much , and that a hot supper of lobster profusely enjoy at the Rectory be the reason of a indisposition which herself persist be solely attributable to the dampness of the weather ? the attack be so sharp that -- as he Reverence express it -- be very nearly " off the hook " ; all the family be in a fever of expectation regard the will , and be make sure of at least forty thousand pound before the commencement of the season . send over a choice parcel of tract , to prepare she for the change from and for another world ; but a good doctor from be call in in time , vanquish the lobster which be so nearly fatal to she , and give she sufficient strength to enable she to return to . the do not disguise he exceeding mortification at the turn which affairs take . while everybody be attend on , and messenger every hour from the Rectory be carry news of she health to the affectionate folk there , there be a lady in another part of the house , be exceedingly ill , of whom no one take any notice at all ; and this be the lady of herself . the good doctor shook he head after see she ; to which visit consent , as it could be pay without a fee ; and she be leave fading away in she lonely chamber , with no more heed pay to she than to a weed in the park . the young lady , too , lose much of the inestimable benefit of they
they governess 's instruction , so affectionate a nurse be , that would take she medicine from no other hand . have be depose long before she mistress 's departure from the country . that faithful attendent find a gloomy consolation on return to , in see suffer the same pang of jealousy and undergo the same faithless treatment to which she herself have be subject . get a extension of leave on he aunt 's illness , and remain dutifully at home . he be always in she antechamber . ( she lay sick in the state bedroom , into which you enter by the little blue saloon . ) he father be always meet he there ; or if he come down the corridor ever so quietly , he father 's door be sure to open , and the hyena face of the old gentleman to glare out . what be it set one to watch the other so ? a generous rivalry , no doubt , as to which should be most attentive to the dear sufferer in the state bedroom . use to come out and comfort both of they ; or one or the other of they rather . both of these worthy gentleman be most anxious to have news of the invalid from she little confidential messenger . at dinner -- to which meal she descend for half a hour -- she keep the peace between they : after which she disappear for the night ; when would ride over to the depot of the 150th at , leave he papa to the society of and he rum and water . she pass as weary a fortnight as ever spend in 's sick - room ; but she little nerve seem to be of iron , as she be quite unshaken by the duty and the tedium of the sick - chamber . she never tell until long afterwards how painful that duty be ; how peevish a patient be the jovial old lady ; how angry ; how sleepless ; in what horror of death ; during what long night she lay moaning , and in almost delirious agony respect that future world which she quite ignore when she be in good health .-- picture to yourself , oh fair young reader , a worldly , selfish , graceless , thankless , religionless old woman , writhing in pain and fear , and without she wig . picture she to yourself , and ere you be old , learn to love and pray ! watch this graceless bedside with indomitable patience . nothing escape she ; and , like a prudent steward , she find a use for everything . she tell many a good story about 's illness in after day -- story which make the lady blush through she artificial carnation . during the illness she be never out of temper ; always alert ; she sleep light , have a perfectly clear conscience ; and could take that refreshment at almost any minute 's warning . and so you see very few trace of fatigue in she appearance . she face might be a trifle paler , and the circle round she eyes a little blacker than usual ; but whenever she come out from the sick - room she be always smiling , fresh , and neat , and look as trim in she little dressing - gown and cap , as in she smartest evening suit . the thought so , and rav about she in uncouth convulsion . the barbed shaft of love have penetrat he dull hide . six week -- appropinquity -- opportunity -- have victimise he completely . he make a confidante of he aunt at the Rectory , of all persons in the world . she rally he about it ; she have perceive he folly ; she warn he ; she finish by own that little sharp be the most clever , droll , odd , good - natured , simple , kindly creature in . must not trifle with she affections , though - - dear would never pardon he for that ; for she , too , be quite overcome by the little governess , and love like a daughter . must go away -- go back to he regiment and naughty , and not play with a poor artless girl 's feeling . many and many a time this good - natured lady , compassionat the forlorn life -guardsman 's condition , give he a opportunity of see at the Rectory , and of walk home with she , as we have see . when man of a certain sort , lady , be in love , though they see the hook and the string , and the whole apparatus with which they be to be take , they gorge the bait nevertheless -- they must come to it -- they must swallow it -- and be presently struck and land gasping . see there be a manifest intention on 's part to captivate he with . he be not very wise ; but he be a man about town , and have see several season . a light dawn upon he dusky soul , as he think , through a speech of 's . " mark my word , , " she say . " you will have one day for you relation . " " what relation -- my cousin , hey , ? sweet on she , hey ? " inquire the waggish officer . " more than that , " . say , with a flash from she black eye . " ? he sha ' not have she . the sneak a ' not worthy of she . he be book to . " " you man perceive nothing . you silly , blind creature -- if anything happen to , will be you mother
mother - in - law ; and that be what will happen . " , , give vent to a prodigious whistle , in token of astonishment at this announcement . he could not deny it . he father 's evident like for sharp have not escape he . he know the old gentleman 's character well ; and a more unscrupulous old -- whyou -- he do not conclude the sentence , but walk home , curl he mustachio , and convince he have find a clue to 's mystery . " by , it be too bad , " think , " too bad , by ! I do believe the woman want the poor girl to be ruin , in order that she should not come into the family as . " when he see alone , he rally she about he father 's attachment in he graceful way . she fling up she head scornfully , look he full in the face , and say , " well , suppose he be fond of I . I know he be , and other too . you do not think I be afraid of he , ? you do not suppose I can not defend my own honour , " say the little woman , look as stately as a queen . " oh , ah , why -- give you fair warning -- look out , you know -- that be all , " say the mustachio- twiddler . " you hint at something not honourable , then ? " say she , flash out . " of -- really -- , " the heavy dragoon interpose . " do you suppose I have no feeling of self - respect , because I be poor and friendless , and because rich people have none ? do you think , because I be a governess , I have not as much sense , and feel , and good breeding as you gentlefolk in ? I be a Montmorency . do you suppose a Montmorency be not as good as a ? " when be agitate , and allude to she maternal relative , she speak with ever so slight a foreign accent , which give a great charm to she clear ringing voice . " no , " she continue , kind as she speak to the ; " I can endure poverty , but not shame -- neglect , but not insult ; and insult from -- from you . " she feeling give way , and she burst into tear . " hang it , -- -- by --upon my soul , I would not for a thousand pound . , ! " she be gone . she drive out with that day . it be before the latter 's illness . at dinner she be unusually brilliant and lively ; but she would take no notice of the hints , or the nod , or the clumsy expostulation of the humiliated , infatuate guardsman . Skirmish of this sort pass perpetually during the little campaign -- tedious to relate , and similar in result . the heavy cavalry be madden by defeat , and route every day . if the of 's have not have the fear of lose he sister 's legacy before he eye , he never would have permit he dear girl to lose the educational blessing which they invaluable governess be conferr upon they . the old house at home seem a desert without she , so useful and pleasant have make herself there . 's letter be not copy and correcte ; he book not make up ; he household business and manifold scheme neglect , now that he little secretary be away . and it be easy to see how necessary such a amanuensis be to he , by the tenor and spelle of the numerous letter which he send to she , entreat she and command she to return . almost every day bring a frank from the Baronet , enclose the most urgent prayer to for she return , or convey pathetic statement to , regard the neglect state of he daughter 's education ; of which document take very little heed . be not formally dismiss , but she place as companion be a sinecure and a derision ; and she company be the fat spaniel in the drawing - room , or occasionally the discontented Firkin in the housekeeper 's closet . though the old lady would by no means hear of 's departure , be the latter regularly install in office in . like many wealthy people , it be 's habit to accept as much service as she could get from she inferior ; and good - naturedly to take leave of they when she no longer find they useful . Gratitude among certain rich folk be scarcely natural or to be think of . they take needy people 's service as they due . have you , of poor parasite and humble hanger - on , much reason to complain ! you friendship for be about as sincere as the return which it usually get . it be money you love , and not the man ; and be and he footman to change place you know , you poor rogue , who would have the benefit of you allegiance . and I be not sure that , in spite of 's simplicity and activity , and gentleness and untiring good humour , the shrewd old lady , upon whom these treasure of friendship be lavish , have not a lurking suspicion all the while of she affectionate nurse and friend . it must have often cross 's mind that nobody do anything for nothing . if she measure she own feeling towards the world , she must have be pretty well able to gauge those of the world towards herself ;
; and perhaps she reflect that it be the ordinary lot of people to have no friend if they themselves care for nobody . well , meanwhile be the greatest comfort and convenience to she , and she give she a couple of new gown , and a old necklace and shawl , and show she friendship by abuse all she intimate acquaintance to she new confidante ( than which there can not be a more touching proof of regard ) , and meditate vaguly some great future benefit -- to marry she perhaps to , the apothecary , or to settle she in some advantageous way of life ; or at any rate , to send she back to 's when she have do with she , and the full season have begin . when be convalescent and descend to the drawing - room , sang to she , and otherwise amuse she ; when she be well enough to drive out , accompany she . and amongst the drive which they take , whither , of all place in the world , do 's admirable good - nature and friendship actually induce she to penetrate , but to , , and the house of , . Ere that event , many note have pass , as may be imagine , between the two dear friend . during the months of 's stay in , the eternal friendship have ( must it be owned ? ) suffer considerable diminution , and grow so decrepit and feeble with old age as to threaten demise altogether . the fact be , both girl have they own real affair to think of : she advance with she employer -- she own absorb topic . when the two girl meet , and fly into each other 's arm with that impetuosity which distinguish the behaviour of young lady towards each other , perform she part of the embrace with the most perfect briskness and energy . poor little blush as she kiss she friend , and think she have be guilty of something very like coldness towards she . they first interview be but a very short one . be just ready to go out for a walk . be wait in she carriage below , she people wonder at the locality in which they find themselves , and gaze upon honest , the black footman of , as one of the queer native of the place . but when come down with she kind smile look ( must introduce she to she friend , be long to see she , and be too ill to leave she carriage ) -- when , I say , come down , the shoulder - knot aristocracy wonder more and more that such a thing could come out of ; and be fairly captivate by the sweet blush face of the young lady who come forward so timidly and so gracefully to pay she respects to the protector of she friend . " what a complexion , my dear ! what a sweet voice ! " say , as they drive away westward after the little interview . " my dear sharp , you young friend be charme . send for she to , do you hear ? " have a good taste . she like natural manners -- a little timidity only set they off . she like pretty face near she ; as she like pretty picture and nice china . she talk of with rapture half a dozen time that day . she mention she to , who come dutifully to partake of he aunt 's chicken . of course , on this instantly state that be engage to be marry -- to a -- a very old flame . " be he a man in a line - regiment ? " ask , remember after a effort , as become a guardsman , the number of the regiment , the -- th . think that be the regiment . " the 's name , " she say , " be . " " a lanky gawky fellow , " say , " tumble over everybody . I know he ; and Osborne be a goodish - look fellow , with large black whisker ? " " enormous , " say , " and enormously proud of they , I assure you . " burst into a horse - laugh by way of reply ; and be press by the ladie to explain , do so when the explosion of hilarity be over . " he fancie he can play at billiards , " say he . " I win two hundred of he at the - . he play , the young flat ! he would have play for anything that day , but he friend carry he off , hang he ! " " , , do not be so wicked , " remark , highly pleased . " why , ma 'am , of all the young fellow I have see out of the line , I think this fellow be the greenest . and get what money they like out of he . he would go to the deuce to be see with a lord . he pay they dinner at , and they invite the company . " " and very pretty company too , I dare say . " " quite right , . right , as usual , . pretty company -- haw , hee ! " and the laugh more and more , think he have make a good joke . " , do not be naughty ! " he aunt exclaim . " well , he father be a man --immensely rich , they say . hang those fellow , they must bleed ; and I have not do with he yet , I can tell you . Haw , hee ! " " ,
, ; I shall warn . a gambling husband ! " " , be not he , hey ? " the say with great solemnity ; and then add , a sudden thought have strike he : " , I say , ma 'am , we will have he here . " " be he a presentable sort of a person ? " the aunt inquire . " Presentable ?-- oh , very well . you would not see any difference , " answer . " do let 's have he , when you begin to see a few people ; and he whatdyecallem -- he inamorato -- eh , ; that be what you call it -- come . , I will write he a note , and have he ; and I will try if he can play piquet as well as billiards . where do he live , ? " tell the 's town address ; and a few day after this conversation , receive a letter , in 's schoolboy hand , and enclose a note of invitation from . despatch also a invitation to she darling , who , you may be sure , be ready enough to accept it when she hear that be to be of the party . it be arrange that be to spend the morning with the ladie of , where all be very kind to she . patronise she with calm superiority : she be so much the cleverer of the two , and she friend so gentle and unassuming , that she always yield when anybody choose to command , and so take 's order with perfect meekness and good humour . 's graciousness be also remarkable . she continue she rapture about little , talk about she before she face as if she be a doll , or a servant , or a picture , and admire she with the most benevolent wonder possible . I admire that admiration which the genteel world sometimes extend to the commonalty . there be no more agreeable object in life than to see Mayfair folk condescende . 's prodigious benevolence rather fatigue poor little , and I be not sure that of the three lady in she do not find honest the most agreeable . she sympathise with as with all neglected or gentle people : she be not what you call a woman of spirit . come to dinner -- a repast en garcon with . the great family coach of the transport he to from ; where the young lady , who be not themselves invite , and profess the greatest indifference at that slight , nevertheless look at 's name in the baronetage ; and learn everything which that work have to teach about the family and they pedigree , and the Binky , they relative , & c. , &c. receive with great frankness and graciousness : praise he play at billiards : ask he when he would have he revenge : be interested about 's regiment : and would have propose piquet to he that very evening , but absolutely forbade any gambling in she house ; so that the young 's purse be not lighten by he gallant patron , for that day at least . however , they make a engagement for the next , somewhere : to look at a horse that have to sell , and to try he in the ; and to dine together , and to pass the evening with some jolly fellows . " that be , if you be not on duty to that pretty , " say , with a know wink . " Monstrous nice girl , ' pon my honour , though , , " he be good enough to add . " lot of tin , I suppose , eh ? " Osborne be not on duty ; he would join with pleasure : and the latter , when they meet the next day , praise he new friend 's horsemanship -- as he might with perfect honesty -- and introduce he to three or four young man of the first fashion , whose acquaintance immensely elate the simple young officer . " how 's little , by - the - bye ? " inquire of he friend over they wine , with a dandified air . " good - nature little girl that . do she suit you well at 's ? like she a good deal last year . " look savagely at the out of he little blue eye , and watch he when he go up to resume he acquaintance with the fair governess . she conduct must have relieve if there be any jealousy in the bosom of that life-guardsman . when the young man go upstairs , and after 's introduction to , he walk up to with a patronising , easy swagger . he be go to be kind to she and protect she . he would even shake hand with she , as a friend of 's ; and say , " ah , ! how - dy - doo ? " hold out he left hand towards she , expect that she would be quite confound at the honour . sharp put out she right forefinger , and give he a little nod , so cool and kill , that , watch the operation from the other room , could hardly restrain he laughter as he see the 's entire discomfiture ; the start he give , the pause , and the perfect clumsiness with which he at length condescende to take the finger which be offer for he embrace . " she would beat the devil , by ! " the say , in a rapture ; and the , by way of begin the conversation , agreeably ask how she like she new place . " my place ? " say ,
, coolly , " how kind of you to remind I of it ! it be a tolerably good place : the wage be pretty good -- not so good as 's , I believe , with you sister in . how be those young lady ?-- not that I ought to ask . " " why not ? " say , amaz . " why , they never condescende to speak to I , or to ask I into they house , whilst I be stay with ; but we poor governess , you know , be use to slights of this sort . " " my dear ! " ejaculate . " at least in some family , " continue . " you can not think what a difference there be though . we be not so wealthy in as you lucky folk of the city . but then I be in a gentleman 's family -- good old English stock . I suppose you know 's father refuse a peerage . and you see how I be treat . I be pretty comfortable . indeed it be rather a good place . but how very good of you to inquire ! " be quite savage . the little governess patronise he and persiffle he until this young feel quite uneasy ; nor could he muster sufficient presence of mind to find a pretext for back out of this most delectable conversation . " I think you like the City family pretty well , " he say , haughtily . " last year you mean , when I be fresh from that horrid vulgar school ? of course I do . do not every girl like to come home for the holiday ? and how be I to know any better ? but oh , , what a difference eighteen month 's experience make ! eighteen month spend , pardon I for say so , with gentleman . as for dear , she , I grant you , be a pearl , and would be charme anywhere . there now , I see you be begin to be in a good humour ; but oh these queer odd city people ! and --how be that wonderful ? " " it seem to I you do not dislike that wonderful last year , " Osborne say kindly . " how severe of you ! well , entre nous , I do not break my heart about he ; yet if he have ask I to do what you mean by you look ( and very expressive and kind they be , too ) , I would not have say no . " give a look as much as to say , " indeed , how very obliging ! " " what a honour to have have you for a brother - in - law , you be think ? to be sister - in - law to , , son of , , son of -- what be you grandpapa , ? well , do not be angry . you can not help you pedigree , and I quite agree with you that I would have marry ; for could a poor penniless girl do better ? now you know the whole secret . I be frank and open ; consider all thing , it be very kind of you to allude to the circumstance -- very kind and polite . dear , and I be talk about you poor brother . how be he ? " thus be utterly route . not that be in the right ; but she have manage most successfully to put he in the wrong . and he now shamefully fle , feel , if he stay another minute , that he would have be make to look foolish in the presence of . though have have the better of he , be above the meanness of talebearing or revenge upon a lady -- only he could not help cleverly confid to , next day , some notion of he regard -- that she be a sharp one , a dangerous one , a desperate flirt , & c. ; in all of which opinion agree laughingly , and with every one of which be make acquainted before twenty - four hour be over . they add to she original regard for . she woman 's instinct have tell she that it be who have interrupt the success of she first love - passage , and she esteem he accordingly . " I only just warn you , " he say to , with a know look -- he have buy the horse , and lose some score of guinea after dinner , " I just warn you -- I know woman , and counsel you to be on the look - out . " " thank you , my boy , " say , with a look of peculiar gratitude . " you be wide awake , I see . " and go off , think be quite right . he tell of what he have do , and how he have counsel -- a devilish good , straightforward fellow -- to be on he guard against that little sly , scheme . " against whom ? " cry . " you friend the governess .-- do not look so astonished . " " of , what have you do ? " say . for she woman 's eyes , which love have make sharp - sight , have in one instant discover a secret which be invisible to , to poor virgin Briggs , and above all , to the stupid peeper of that young whisker prig , . for as be shawl she in a upper apartment , where these two friend have a opportunity for a little of that secret talking and conspiring which form the delight of female life
life , , come up to , and take she two little hands in hers , say , " , I see it all . " kiss she . and regard this delightful secret , not one syllable more be say by either of the young woman . but it be destin to come out before long . some short period after the above event , and still remain at she patroness 's house in , one more hatchment might have be see in great , figure amongst the many which usually ornament that dismal quarter . it be over 's house ; but it do not indicate the worthy baronet 's demise . it be a feminine hatchment , and indeed a few year back have serve as a funeral compliment to 's old mother , the late dowager . it be period of service over , the hatchment have come down from the front of the house , and live in retirement somewhere in the back premise of 's mansion . it reappear now for poor . be a widower again . the arm quarter on the shield along with he own be not , to be sure , poor rose 's . she have no arm . but the cherub paint on the scutcheon answer as well for she as for 's mother , and be write under the coat , flank by the and . Arms and Hatchments , . -- here be a opportunity for moralising ! have tend that otherwise friendless bedside . she go out of the world strengthen by such word and comfort as he could give she . for many year he be the only kindness she ever know ; the only friendship that solace in any way that feeble , lonely soul . she heart be dead long before she body . she have sell it to become 's wife . mother and daughter be make the same bargain every day in . when the demise take place , she husband be in attend to some of he innumerable scheme , and busy with he endless lawyer . he have find time , nevertheless , to call often in , and to despatch many note to , entreat she , enjoin she , command she to return to she young pupil in the country , who be now utterly without companionship during they mother 's illness . but would not hear of she departure ; for though there be no lady of fashion in who would desert she friend more complacently as soon as she be tired of they society , and though few tired of they sooner , yet as long as she engoument last she attachment be prodigious , and she cling still with the greatest energy to . the news of 's death provoke no more grief or comment than might have be expect in 's family circle . " I suppose I must put off my party for the 3rd , " say ; and add , after a pause , " I hope my brother will have the decency not to marry again . " " what a confound rage will be in if he do , " remark , with he usual regard for he elder brother . say nothing . she seem by far the gravest and most impressed of the family . she leave the room before go away that day ; but they meet by chance below , as he be go away after take leave , and have a parley together . on the morrow , as be ga from the window , she start , who be placidly occupy with a french novel , by cry out in a alarmed tone , " be , ma 'am ! " and the Baronet 's knock follow this announcement . " my dear , I can not see he . I will not see he . not at home , or go downstairs and say I be too ill to receive any one . my nerf really will not bear my brother at this moment , " cry out , and resume the novel . " she be too ill to see you , sir , " say , trip down to , who be prepare to ascend . " so much the better , " answer . " I want to see you , . come along a I into the parlour , " and they enter that apartment together . " I wawnt you back at 's , , " the baronet say , fix he eye upon she , and take off he black glove and he hat with it be great crape hat - band . he eye have such a strange look , and fix upon she so steadfastly , that begin almost to tremble . " I hope to come soon , " she say in a low voice , " as soon as be better -- and return to -- to the dear child . " " you have say so these three month , , " reply , " and still you go hang on to my sister , who will fl you off like a old shoe , when she be wear you out . I tell you I want you . I be go back to the Vuneral . will you come back ? yes or no ? " " I dare not -- I do not think -- it would be right -- to be alone -- with you , sir , " say , seemingly in great agitation . " I say agin , I want you , " say , thump the table . " I can not git on without you . I do not see what it be till you go away . the house all go wrong . it be not the same place . all
all my account have get muddled agin . you must come back . do come back . dear , do come . " " come -- as what , sir ? " gasp out . " come as , if you like , " the Baronet say , grasp he crape hat . " there ! will that zatusfy you ? come back and be my wife . you vit vor't . birth be hange . you be as good a lady as ever I see . you have get more brain in you little vinger than any baronet 's wife in the county . will you come ? yes or no ? " " oh , ! " say , very much move . " say yes , , " continue . " I be a old man , but a good 'n . I be good for twenty year . I will make you happy , zee if I do not . you shall do what you like ; spend what you like ; and ' ave it all you own way . I will make you a zettlement . I will do everything reglar . look year ! " and the old man fall down on he knee and leer at she like a satyr . start back a picture of consternation . in the course of this history we have never see she lose she presence of mind ; but she do now , and weep some of the most genuine tear that ever fell from she eyes . " oh , ! " she say . " oh , sir -- I -- I be marry already . " in 's for a Short time every reader of a sentimental turn ( and we desire no other ) must have be pleased with the tableau with which the last act of we little drama conclude ; for what can be prettier than a image of Love on he knee before ? but when hear that awful confession from that she be marry already , he bounce up from he attitude of humility on the carpet , uttere exclamation which cause poor little beauty to be more frightened than she be when she make she avowal . " marry ; you be joke , " the Baronet cry , after the first explosion of rage and wonder . " you be make vun of I , . who would ever go to marry you without a shilling to you vortune ? " " ! marry ! " say , in a agony of tear -- she voice chok with emotion , she handkerchief up to she ready eye , faint against the mantelpiece a figure of woe fit to melt the most obdurate heart . " of , dear , do not think I ungrateful for all you goodness to I . it be only you generosity that have extort my secret . " " Generosity be hange ! " roar out . " who be it tu , then , you be marry ? where be it ? " " let I come back with you to the country , sir ! let I watch over you as faithfully as ever ! do not , do not separate I from dear 's ! " " the feller have leave you , have he ? " the Baronet say , begin , as he fancie , to comprehend . " well , -- come back if you like . you can not eat you cake and have it . any way I make you a vair offer . Coom back as governess -- you shall have it all you own way . " she hold out one hand . she cry fit to break she heart ; she ringlet fall over she face , and over the marble mantelpiece where she lay it . " so the rascal run off , eh ? " say , with a hideous attempt at consolation . " never mind , , I will take care of 'ee . " " oh , sir ! it would be the pride of my life to go back to 's , and take care of the child , and of you as formerly , when you say you be pleased with the service of you little . when I think of what you have just offer I , my heart fill with gratitude indeed it do . I can not be you wife , sir ; let I -- let I be you daughter . " say which , go down on she knee in a most tragical way , and , take 's horny black hand between she own two ( which be very pretty and white , and as soft as satin ) , look up in he face with a expression of exquisite patho and confidence , when -- when the door open , and sail in . and , who happen by chance to be at the parlour door soon after the and enter the apartment , have also see accidentally , through the keyhole , the old gentleman prostrate before the governess , and have hear the generous proposal which he make she . it be scarcely out of he mouth when and have stream up the stair , have rush into the drawing - room where be read the french novel , and have give that old lady the astounding intelligence that be on he knee , propose to . and if you calculate the time for the above dialogue to take place -- the time for and to fly to the drawing - room -- the time for to be astonish , and to drop she volume of Pigault le -- and the time for she to come downstairs -- you will see how exactly accurate this history be , and how must have appear at
at the very instant when have assume the attitude of humility . " it be the lady on the ground , and not the gentleman , " say , with a look and voice of great scorn . " they tell I that you be on you knee , : do kneel once more , and let I see this pretty couple ! " " I have thank , ma 'am , " say , rise , " and have tell he that -- that I never can become . " " refuse he ! " say , more bewilder than ever . and at the door open the eye of astonishment and the lip of wonder . " yes -- refuse , " continue , with a sad , tearful voice . " and be I to credit my ear that you absolutely propose to she , ? " the old lady ask . " ees , " say the , " I do . " " and she refuse you as she say ? " " ees , " say , he feature on a broad grin . " it do not seem to break you heart at any rate , " remark . " Nawt a bit , " answer , with a coolness and good - humour which set almost mad with bewilderment . that a old gentleman of station should fall on he knee to a penniless governess , and burst out laugh because she refuse to marry he -- that a penniless governess should refuse a Baronet with four thousand a year -- these be mystery which could never comprehend . it surpass any complication of intrigue in she favourite Pigault le . " I be glad you think it good sport , brother , " she continue , grope wildly through this amazement . " Vamous , " say . " who would ha ' think it ! what a sly little ! what a little fox it waw ! " he mutter to himself , chuckl with pleasure . " who would have think what ? " cry , stampe with she foot . " pray , , be you wait for the 's divorce , that you do not think we family good enough for you ? " " my attitude , " say , " when you come in , ma 'am , do not look as if I despise such a honour as this good -- this noble man have deign to offer I . do you think I have no heart ? have you all love I , and be so kind to the poor orphan -- desert -- girl , and be I to feel nothing ? of my friend ! of my benefactor ! may not my love , my life , my duty , try to repay the confidence you have show I ? do you grudge I even gratitude , ? it be too much --my heart be too full " ; and she sank down in a chair so pathetically , that most of the audience present be perfectly melt with she sadness . " whether you marry I or not , you be a good little girl , , and I be you vriend , mind , " say , and put on he crape - bound hat , he walk away -- greatly to 's relief ; for it be evident that she secret be unrevealed to , and she have the advantage of a brief reprieve . put she handkerchief to she eye , and nodd away honest , who would have follow she upstairs , she go up to she apartment ; while and , in a high state of excitement , remain to discuss the strange event , and , not less move , div down into the kitchen region , and talk of it with all the male and female company there . and so impressed be with the news , that she think proper to write off by that very night 's post , " with she humble duty to . and the family at the Rectory , and have be and propose for to marry , wherein she have refuse he , to the wonder of all . " the two lady in the dining - room ( where worthy be delighted to be admit once more to confidential conversation with she patroness ) wonder to they heart 's content at 's offer , and 's refusal ; Briggs very acutely suggest that there must have be some obstacle in the shape of a previous attachment , otherwise no young woman in she sense would ever have refuse so advantageous a proposal . " you would have accept it yourself , would not you , ? " say , kindly . " would it not be a privilege to be 's sister ? " Brigg reply , with meek evasion . " well , would have make a good , after all , " remark ( who be mollify by the girl 's refusal , and very liberal and generous now there be no call for she sacrifice ) . " she have brain in plenty ( much more wit in she little finger than you have , my poor dear Briggs , in all you head ) . she manners be excellent , now I have form she . she be a Montmorency , , and blood be something , though I despise it for my part ; and she would have hold she own amongst those pompous stupid people much better than that unfortunate ironmonger 's daughter . " coincide as usual , and the " previous attachment " be then discuss in conjecture . " you poor friendless creature be always have some foolish tendre , " say . " you yourself , you know , be in love with a writing -
- master ( do not cry , -- you be always cry , and it will not bring he to life again ) , and I suppose this unfortunate have be silly and sentimental too -- some apothecary , or house - steward , or painter , or young curate , or something of that sort . " " poor thing ! poor thing ! " say ( who be think of twenty - four year back , and that hectic young writing - master whose lock of yellow hair , and whose letter , beautiful in they illegibility , she cherish in she old desk upstairs ) . " poor thing , poor thing ! " say . once more she be a fresh - cheek lass of eighteen ; she be at evening church , and the hectic writing - master and she be quaver out of the same psalm - book . " after such conduct on 's part , " say enthusiastically , " we family should do something . find out who be the objet , . I will set he up in a shop ; or order my portrait of he , you know ; or speak to my cousin , the and I will doter , and we will have a wedding , , and you shall make the breakfast , and be a bridesmaid . " declare that it would be delightful , and vow that she dear be always kind and generous , and go up to 's bedroom to conseal she and prattle about the offer , and the refusal , and the cause thereor ; and to hind at the generous intention of , and to find out who be the gentleman that have the mastery of 's heart . be very kind , very affectionate and affecte -- respond to 's offer of tenderness with grateful fervour -- own there be a secret attachment -- a delicious mystery -- what a pity miss Briggs have not remain half a minute longer at the keyhole ! might , perhaps , have tell more : but five minute after 's arrival in 's apartment , actually make she appearance there -- a unheard - of honour -- she impatience have overcome she ; she could not wait for the tardy operation of she ambassadress : so she come in person , and order out of the room . and express she approval of 's conduct , she ask particular of the interview , and the previous transaction which have bring about the astonishing offer of . say she have long have some notion of the partiality with which honoure she ( for he be in the habit of make he feeling know in a very frank and unreserved manner ) but , not to mention private reason with which she would not for the present trouble , Pitt's age , station , and habits be such as to render a marriage quite impossible ; and could a woman with any feeling of self - respect and any decency listen to proposal at such a moment , when the funeral of the lover 's decease wife have not actually take place ? " Nonsense , my dear , you would never have refuse he have there not be some one else in the case , " say , come to she point at once . " tell I the private reason ; what be the private reason ? there be some one ; who be it that have touch you heart ? " cast down she eye , and own there be . " you have guess right , dear lady , " she say , with a sweet simple falter voice . " you wonder at one so poor and friendless have a attachment , do not you ? I have never hear that poverty be any safeguard against it . I wish it be . " " my poor dear child , " cry , who be always quite ready to be sentimental , " be we passion unrequited , then ? be we pin in secret ? tell I all , and let I conseal you . " " I wish you could , dear Madam , " say in the same tearful tone . " indeed , indeed , I need it . " and she lay she head upon 's shoulder and weep there so naturally that the old lady , surprise into sympathy , embrace she with a almost maternal kindness , uttere many soothing protest of regard and affection for she , vow that she love she as a daughter , and would do everything in she power to serve she . " and now who be it , my dear ? be it that pretty 's brother ? you say something about a affair with he . I will ask he here , my dear . and you shall have he : indeed you shall . " " do not ask I now , " say . " you shall know all soon . indeed you shall . dear kind -- dear friend , may I say so ? " " that you may , my child , " the old lady replie , kiss she . " I can not tell you now , " sob out , " I be very miserable . but o ! love I always -- promise you will love I always . " and in the midst of mutual tear -- for the emotion of the younger woman have awaken the sympathy of the elder -- this promise be solemnly give by , who leave she little protege , bless and admir she as a dear , artless , tender - hear , affectionate , incomprehensible creature . and now she be leave alone to think over the sudden and wonderful event of the day , and
and of what have be and what might have be . what think you be the private feeling of , no ( begge she pardon ) of ? if , a few page back , the present writer claim the privilege of peeping into 's bedroom , and understand with the omniscience of the novelist all the gentle pain and passion which be toss upon that innocent pillow , why should he not declare himself to be 's confidante too , master of she secret , and seal - keeper of that young woman 's conscience ? well , then , in the first place , give way to some very sincere and touch regret that a piece of marvellous good fortune should have be so near she , and she actually oblige to decline it . in this natural emotion every properly regulate mind will certainly share . what good mother be there that would not commiserate a penniless spinster , who might have be my lady , and have share four thousand a year ? what well - breed young person be there in all , who will not feel for a hard - work , ingenious , meritorious girl , who get such a honourable , advantageous , provoke offer , just at the very moment when it be out of she power to accept it ? I be sure we friend 's disappointment deserve and will command every sympathy . I remember one night be in the fair myself , at a evening party . I observ old there also present , single out for she special attention and flattery little , the barrister 's wife , who be of a good family certainly , but , as we all know , be as poor as poor can be . what , I ask in my own mind , can cause this obsequiousness on the part of ; have Briefless get a county court , or have he wife have a fortune leave she ? explain presently , with that simplicity which distinguish all she conduct . " you know , " she say , " be granddaughter of , who be so ill at that he can not last six month . 's papa succeed ; so you see she will be a baronet 's daughter . " and ask and he wife to dinner the very next week . if the mere chance of become a baronet 's daughter can procure a lady such homage in the world , surely , surely we may respect the agony of a young woman who have lose the opportunity of become a baronet 's wife . who would have dream of die so soon ? she be one of those sickly woman that might have last these ten year -- think to herself , in all the woe of repentance -- and I might have be my lady ! I might have lead that old man whither I would . I might have thank . for she patronage , and for he insufferable condescension . I would have have the town - house newly furnish and decorate . I would have have the handsomest carriage in , and a box at the opera ; and I would have be present next season . all this might have be ; and now -- now all be doubt and mystery . but be a young lady of too much resolution and energy of character to permit herself much useless and unseemly sorrow for the irrevocable past ; so , have devote only the proper portion of regret to it , she wisely turn she whole attention towards the future , which be now vastly more important to she . and she survey she position , and its hope , doubt , and chance . in the first place , she be married -- that be a great fact . know it . she be not so much surprise into the avowal , as induce to make it by a sudden calculation . it must have come some day : and why not now as at a later period ? he who would have marry she himself must at least be silent with regard to she marriage . how would bear the news -- be the great question . have ; but she remember all have say ; the old lady 's avow contempt for birth ; she da liberal opinion ; she general romantic propensity ; she almost do attachment to she nephew , and she repeatedly express fondness for herself . she be so fond of he , think , that she will forgive he anything : she be so used to I that I do not think she could be comfortable without I : when the eclaircissement come there will be a scene , and hysteric , and a great quarrel , and then a great reconciliation . at all event , what use be there in delay ? the die be throw , and now or to - morrow the issue must be the same . and so , resolve that should have the news , the young person debate in she mind as to the best means of convey it to she ; and whether she should face the storm that must come , or fly and avoid it until it be first fury be blow over . in this state of meditation she write the follow letter : Dearest friend , the great crisis which we have debate about so often be come . half of my secret be know , and I have think and think , until I be quite sure that now be the time to reveal the whole of the mystery . come to I this morning , and make -- what do you think in . think of that ! poor little I . I might have be . how
how pleased . would have be : and ma tante if I have take precedence of she ! I might have be somebody be mamma , instead of -- o , I tremble , I tremble , when I think how soon we must tell all ! know I be married , and not know to whom , be not very much displease as yet . ma tante be actually angry that I should have refuse he . but she be all kindness and graciousness . she condescend to say I would have make he a good wife ; and vow that she will be a mother to you little . she will be shake when she first hear the news . but need we fear anything beyond a momentary anger ? I think not : I be sure not . she dote upon you so ( you naughty , good - for - nothing man ) , that she would pardon you anything : and , indeed , I believe , the next place in she heart be mine : and that she would be miserable without I . Dearest ! something tell I we shall conquer . you shall leave that odious regiment : quit game , racing , and be a good Boy ; and we shall all live in , and ma tante shall leave we all she money . I shall try and walk to - morrow at 3 in the usual place . if accompany I , you must come to dinner , and bring a answer , and put it in the third volume of 's . but , at all event , come to you own respect to , at 's , , . and I trust there be no reader of this little story who have not discernment enough to perceive that the ( a old schoolfellow , say , with whom she have resume a active correspondence of late , and who use to fetch these letter from the saddler 's ) , wear brass spur , and large curling mustachio , and be indeed no other than . the on the Pincushion how they be marry be not of the slightest consequence to anybody . what be to hinder a captain who be a major , and a young lady who be of age , from purchase a licence , and unit themselves at any church in this town ? who need to be tell , that if a woman have a will she will assuredly find a way ?-- my belief be that one day , when have go to pass the forenoon with she dear friend in , a lady very like she might have be see enter a church in the , in company with a gentleman with dyed mustachio , who , after a quarter of a hour 's interval , escort she back to the hackney - coach in waiting , and that this be a quiet bridal party . and who on earth , after the daily experience we have , can question the probability of a gentleman marrying anybody ? how many of the wise and learn have marry they cook ? do not himself , the most prudent of man , make a runaway match ? be not and both in love with they servant maid ? and be we to expect a heavy dragoon with strong desire and small brain , who have never control a passion in he life , to become prudent all of a sudden , and to refuse to pay any price for a indulgence to which he have a mind ? if people only make prudent marriage , what a stop to population there would be ! it seem to I , for my part , that 's marriage be one of the honestest action which we shall have to record in any portion of that gentleman 's biography which have to do with the present history . no one will say it be unmanly to be captivate by a woman , or , be captivate , to marry she ; and the admiration , the delight , the passion , the wonder , the unbounded confidence , and frantic adoration with which , by degree , this big warrior get to regard the little , be feeling which the lady at least will pronounce be not altogether discreditable to he . when she sang , every note thrill in he dull soul , and tingle through he huge frame . when she speak , he bring all the force of he brain to listen and wonder . if she be jocular , he use to revolve she joke in he mind , and explode over they half a hour afterwards in the street , to the surprise of the groom in the tilbury by he side , or the comrade ride with he in . she word be oracle to he , she smallest action mark by a infallible grace and wisdom . " how she sings , -- how she paint , " think he . " how she ride that kick mare at 's ! " and he would say to she in confidential moment , " by , , you be fit to be - in - , or Archbishop of , by . " be he case a rare one ? and do not we see every day in the world many a honest Hercule at the apron - string of , and great whisker Samsons prostrate in 's lap ? when , then , tell he that the great crisis be near , and the time for action have arrive , express himself as ready to act under she order , as he would be to charge with he troop at the command of he colonel . there be no need for he to put he letter into the third
third volume of . easily find a means to get rid of , she companion , and meet she faithful friend in " the usual place " on the next day . she have think over matter at night , and communicate to the result of she determination . he agree , of course , to everything ; be quite sure that it be all right : that what she propose be best ; that would infallibly relent , or " come round , " as he say , after a time . have 's resolution be entirely different , he would have follow they as implicitly . " you have head enough for both of we , , " say he . " you be sure to get we out of the scrape . I never see you equal , and I have meet with some clipper in my time too . " and with this simple confession of faith , the love - stricken dragoon leave she to execute he part of the project which she have form for the pair . it consist simply in the hiring of quiet lodging at , or in the neighbourhood of the barrack , for and . for have determine , and very prudently , we think , to fly . be only too happy at she resolve ; he have be entreat she to take this measure any time for week past . he prance off to engage the lodging with all the impetuosity of love . he agree to pay two guinea a week so readily , that the landlady regret she have ask he so little . he order in a piano , and half a nursery - house full of flower : and a heap of good thing . as for shawl , kid glove , silk stocking , gold french watch , bracelet and perfumery , he send they in with the profusion of blind love and unbounded credit . and have relieve he mind by this outpouring of generosity , he go and dine nervously at the club , wait until the great moment of he life should come . the occurrence of the previous day ; the admirable conduct of in refuse a offer so advantageous to she , the secret unhappiness prey upon she , the sweetness and silence with which she bear she affliction , make much more tender than usual . a event of this nature , a marriage , or a refusal , or a proposal , thrill through a whole household of woman , and set all they hysterical sympathy at work . as a observer of human nature , I regularly frequent 's , , during the genteel marriage season ; and though I have never see the bridegroom 's male friend give way to tear , or the beadle and officiate clergy any way affect , yet it be not at all uncommon to see woman who be not in the least concerned in the operation go on -- old lady who be long past marrying , stout middle - aged female with plenty of son and daughter , let alone pretty young creature in pink bonnet , who be on they promotion , and may naturally take a interest in the ceremony -- I say it be quite common to see the woman present piping , sobb , sniff ; hide they little face in they little useless pocket -handkerchief ; and heaive , old and young , with emotion . when my friend , the fashionable , marry the lovely , the excitement be so general that even the little snuffy old pew -opener who let I into the seat be in tear . and wherefore ? I inquire of my own soul : she be not go to be marry . and in a word , after the affair of , indulge in the utmost luxury of sentiment , and become a object of the most tender interest to they . in she absence solace herself with the most sentimental of the novel in she library . , with she secret grief , be the heroine of the day . that night sang more sweetly and talk more pleasantly than she have ever be hear to do in . she twin herself round the heart of . she speak lightly and laughingly of 's proposal , ridicule it as the foolish fancy of a old man ; and she eye fill with tear , and 's heart with unutterable pang of defeat , as she say she desire no other lot than to remain for ever with she dear benefactress . " my dear little creature , " the old lady say , " I do not intend to let you stir for year , that you may depend upon it . as for go back to that odious brother of mine after what have pass , it be out of the question . here you stay with I and . want to go to see she relation very often . , you may go when you like . but as for you , my dear , you must stay and take care of the old woman . " if have be then and there present , instead of be at the club nervously drink claret , the pair might have go down on they knee before the old spinster , avow all , and be forgive in a twinkling . but that good chance be deny to the young couple , doubtless in order that this story might be write , in which number of they wonderful adventur be narrated -- adventur which could never have occur to they if they have be house and shelte under the comfortable uninteresting forgiveness of . under 's order , in the establishment , be a young woman from , whose business it be , among other
other duty , to knock at 's door with that jug of hot water which would rather have perish than have present to the intruder . this girl , breed on the family estate , have a brother in 's troop , and if the truth be know , I daresay it would come out that she be aware of certain arrangement , which have a great deal to do with this history . at any rate she purchase a yellow shawl , a pair of green boot , and a light blue hat with a red feather with three guinea which give she , and as little be by no means too liberal with she money , no doubt it be for service render that be so bribed . on the second day after 's offer to , the sun rise as usual , and at the usual hour , the upstairs maid , knock at the door of the governess 's bedchamber . no answer be return , and she knock again . Silence be still uninterrupted ; and , with the hot water , open the door and enter the chamber . the little white dimity bed be as smooth and trim as on the day previous , when 's own hand have help to make it . two little trunk be cord in one end of the room ; and on the table before the window -- on the pincushion the great fat pincushion line with pink inside , and twil like a lady 's nightcap -- lay a letter . it have be repose there probably all night . advanc towards it on tiptoe , as if she be afraid to awake it -- look at it , and round the room , with a air of great wonder and satisfaction ; take up the letter , and grin intensely as she turn it round and over , and finally carry it into 's room below . how could tell that the letter be for , I should like to know ? all the schooling have have be at 's school , and she could no more read write than . " , , " the girl exclaim , " o , , something must have happen -- there be nobody in 's room ; the bed be not be slep in , and she have run away , and leave this letter for you , . " " what ! " cry Briggs , drop she comb , the thin wisp of faded hair fall over she shoulders ; " a elopement ! a fugitive ! what , what be this ? " and she eagerly break the neat seal , and , as they say , " devoure the contents " of the letter address to she . dear [ the refugee write ] , the kindest heart in the world , as yours be , will pity and sympathise with I and excuse I . with tear , and prayer , and blessing , I leave the home where the poor orphan have ever meet with kindness and affection . claim even superior to those of my benefactress call I hence . I go to my duty -- to my husband . yes , I be marry . my husband command I to seek the humble Home which we call ours . , break the news as you delicate sympathy will know how to do it -- to my dear , my beloved friend and benefactress . tell she , ere I go , I she tear on she dear pillow -- that pillow that I have so often soothe in sickness -- that I long again to watch -- oh , with what joy shall I return to dear ! how I tremble for the answer which be to seal my Fate ! when deign to offer I he hand , a honour of which my belov say I be DESERVING ( my blessing go with she for judge the poor orphan worthy to be ! ) I tell that I be already a wife . even he forgave I . but my courage fail I , when I should have tell he all -- that I could not be he wife , for I be this daughter ! I be wed to the best and most generous of men-- 's be my . at he command I open my lip , and follow he to we humble home , as I would through the World . o , my excellent and kind friend , intercede with my 's beloved aunt for he and the poor girl to whom all have show such . ask to receive she child . I can say no more , but blessing , blessing on all in the dear house I leave , pray you affectionate and . . just as have finish read this affecting and interesting document , which reinstate she in she position as first confidante of , enter the room . " here have just arrive by the mail from , and want some tea ; will you come down and make breakfast , ? " and to the surprise of , clasp she dressing - gow around she , the wisp of hair float dishevell behind she , the little curl -paper still stick in bunch round she forehead , sail down to . with the letter in she hand contain the wonderful news . " oh , , " gas , " sech a business . have a gone and run away with the Capting , and they be off to ! " we would devote a chapter to describe the emotion of , do not the passion of she mistress occupy we genteeler muse . when , numb with midnight travelling , and warm herself at the newly crack parlour fire , hear from the intelligence of the clandestine
clandestine marriage , she declare it be quite providential that she should have arrive at such a time to assist poor dear in support the shock -- that be a artful little hussy of whom she have always have she suspicions ; and that as for , she never wcould account for he aunt 's infatuation regard he , and have long consider he a profligate , lose , and abandon being . and this awful conduct , . say , will have at least this good effect , it will open poor dear 's eye to the real character of this wicked man . then . have a comfortable hot toast and tea ; and as there be a vacant room in the house now , there be no need for she to remain at the where the Portsmouth mail have set she down , and whence she order 's aide - de - camp the footman to bring away she trunk . , be it know , do not leave she room until near noon --tak chocolate in bed in the morning , while read the to she , or otherwise amuse herself or dawdling . the conspirator below agree that they would spare the dear lady 's feeling until she appear in she drawing - room : meanwhile it be announce to she that . have come up from by the mail , be stay at the , send she love to , and ask for breakfast with . the arrival of , which would not have cause any extreme delight at another period , be haile with pleasure now ; be pleased at the notion of a gossip with she sister - in - law regard the late , the funeral arrangement pend , and 's abrupt proposal to . it be not until the old lady be fairly ensconce in she usual arm - chair in the drawing - room , and the preliminary embrace and inquiry have take place between the ladie , that the conspirator think it advisable to submit she to the operation . who have not admire the artifice and delicate approach with which woman " prepare " they friend for bad news ? 's two friend make such a apparatus of mystery before they break the intelligence to she , that they work she up to the necessary degree of doubt and alarm . " and she refuse , my dear , dear , prepare yourself for it , " say , " because -- because she could not help herself . " " of course there be a reason , " answer . " she like somebody else . I tell so yesterday . " " like somebody else ! " gas . " of my dear friend , she be marry already . " " marry already , " chim in ; and both sate with clasped hand look from each other at they victim . " send she to I , the instant she come in . the little sly wretch : how da she not tell I ? " cry out . " she will not come in soon . prepare yourself , dear friend -- she be go out for a long time -- she be -- she be go altogether . " " gracious goodness , and who be to make my chocolate ? send for she and have she back ; I desire that she come back , " the old lady say . " she decamp last night , ma 'am , " cry . " she leave a letter for I , " exclaim . " she have marry to -- " " prepare she , for heaven 's sake . do not torture she , my dear . " " she have marry to whom ? " cry the spinster in a nervous fury . " To -- to a relation of -- " " she refuse , " cry the victim . " speak at once . do not drive I mad . " " of ma 'am -- prepare she , -- she be marry to . " " marry -- governess -- nobod -- get out of my house , you fool , you idiot -- you stupid old Briggs -- how dare you ? you be in the plot -- you make he marry , think that I would leave my money from he -- you do , , " the poor old lady scream in hysteric sentence . " I , , ask a member of this family to marry a drawing - master 's daughter ? " " she mother be a Montmorency , " cry out the old lady , pull at the bell with all she might . " she mother be a opera girl , and she have be on the stage or worse herself , " say . give a final scream , and fall back in a faint . they be force to take she back to the room which she have just quit . one fit of hysteric succeed another . the doctor be send for -- the apothecary arrive . take up the post of nurse by she bedside . " she relation ought to be round about she , " that amiable woman say . she have scarcely be carry up to she room , when a new person arrive to whom it be also necessary to break the news . this be . " 's ? " he say , come in . " where be she trap ? she be come with I to 's . " " have you not hear the astonishing intelligence regard she surreptitious union ? " ask . " what be that to I ? " ask . " I know she be marry . that make no odd . tell she to come down at once , and not
not keep I . " " be you not aware , sir , " ask , " that she have leave we roof , to the dismay of , who be nearly kill by the intelligence of 's union with she ? " when hear that be marry to he son , he break out into a fury of language , which it would do no good to repeat in this place , as indeed it send poor Briggs shudder out of the room ; and with she we will shut the door upon the figure of the frenzied old man , wild with hatred and insane with baffled desire . one day after he go to 's , he burst like a madman into the room she have use when there -- dash open she box with he foot , and fling about she papers , clothes , and other relic . , the butler 's daughter , take some of they . the child dress themselves and act play in the other . it be but a few day after the poor mother have go to she lonely burying - place ; and be laid , unwept and disregard , in a vault full of stranger . " suppose the old lady do not come to , " say to he little wife , as they sate together in the snug little lodging . she have be try the new piano all the morning . the new glove fit she to a nicety ; the new shawl become she wonderfully ; the new ring glitter on she little hand , and the new watch tick at she waist ; " suppose she do not come round , eh , ? " " I will make you fortune , " she say ; and pat 's cheek . " you can do anything , " he say , kiss the little hand . " by you can ; and we will drive down to the and , and dine , by . " buy a if there be any exhibition in all Vanity fair which and can visit arm in arm together ; where you light on the strangest contrast laughable and tearful : where you may be gentle and pathetic , or savage and cynical with perfect propriety : it be at one of those public assemblie , a crowd of which be advertise every day in the last page of the newspaper , and over which the late use to preside with so much dignity . there be very few people , as I fancy , who have not attend at these meeting , and all with a taste for moralizing must have think , with a sensation and interest not a little startling and queer , of the day when they turn shall come too , and will sell by the order of Diogene ' assignee , or will be instruct by the executor , to offer to public competition , the library , furniture , plate , wardrobe , and choice cellar of wine of decease . even with the most selfish disposition , the Vanity Fairian , as he witness this sordid part of the obsequy of a depart friend , can not but feel some sympathy and regret . my 's remains be in the family vault : the statuary be cut a inscription veraciously commemorat he virtue , and the sorrow of he heir , who be dispose of he goods . what guest at 's table can pass the familiar house without a sigh ?-- the familiar house of which the light use to shine so cheerfully at seven o'clock , of which the hall - door open so readily , of which the obsequious servants , as you pass up the comfortable stair , sound you name from landing to lande , until it reach the apartment where jolly old welcome he friend ! what a number of they he have ; and what a noble way of entertain they . how witty people use to be here who be morise when they get out of the door ; and how courteous and friendly man who slander and hate each other everywhere else ! he be pompous , but with such a cook what would one not swallow ? he be rather dull , perhaps , but would not such wine make any conversation pleasant ? we must get some of he Burgundy at any price , the mourner cry at he club . " I get this box at old Dives 's sale , " say , hand it round , " one of 's mistress -- pretty thing , be it not ?-- sweet miniature , " and they talk of the way in which young Dive be dissipat he fortune . how change the house be , though ! the front be patch over with bill , set forth the particular of the furniture in staring capital . they have hang a shred of carpet out of a upstairs window -- a half dozen of porter be lounge on the dirty step -- the hall swarm with dingy guest of oriental countenance , who thrust print card into you hand , and offer to bid . old woman and amateur have invade the upper apartment , pinch the bed - curtain , pok into the feather , shampoo the mattress , and clapp the wardrobe drawer to and . Enterprise young housekeeper be measure the look - glass and hanging to see if they will suit the new menage ( Snob will brag for year that he have purchase this or that at 's sale ) , and be sit on the great mahogany dining - table , in the dining - room below , wave the ivory hammer , and employ all the artifice of eloquence , enthusiasm , entreaty , reason , despair ; shout to
to he people ; satirize for he sluggishness ; inspirit into action ; implor , command , bellow , until down come the hammer like fate , and we pass to the next lot . of , who would ever have thought , as we sit round the broad table sparkling with plate and spotless linen , to have seen such a dish at the head of it as that roaring auctioneer ? it be rather late in the sale . the excellent drawing - room furniture by the best maker ; the rare and famous wine select , regardless of cost , and with the well - know taste of the purchaser ; the rich and complete set of family plate have be sell on the previous day . of the best wine ( which all have a great character among amateur in the neighbourhood ) have be purchase for he master , who know they very well , by the butler of we friend , , of . a small portion of the most useful article of the plate have be buy by some young stockbroker from the City . and now the public be invite to the purchase of minor object , it happen that the orator on the table be expatiat on the merit of a picture , which he seek to recommend to he audience : it be by no means so select or numerous a company as have attend the previous day of the auction . " no. 369 , " roar . " Portrait of a gentleman on a elephant . who will bid for the gentleman on the elephant ? lift up the picture , , and let the company examine this lot . " a long , pale , military - look gentleman , seat demurely at the mahogany table , could not help grinn as this valuable lot be show by . " turn the elephant to the , . what shall we say , sir , for the elephant ? " but the captain , blush in a very hurried and discomfit manner , turn away he head . " shall we say twenty guinea for this work of art ?--fifteen , five , name you own price . the gentleman without the elephant be worth five pound . " " I wonder it be not come down with he , " say a professional wag , " he be anyhow a precious big one " ; at which ( for the elephant - rider be represent as of a very stout figure ) there be a general giggle in the room . " do not be try to deprecate the value of the lot , , " say ; " let the company examine it as a work of art -- the attitude of the gallant animal quite accord to yonatu ' ; the gentleman in a nankeen jacket , he gun in he hand , be go to the chase ; in the distance a banyhann tree and a pagody , most likely resemblances of some interesting spot in we famous eastern possession . how much for this lot ? come , gentlemen , do not keep I here all day . " some one bid five shilling , at which the military gentleman look towards the quarter from which this splendo offer have come , and there see another officer with a young lady on he arm , who both appear to be highly amused with the scene , and to whom , finally , this lot be knock down for half a guinea . he at the table look more surprised and discompose than ever when he spy this pair , and he head sank into he military collar , and he turn he back upon they , so as to avoid they altogether . of all the other article which have the honour to offer for public competition that day it be not we purpose to make mention , save of one only , a little square piano , which come down from the upper region of the house ( the state grand piano have be dispose of previously ) ; this the young lady try with a rapid and skilful hand ( make the officer blush and start again ) , and for it , when its turn come , she agent begin to bid . but there be a opposition here . the aide - de - camp in the service of the officer at the table bid against the gentleman employ by the elephant purchaser , and a brisk battle ensue over this little piano , the combatant be greatly encourage by . at last , when the competition have be prolonge for some time , the elephant captain and lady desiste from the race ; and the hammer come down , the auctioneer say :-- " , twenty - five , " and 's chief thus become the proprietor of the little square piano . have effect the purchase , he sate up as if he be greatly relieved , and the unsuccessful competitor catch a glimpse of he at this moment , the lady say to she friend , " why , , it be . " I suppose be discontent with the new piano she husband have hire for she , or perhaps the proprietor of that instrument have fetch it away , decline farther credit , or perhaps she have a particular attachment for the one which she have just try to purchase , recollect it in old day , when she use to play upon it , in the little sitting - room of we dear . the sale be at the old house in , where we pass some evening together at the beginning of this story . good old be a ruin man . he name have be proclaim as a defaulter on the stock
stock , and he bankruptcy and commercial extermination have follow . 's butler come to buy some of the famious port wine to transfer to the cellar over the way . as for one dozen well - manufacture silver spoon and fork at per oz. , and one dozen dessert ditto ditto , there be three young stockbroker ( Messr . , , and , of , indeed ) , who , have have dealings with the old man , and kindness from he in day when he be kind to everybody with whom he deal , send this little spar out of the wreck with they love to good ; and with respect to the piano , as it have be 's , and as she might miss it and want one now , and as could no more play upon it than he could dance on the tight rope , it be probable that he do not purchase the instrument for he own use . in a word , it arrive that even at a wonderful small cottage in a street lead from the -- one of those street which have the finest romantic name --( this be call , - ) , where the house look like baby - house ; where the people , look out of the first - floor window , must infallibly , as you think , sit with they foot in the parlour ; where the shrub in the little garden in front bloom with a perennial display of little child 's pinafore , little red sock , cap , & c. ( polyandria polygynia ) ; whence you hear the sound of jingling spinet and woman singe ; where little porter pots hang on the railing sunn themselves ; whither of evening you see clerk padding wearily : here it be that , the clerk of , have he domicile , and in this asylum the good old gentleman hide he head with he wife and daughter when the crash come . have act as a man of he disposition would , when the announcement of the family misfortune reach he . he do not come to , but he write to he mother to draw upon he agent for whatever money be want , so that he kind break - spirite old parent have no present poverty to fear . this do , go on at the boarding - house at pretty much as before . he drive he curricle ; he drank he claret ; he play he rubber ; he tell he indian story , and the irish widow consol and flatter he as usual . he present of money , needful as it be , make little impression on he parent ; and I have hear say that the first day on which she see she father lift up he head after the failure be on the receipt of the packet of fork and spoon with the young stockbroker ' love , over which he burst out cry like a child , be greatly more affected than even he wife , to whom the present be address . , the junior of the house , who purchase the spoon for the firm , be , in fact , very sweet upon , and offer for she in spite of all . he marry ( daughter of and , the eminent cornfactor ) with a handsome fortune in 1820 ; and be now live in splendour , and with a numerous family , at he elegant villa , . but we must not let the recollection of this good fellow cause we to diverge from the principal history . I hope the reader have much too good a opinion of and . to suppose that they ever would have dream of pay a visit to so remote a district as , if they think the family whom they propose to honour with a visit be not merely out of fashion , but out of money , and could be serviceable to they in no possible manner . be entirely surprised at the sight of the comfortable old house where she have meet with no small kindness , ransack by broker and bargainer , and its quiet family treasure give up to public desecration and plunder . a month after she flight , she have bethotch she of , and , with a horse - laugh , have express a perfect willingness to see young again . " he be a very agreeable acquaintance , , " the wag add . " I would like to sell he another horse , . I would like to play a few more game at billiards with he . he would be what I call useful just now , .-- ha , ha ! " by which sort of speech it be not to be suppose that have a deliberate desire to cheat at play , but only wish to take that fair advantage of he which almost every sporting in consider to be he due from he neighbour . the old aunt be long in " come - to . " a month have elapse . be deny the door by ; he servants could not get a lodgment in the house at ; he letter be send back unopened . never stir out -- she be unwell -- and . remain still and never leave she . and he wife both of they augure evil from the continue presence of . " Gad , I begin to perceive now why she be always bring we together at 's , " say . " what a artful little woman ! " ejaculate . " well , I do not regret it , if you do not , " the cry , still in a amorous rapture with he wife , who reward he with a kiss by way of reply , and
and be indeed not a little gratify by the generous confidence of she husband . " if he have but a little more brain , " she think to herself , " I might make something of he " ; but she never let he perceive the opinion she have of he ; listen with indefatigable complacency to he story of the stable and the mess ; laugh at all he joke ; feel the greatest interest in , whose cab - horse have come down , and , who have be take up in a gambling - house , and , who be go to ride the steeplechase . when he come home she be alert and happy : when he go out she press he to go : when he stay at home , she play and sang for he , make he good drink , superintend he dinner , warm he slipper , and steep he soul in comfort . the best of woman ( I have hear my grandmother say ) be hypocrite . we do not know how much they hide from we : how watchful they be when they seem most artless and confidential : how often those frank smile which they wear so easily , be trap to cajole or elude or disarm -- I do not mean in you mere coquette , but you domestic model , and paragon of female virtue . who have not see a woman hide the dulness of a stupid husband , or coax the fury of a savage one ? we accept this amiable slavishness , and praise a woman for it : we call this pretty treachery truth . a good housewife be of necessity a humbug ; and 's husband be hoodwink , as be -- only in a different way . by these attention , that veteran rake , , find himself convert into a very happy and submissive married man . he former haunt know he not . they ask about he once or twice at he club , but do not miss he much : in those boot of Vanity fair people seldom do miss each other . he seclude wife ever smile and cheerful , he little comfortable lodging , snug meal , and homely evening , have all the charms of novelty and secrecy . the marriage be not yet declare to the world , or publish in the . all he creditor would have come rush on he in a body , have they know that he be united to a woman without fortune . " my relation will not cry fie upon I , " say , with rather a bitter laugh ; and she be quite contente to wait until the old aunt should be reconcile , before she claim she place in society . so she live at , and meanwhile see no one , or only those few of she husband 's male companion who be admit into she little dining - room . these be all charme with she . the little dinner , the laugh and chat , the music afterwards , delighte all who participate in these enjoyment . major never think about ask to see the marriage licence , be perfectly enchant with she skill in make punch . and young ( who be fond of piquet , and whom would often invite ) be evidently and quickly smite by ; but she own circumspection and modesty never forsook she for a moment , and 's reputation as a fire - eating and jealous warrior be a further and complete defence to he little wife . there be gentleman of very good blood and fashion in this city , who never have enter a lady 's drawing - room ; so that though 's marriage might be talk about in he county , where , of course , . have spread the news , in it be doubt , or not heed , or not talk about at all . he live comfortably on credit . he have a large capital of debt , which lay out judiciously , will carry a man along for many year , and on which certain man about town contrive to live a hundred time better than even man with ready money can do . indeed who be there that walk street , but can point out a half - dozen of man ride by he splendidly , while he be on foot , court by fashion , bow into they carriage by tradesman , deny themselves nothing , and live on who know what ? we see Thriftless prance in the park , or dart in he brougham down : we eat he dinner serve on he miraculous plate . " how do this begin , " we say , " or where will it end ? " " my dear fellow , " I hear once say , " I owe money in every capital in . " the end must come some day , but in the meantime jack thrive as much as ever ; people be glad enough to shake he by the hand , ignore the little dark story that be whisper every now and then against he , and pronounce he a good - natured , jovial , reckless fellow . Truth oblige we to confess that have marry a gentleman of this order . everything be plentiful in he house but ready money , of which they menage pretty early feel the want ; and read the one day , and come upon the announcement of " . to be by purchase , vice , who exchange , " utter that sentiment regard 's lover , which end in the visit to . when and he wife wish to communicate with at the sale , and to know particular of the catastrophe which have befall 's old acquaintance
acquaintance , the have vanish ; and such information as they get be from a stray porter or broker at the auction . " look at they with they hooked beanks , " say , get into the buggy , she picture under she arm , in great glee . " they be like vulture after a battle . " " do not know . never be in action , my dear . ask ; he be in , aide - de -camp to . " " he be a very kind old man , , " say ; " I be really sorry he be go wrong . " " of stockbroker -- bankrupt -- use to it , you know , " reply , cut a fly off the horse 's ear . " I wish we could have afforde some of the plate , , " the wife continue sentimentally . " five - and - twenty guinea be monstrously dear for that little piano . we choose it at 's for , when she come from school . it only cost five - and - thirty then . " " what - would '-ye -call 'em , ' will cry off now , I suppose , since the family be smashed . how cut up you pretty little friend will be ; hey , ? " " I daresay she will recover it , " say with a smile -- and they drive on and talk about something else . who play on the we surprised story now find itself for a moment among very famous event and personage , and hang on to the skirt of history . when the eagle of , the Corsican upstart , be fly from , where they have perch after a brief sojourn in , and from steeple to steeple until they reach the towers of , I wonder whether the Imperial bird have any eye for a little corner of the parish of , , which you might have think so quiet , that even the whirring and flapping of those mighty wing would pass unobserved there ? " have land at . " such news might create a panic at , and cause to drop he card , and take into a corner , and and to wag they head together , while , and even the present of , be puzzl ; but how be this intelligence to affect a young lady in , before whose door the watchman sang the hour when she be asleep : who , if she stroll in the square , be guard there by the railing and the beadle : who , if she walk ever so short a distance to buy a ribbon in , be follow by with a enormous cane : who be always care for , dress , put to bed , and watch over by ever so many guardian angels , with and without wage ? , I say , be it not hard that the fateful rush of the great Imperial struggle can not take place without affect a poor little harmless girl of eighteen , who be occupy in billing and cooe , or work muslin collar in ? you too , kindly , homely flower !-- be the great roaring war tempest come to sweep you down , here , although cower under the shelter of ? yes ; be flinge he last stake , and poor little 's happiness form , somehow , part of it . in the first place , she father 's fortune be sweep down with that fatal news . all he speculation have of late go wrong with the luckless old gentleman . Venture have fail ; merchant have break ; fund have risen when he calculate they would fall . what need to particularize ? if success be rare and slow , everybody know how quick and easy ruin be . have keep he own sad counsel . everything seem to go on as usual in the quiet , opulent house ; the good - natured mistress pursue , quite unsuspiciously , she bust idleness , and daily easy avocation ; the daughter absorb still in one selfish , tender think , and quite regardless of all the world beside , when that final crash come , under which the worthy family fell . one night be write card for a party ; the have give one , and she must not be behindhand ; , who have come home very late from the City , sate silent at the chimney side , while he wife be prattl to he ; Emmy have go up to she room ailing and low- spirit . " she be not happy , " the mother go on . " neglect she . I have no patience with the air of those people . the girl have not be in the house these three week ; and have be twice in town without come . see he at the . would marry she I be sure : and there be who , I think , would -- only I hate all army man . such a dandy as have become . with he military air , indeed ! we must show some folk that we be as good as they . only give Dale any encouragement , and you will see . we must have a party , why do not you speak , ? shall I say fortnight ? why do not you answer ? , , what have happen ? " spring up out of he chair to meet he wife , who run to he . he seize she in he arm , and say with a hasty voice , " we be ruin , . we have get the world to begin over again , dear . it be best that you should know all ,
, and at once . " as he speak , he tremble in every limb , and almost fell . he think the news would have overpower he wife -- he wife , to whom he have never say a hard word . but it be he that be the most move , sudden as the shock be to she . when he sank back into he seat , it be the wife that take the office of consoler . she take he trembling hand , and kiss it , and put it round she neck : she call he she -- she dear -- she old man -- she kind old man ; she pour out a hundred word of incoherent love and tenderness ; she faithful voice and simple caress wrotch this sad heart up to a inexpressible delight and anguish , and cheer and solace he over -burdened soul . only once in the course of the long night as they sate together , and poor open he pent - up soul , and tell the story of he loss and embarrassment -- the treason of some of he oldest friend , the manly kindness of some , from whom he never could have expect it -- in a general confession -- only once do the faithful wife give way to emotion . " my , my , it will break 's heart , " she say . the father have forget the poor girl . she be lie , awake and unhappy , overhead . in the midst of friend , home , and kind parent , she be alone . to how many people can any one tell all ? who will be open where there be no sympathy , or have call to speak to those who never can understand ? we gentle be thus solitary . she have no confidante , so to speak , ever since she have anything to confide . she could not tell the old mother she doubt and care ; the would - be sister see every day more strange to she . and she have misgiving and fear which she da not acknowledge to herself , though she be always secretly brood over they . she hebe try to persist in asserting that be worthy and faithful to she , though she know otherwise . how many a thing have she say , and get no echo from he . how many suspicion of selfishness and indifference have she to encounter and obstinately overcome . to whom could the poor little martyr tell these daily struggle and torture ? she hero himself only half understand she . she do not dare to own that the man she love be she inferior ; or to feel that she have give she heart away too soon . give once , the pure bashful maiden be too modest , too tender , too trustful , too weak , too much woman to recall it . we be Turk with the affections of we woman ; and have make they subscribe to we doctrine too . we let they body go abroad liberally enough , with smile and ringlet and pink bonnet to disguise they instead of veil and yakmak . but they soul must be see by only one man , and they obey not unwillingly , and consent to remain at home as we slave --minister to we and do drudgery for we . so imprison and torture be this gentle little heart , when in the month of , 1815 , land at , and fle , and all be in alarm , and the fund fell , and old be ruin . we be not go to follow the worthy old stockbroker through those last pang and agony of ruin through which he pass before he commercial demise befell . they declare he at the stock ; he be absent from he house of business : he bill be protest : he act of bankruptcy formal . the house and furniture of be seize and sell up , and he and he family be thrust away , as we have see , to hide they head where they might . have not the heart to review the domestic establishment who have appear now and anon in we page and of whom he be now force by poverty to take leave . the wage of those worthy people be dischar with that punctuality which men frequently show who only owe in great sum -- they be sorry to leave good place -- but they do not break they heart at parting from they adored master and mistress . 's maid be profuse in condolence , but go off quite resign to better herself in a genteeler quarter of the town . , with the infatuation of he profession , determine on set up a public - house . honest old indeed , who have see the birth of and , and the wooing of and he wife , be for stay by they without wage , have amass a considerable sum in they service : and she accompany the fall people into they new and humble place of refuge , where she ten they and grumble against they for a while . of all 's opponent in he debate with he creditor which now ensue , and harass the feeling of the humiliate old gentleman so severely , that in six week he olden more than he have do for fifteen year before -- the most determined and obstinate seem to be , he old friend and neighbour -- , whom he have set up in life -- who be under a hundred obligation to he -- and whose son be to marry 's daughter . any one of these circumstance would account for the bitterness of 's opposition . when one man have be under very remarkable obligation
obligation to another , with whom he subsequently quarrel , a common sense of decency , as it be , make of the former a much severer enemy than a mere stranger would be . to account for you own hard - heartedness and ingratitude in such a case , you be bound to prove the other party 's crime . it be not that you be selfish , brutal , and angry at the failure of a speculation -- no , no -- it be that you partner have lead you into it by the basest treachery and with the most sinister motive . from a mere sense of consistency , a persecutor be bound to show that the fallen man be a villain -- otherwise he , the persecutor , be a wretch himself . and as a general rule , which may make all creditor who be inclin to be severe pretty comfortable in they minds , no man embarrass be altogether honest , very likely . they conceal something ; they exaggerate chance of good luck ; hide away the real state of affair ; say that thing be flourish when they be hopeless , keep a smiling face ( a dreary smile it be ) upon the verge of bankruptcy -- be ready to lay hold of any pretext for delay or of any money , so as to stave off the inevitable ruin a few day longer . " down with such dishonesty , " say the creditor in triumph , and revile he sinke enemy . " you fool , why do you catch at a straw ? " calm good sense say to the man that be drown . " you villain , why do you shrink from plunge into the irretrievable ? " say prosperity to the poor devil battling in that black gulf . who have not remark the readiness with which the closest of friend and honestest of man suspect and accuse each other of cheate when they fall out on money matter ? everybody do it . everybody be right , I suppose , and the world be a rogue . then have the intolerable sense of former benefit to goad and irritate he : these be always a cause of hostility aggravate . finally , he have to break off the match between 's daughter and he son ; and as it have go very far indeed , and as the poor girl 's happiness and perhaps character be compromise , it be necessary to show the strongest reason for the rupture , and for to prove to be a very bad character indeed . at the meeting of creditor , then , he comport himself with a savageness and scorn towards , which almost succeed in break the heart of that ruin bankrupt man . on 's intercourse with he put a instant veto --menace the youth with malediction if he break he command , and vilipend the poor innocent girl as the basest and most artful of vixen . one of the great condition of anger and hatred be , that you must tell and believe lie against the hate object , in order , as we say , to be consistent . when the great crash come -- the announcement of ruin , and the departure from , and the declaration that all be over between she and -- all over between she and love , she and happiness , she and faith in the world -- a brutal letter from tell she in a few curt line that she father 's conduct have be of such a nature that all engagement between the family be at a end -- when the final award come , it do not shock she so much as she parent , as she mother rather expect ( for himself be entirely prostrate in the ruin of he own affair and shatte honour ) . take the news very palely and calmly . it be only the confirmation of the dark presage which have long gone before . it be the mere reading of the sentence -- of the crime she have long ago be guilty -- the crime of loving wrongly , too violently , against reason . she tell no more of she thought now than she have before . she seem scarcely more unhappy now when convince all hope be over , than before when she feel but da not confess that it be gone . so she change from the large house to the small one without any mark or difference ; remain in she little room for the most part ; pin silently ; and die away day by day . I do not mean to say that all female be so . my dear , I do not think you heart would break in this way . you be a strong - minded young woman with proper principles . I do not venture to say that mine would ; it have suffer , and , it must be confess , survive . but there be some soul thus gently constitute , thus frail , and delicate , and tender . whenever old think of the affair between and , or allude to it , it be with bitterness almost as great as himself have show . he curse and he family as heartless , wick , and ungrateful . no power on earth , he swore , would induce he to marry he daughter to the son of such a villain , and he order to banish from she mind , and to return all the present and letter which she have ever have from he . she promise acquiescence , and try to obey . she put up the two or three trinket : and , as for the letter , she draw they out of the place where she keep they ;
; and read they over -- as if she do not know they by heart already : but she could not part with they . that effort be too much for she ; she place they back in she bosom again -- as you have see a woman nurse a child that be dead . yong feel that she would die or lose she sense outright , if tear away from this last consolation . how she use to blush and lighten up when those letter come ! how she use to trip away with a beat heart , so that she might read unseen ! if they be cold , yet how perversely this fond little soul interpret they into warmth . if they be short or selfish , what excuse she find for the writer ! it be over these few worthless papers that she brood and brood . she live in she past life -- every letter seem to recall some circumstance of it . how well she remembe they all ! he look and tone , he dress , what he say and how -- these relic and remembrance of dead affection be all that be leave she in the world . and the business of she life , be -- to watch the corpse of Love . to death she look with inexpressible longing . then , she think , I shall always be able to follow he . I be not praise she conduct or set she up as a model for to imitate . know how to regulate she feeling better than this poor little creature . would never have commit herself as that imprudent have do ; pledge she love irretrievably ; confess she heart away , and get back nothing -- only a britle promise which be snapt and worthless in a moment . a long engagement be a partnership which one party be free to keep or to break , but which involve all the capital of the other . be cautious then , young lady ; be wary how you engage . be shy of love frankly ; never tell all you feel , or ( a better way still ) , feel very little . see the consequence of be prematurely honest and confid , and mistrust yourselves and everybody . get yourselves marry as they do in , where the lawyer be the bridesmaid and confidante . at any rate , never have any feeling which may make you uncomfortable , or make any promise which you can not at any require moment command and withdraw . that be the way to get on , and be respect , and have a virtuous character in . if could have hear the comment regard she which be make in the circle from which she father 's ruin have just drive she , she would have see what she own crime were , and how entirely she character be jeopardise . such criminal imprudence never know of ; such horrid familiarity have always condemned , and the end might be a warning to she daughter . " , of course , could not marry a bankrupt 's daughter , " the say . " it be quite enough to have be swindle by the father . as for that little , she folly have really pass all -- " " all what ? " roar out . " have not they be engage ever since they be child ? be not it as good as a marriage ? dare any soul on earth breato a word against the sweetest , the purest , the tenderest , the most angelical of young woman ? " " , , do not be so highty - tighty with . we be not man . we can not fight you , " say . " we have say nothing against : but that she conduct throughout be most Imprudent , not to call it by any worse name ; and that she parent be people who certainly merit they misfortune . " " have not you better , now that be free , propose for she yourself , ? " ask sarcastically . " it would be a most eligible family connection . he ! he ! " " I marry she ! " say , blush very much , and talk quick . " if you be so ready , young lady , to chop and change , do you suppose that she be ? laugh and sneer at that angel . she can not hear it ; and she be miserable and unfortunate , and deserve to be laugh at . go on joking , . you be the wit of the family , and the other like to hear it . " " I must tell you again we be not in a barrack , , " remark . " in a barrack , by -- I wish anybody in a barrack would say what you do , " cry out this uproused british lion . " I should like to hear a man breato a word against she , by . but man do not talk in this way , : it be only woman , who get together and hiss , and shriek , and cackle . there , get away -- do not begin to cry . I only say you be a couple of geese , " will say , perceive 's pink eyes be begin to moisten as usual . " well , you be not gese , you be swan -- anything you like , only do , do leave alone . " anything like 's infatuation about that silly little flirting , ogling thing be never know , the mamma and sister agree together in think : and they tremble lest , she engagement be off with , she should take up immediately she
she other admirer and . in which foreboding these worthy young woman no doubt judge accord to the best of they experience ; or rather ( for as yet they have have no opportunity of marrying or of jilting ) accord to they own notion of right and wrong . " it be a mercy , , that the regiment be order abroad , " the girl say . " this danger , at any rate , be spa we brother . " such , indeed , be the fact ; and so it be that the french emperor come in to perform a part in this domestic comedy of Vanity fair which we be now play , and which would never have be enact without the intervention of this august mute personage . it be he that ruin the and . it be he whose arrival in he capital call up all in arm to defend he there ; and all to oust he . while the french nation and army be swear fidelity round the eagle in the , four mighty european host be get in motion for the great chasse a l'aigle ; and one of these be a british army , of which two heroe of ours , and , form a portion . the news of 's escape and landing be receive by the gallant -- th with a fiery delight and enthusiasm , which everybody can understand who know that famous corps . from the colonel to the smallest drummer in the regiment , all be fill with hope and ambition and patriotic fury ; and thanke the french emperor as for a personal kindness in come to disturb the peace of . now be the time the -- th have so long pante for , to show they comrade in arm that they could fight as well as the , and that all the pluck and valour of the -- th have not be kill by the and the yellow fever . and look to get they company without purchase . before the end of the campaign ( which she resolve to share ) , hope to write herself , . we two friend ( and ) be quite as much excited as the rest : and each in he way -- very quietly , very loudly and energetically -- be bent upon do he duty , and gain he share of honour and distinction . the agitation thrill through the country and army in consequence of this news be so great , that private matters be little heed : and hence probably , just gazet to he company , busy with preparation for the march , which must come inevitably , and pante for further promotion -- be not so much affect by other incidents which would have intereste he at a more quiet period . he be not , it must be confess , very much cast down by good old 's catastrophe . he try he new uniform , which become he very handsomely , on the day when the first meeting of the creditor of the unfortunate gentleman take place . he father tell he of the wicked , rascally , shameful conduct of the bankrupt , remind he of what he have say about , and that they connection be break off for ever ; and give he that even a good sum of money to pay for the new clothes and epaulet in which he look so well . money be always useful to this free - hand young fellow , and he take it without many word . the bills be up in the house , where he have pass so many , many happy hour . he could see they as he walk from home that night ( to the ' , where he put up when in town ) shining white in the moon . that comfortable home be shut , then , upon and she parent : where have they take refuge ? the thought of they ruin affect he not a little . he be very melancholy that night in the coffee - room at the ' ; and drank a good deal , as he comrade remark there . come in presently , caution he about the drink , which he only take , he say , because he be deuce low ; but when he friend begin to put to he clumsy inquiry , and ask he for news in a significant manner , decline enter into conversation with he , avow , however , that he be devilish disturbed and unhappy . three day afterwards , find in he room at the barrack -- he head on the table , a number of papers about , the young evidently in a state of great despondency . " she -- she have send I back some thing I give she -- some damned trinket . look here ! " there be a little packet direct in the well - know hand to , and some thing lie about -- a ring , a silver knife he have buy , as a boy , for she at a fair ; a gold chain , and a locket with hair in it . " it be all over , " say he , with a groan of sickening remorse . " look , , you may read it if you like . " there be a little letter of a few line , to which he point , which say : my papa have order I to return to you these present , which you make in happier day to I ; and I be to write to you for the last time . I think , I know you feel as much as I do the blow which have come upon we . it be I that absolve you from a engagement
engagement which be impossible in we present misery . I be sure you have no share in it , or in the cruel suspicion of , which be the hardest of all we grief to bear . farewell . farewell . I pray to strengthen I to bear this and other calamity , and to bless you always . . I shall often play upon the piano -- you piano . it be like you to send it . be very soft -hearted . the sight of woman and child in pain always use to melt he . the idea of break - hearted and lonely tore that good - natured soul with anguish . and he break out into a emotion , which anybody who like may consider unmanly . he swore that be a angel , to which say aye with all he heart . he , too , have be review the history of they life -- and have see she from she childhood to she present age , so sweet , so innocent , so charmingly simple , and artlessly fond and tender . what a pang it be to lose all that : to have have it and not prize it ! a thousand homely scene and recollection crowd on he -- in which he always see she good and beautiful . and for himself , he blush with remorse and shame , as the remembrance of he own selfishness and indifference contrast with that perfect purity . for a while , glory , war , everything be forget , and the pair of friend talk about she only . " where be they ? " ask , after a long talk , and a long pause -- and , in truth , with no little shame at think that he have take no step to follow she . " where be they ? there be no address to the note . " know . he have not merely send the piano ; but have write a note to , and ask permission to come and see she -- and he have see she , and too , yesterday , before he come down to ; and , what be more , he have bring that farewell letter and packet which have so move they . the good - natured fellow have find Mrs . Sedley only too willing to receive he , and greatly agitate by the arrival of the piano , which , as she conjecture , must have come from , and be a signal of amity on he part . do not correct this error of the worthy lady , but listen to all she story of complaint and misfortunes with great sympathy -- condol with she loss and privation , and agree in reprehend the cruel conduct of towards he first benefactor . when she have ease she overflow bosom somewhat , and pour forth many of she sorrow , he have the courage to ask actually to see , who be above in she room as usual , and whom she mother lead trembling downstair . she appearance be so ghastly , and she look of despair so pathetic , that honest be frightene as he beheld it ; and read the most fatal foreboding in that pale fix face . after sit in he company a minute or two , she put the packet into he hand , and say , " take this to , if you please , and -- and I hope he be quite well -- and it be very kind of you to come and see we -- and we like we new house very much . and I -- I think I will go upstairs , , for I be not very strong . " and with this , and a curtsey and a smile , the poor child go she way . the mother , as she lead she up , cast back look of anguish towards . the good fellow want no such appeal . he love she himself too fondly for that . Inexpressible grief , and pity , and terror pursue he , and he come away as if he be a criminal after see she . when hear that he friend have find she , he make hot and anxious inquiry regard the poor child . how be she ? how do she look ? what do she say ? he comray take he hand , and look he in the face . " , she have die , " say -- and could speak no more . there be a buxom irish servant - girl , who perform all the duty of the little house where the family have find refuge : and this girl have in vain , on many previous day , strive to give aid or consolation . be much too sad to answer , or even to be aware of the attempt the other be make in she favour . four hour after the talk between and , this servant-maid come into 's room , where she sate as usual , brood silently over she letter -- she little treasure . the girl , smile , and look arch and happy , make many trial to attract poor 's attention , who , however , take no heed of she . " , " say the girl . " I be come , " say , not look round . " there be a message , " the maid go on . " there be something -- somebody -- sure , here be a new letter for you -- do not be read they old one any more . " and she give she a letter , which take , and read . " I must see you , " the letter say . " -- dearest love -- dearest wife , come
come to I . " and she mother be outside , wait until she have read the letter . at we have see how , the lady 's maid , as soon as any event of importance to the family come to she knowledge , feel bound to communicate it to , at the Rectory ; and have before mention how particularly kind and attentive that good - natured lady be to 's confidential servant . she have be a gracious friend to , the companion , also ; and have secure the latter 's good - will by a number of those attention and promise , which cost so little in the making , and be yet so valuable and agreeable to the recipient . indeed every good economist and manager of a household must know how cheap and yet how amiable these profession be , and what a flavour they give to the most homely dish in life . who be the blundering idiot who say that " fine word butter no parsnip " ? half the parsnip of society be serve and render palatable with no other sauce . as the immortal can make more delicious soup for a half - penny than a ignorant cook can concoct with pound of vegetable and meat , so a skilful artist will make a few simple and pleasing phrasis go farther than ever so much substantial benefit - stock in the hand of a mere bungler . Nay , we know that substantial benefit often sicke some stomach ; whereas , most will digest any amount of fine word , and be always eager for more of the same food . have tell and so often of the depth of she affection for they ; and what she would do , if she have 's fortune , for friend so excellent and attach , that the lady in question have the deepest regard for she ; and feel as much gratitude and confidence as if . have load they with the most expensive favour . , on the other hand , like a selfish heavy dragoon as he be , never take the least trouble to conciliate he aunt 's aide - de - camp , show he contempt for the pair with entire frankness -- make pull off he boot on one occasion -- send she out in the rain on ignominious message -- and if he give she a guinea , fling it to she as if it be a box on the ear . as he aunt , too , make a butt of , the follow the example , and level he joke at she -- joke about as delicate as a kick from he charger . whereas , consult she in matter of taste or difficulty , admire she poetry , and by a thousand act of kindness and politeness , show she appreciation of ; and if she make Firkin a twopenny - halfpenny present , accompany it with so many compliment , that the twopence - half - penny be transmute into gold in the heart of the grateful waiting - maid , who , besides , be look forwards quite contentedly to some prodigious benefit which must happen to she on the day when . come into she fortune . the different conduct of these two people be point out respectfully to the attention of person commence the world . praise everybody , I say to such : never be squeamish , but speak out you compliment both point - blank in a man 's face , and behind he back , when you know there be a reasonable chance of he hear it again . never lose a chance of say a kind word . as never see a vacant place in he estate but he take a acorn out of he pocket and pop it in ; so deal with you compliment through life . a acorn cost nothing ; but it may sprout into a prodigious bit of timber . in a word , during 's prosperity , he be only obeyed with sulky acquiescence ; when he disgrace come , there be nobody to help or pity he . whereas , when . take the command at 's house , the garrison there be charmed to act under such a leader , expect all sort of promotion from she promise , she generosity , and she kind word . that he would consider himself beat , after one defeat , and make no attempt to regain the position he have lost , never allow herself to suppose . she know to be too clever and spirit and desperate a woman to submit without a struggle ; and feel that she must prepare for that combat , and be incessantly watchful against assault ; or mine , or surprise . in the first place , though she hold the town , be she sure of the principal inhabitant ? would herself hold out ; and have she not a secret long to welcome back the ousted adversary ? the old lady like , and , who amuse she . . could not disguise from herself the fact that none of she party could so contribute to the pleasure of the town - breed lady . " my girl ' singe , after that little odious governess 's , I know be unbearable , " the candid rector 's wife own to herself . " she always use to go to sleep when and play they duet . 's stiff college manners and poor dear 's talk about he dog and horse always annoye she . if I take she to the Rectory , she would grow angry with we all , and fly , I know she would ; and might fall into that horrid 's clutch again , and be the victim of that little viper of a
a sharp . meanwhile , it be clear to I that she be exceedingly unwell , and can not move for some week , at any rate ; during which we must think of some plan to protect she from the art of those unprincipled people . " in the very best - of moment , if anybody tell that she be , or look ill , the trembling old lady send off for she doctor ; and I daresay she be very unwell after the sudden family event , which might serve to shake stronger nerve than hers . at least , . think it be she duty to inform the physician , and the apothecary , and the dame - de - compagnies , and the domestic , that be in a most critical state , and that they be to act accordingly . she have the street laid knee - deep with straw ; and the knocker put by with 's plate . she insist that the Doctor should call twice a day ; and deluge she patient with draught every two hour . when anybody enter the room , she utter a shshshsh so sibilant and ominous , that it frighten the poor old lady in she bed , from which she could not look without see 's beady eye eagerly fix on she , as the latter sate steadfast in the arm -chair by the bedside . they seem to lighten in the dark ( for she keep the curtain close ) as she move about the room on velvet paw like a cat . there lay for day -- ever so many day -- . Bute read book of devotion to she : for night , long night , during which she have to hear the watchman se , the night - light sputter ; visit at midnight , the last thing , by the stealthy apothecary ; and then leave to look at 's twinkling eye , or the flick of yellow that the rushlight throw on the dreary darken ceiling . herself would have fall sick under such a regimen ; and how much more this poor old nervous victim ? it have be say that when she be in health and good spirit , this venerable inhabitant of have as free notion about religion and moral as himself could desire , but when illness overtake she , it be aggravate by the most dreadful terror of death , and a utter cowardice take possession of the prostrate old sinner . sick - bed homily and pious reflection be , to be sure , out of place in mere story - book , and we be not go ( after the fashion of some novelist of the present day ) to cajeal the public into a sermon , when it be only a comedy that the reader pay he money to witness . but , without preaching , the truth may surely be borne in mind , that the bustle , and triumph , and laughter , and gaiety which fair exhibit in public , do not always pursue the performer into private life , and that the most dreary depression of spirit and dismal repentance sometimes overcome he . Recollection of the best ordained banquet will scarcely cheer sick epicure . Reminiscence of the most become dress and brilliant ball triumph will go very little way to conseal fad beauty . perhaps statesman , at a particular period of existence , be not much gratify at think over the most triumphant division ; and the success or the pleasure of yesterday become of very small account when a certain ( albeit uncertain ) morrow be in view , about which all of we must some day or other be speculat . of brother wearer of motley ! be there not moment when one grow sick of grinning and tumbling , and the jingling of cap and bell ? this , dear friend and companion , be my amiable object -- to walk with you through the fair , to examine the shop and the show there ; and that we should all come home after the flare , and the noise , and the gaiety , and be perfectly miserable in private . " if that poor man of mine have a head on he shoulders , " think to herself , " how useful he might be , under present circumstance , to this unhappy old lady ! he might make she repent of she shock free - think way ; he might urge she to do she duty , and cast off that odious reprobate who have disgrac himself and he family ; and he might induce she to do justice to my dear girl and the two boy , who require and deserve , I be sure , every assistance which they relative can give they . " and , as the hatred of vice be always a progress towards virtue , endeavoure to instil she sister - in - law a proper abhorrence for all 's manifold sin : of which he uncle 's wife bring forward such a catalogue as indeed would have serve to condemn a whole regiment of young officer . if a man have commit wrong in life , I do not know any moralist more anxious to point he error out to the world than he own relation ; so Mrs . show a perfect family interest and knowledge of 's history . she have all the particular of that ugly quarrel with , in which , wrong from the beginning , end in shoot the captain . she know how the unhappy , whose mamma have take a house at , so that he might be educate there , and who have never touch a card in he life till he come to , be pervert by at the - , make
make helplessly tipsy by this abominable seducer and perverter of , and fleece of four thousand pound . she describe with the most vivid minuteness the agony of the country family whom he have ruin -- the son whom he have plunge into dishonour and poverty -- the daughter whom he have inveigle into perdition . she know the poor tradesman who be bankrupt by he extravagance -- the mean shift and roguery with which he have ministere to it -- the astounding falsehood by which he have impos upon the most generous of aunt , and the ingratitude and ridicule by which he have repay she sacrifice . she impart these story gradually to ; give she the whole benefit of they ; feel it to be she bounden duty as a woman and mother of a family to do so ; have not the smallest remorse or compunction for the victim whom she tongue be immolating ; nay , very likely think she act be quite meritorious , and plume herself upon she resolute manner of perform it . yes , if a man 's character be to be abuse , say what you will , there be nobody like a relation to do the business . and one be bound to own , regard this unfortunate wretch of a , that the mere truth be enough to condemn he , and that all invention of scandal be quite superfluous pain on he friend 's part . , too , be now a relative , come in for the fullest share of 's kind inquiry . this indefatigable pursuer of truth ( have give strict order that the door be to be deny to all emissary or letter from ) , take 's carriage , and drive to she old friend , at , , to whom she announce the dreadful intelligence of 's seduction by , and from whom she get sundry strange particular regard the ex-governess 's birth and early history . the friend of the have plenty of information to give . be make to fetch the drawing - master 's receipt and letter . this one be from a spunging - house : that entreate a advance : another be full of gratitude for 's reception by the ladie of : and the last document from the unlucky artist 's pen be that in which , from he die bed , he recommend he orphan child to 's protection . there be juvenile letter and petition from , too , in the collection , implor aid for she father or declare she own gratitude . perhaps in there be no better satire than letter . take a bundle of you dear friend 's of ten year back -- you dear friend whom you hate now . look at a file of you sister 's ! how you cling to each other till you quarrell about the twenty - pound legacy ! get down the round - hand scrawl of you son who have half break you heart with selfish undutifulness since ; or a parcel of you own , breathe endless ardour and love eternal , which be send back by you mistress when she marry the -- you mistress for whom you now care no more than for . Vows , love , promise , confidence , gratitude , how queerly they read after a while ! there ink to be a law in order the destruction of every write document ( except receipt tradesman 's bill ) after a certain brief and proper interval . those quack and misanthrope who advertise indelible ink should be make to perish along with they wicked discoveries . the best ink for fair use would be one that fade utterly in a couple of day , and leave the paper clean and blank , so that you might write on it to somebody else . from 's the indefatigable . follow the track of and he daughter back to the lodging in , which the defunct painter have occupy ; and where portrait of the landlady in white satin , and of the husband in brass button , do by in lieu of a quarter 's rent , still decorate the parlour wall . be a communicative person , and quickly tell all she know about ; how dissolute and poor he be ; how good - natured and amusing ; how he be always hunt by bailiff and dun ; how , to the landlady 's horror , though she never could abide the woman , he do not marry he wife till a short time before she death ; and what a queer little wild vixen he daughter be ; how she keep they all laugh with she fun and mimicry ; how she use to fetch the gin from the public - house , and be know in all the studio in the quarter -- in brief , . get such a full account of she new niece 's parentage , education , and behaviour as would scarcely have pleased , have the latter known that such inquiry be be make concern she . of all these industrious research have the full benefit . be the daughter of a opera-girl . she have dance herself . she have be a model to the painter . she be brotch up as become she mother 's daughter . she drank gin with she father , &c . &c . it be a lost woman who be marry to a lose man ; and the moral to be infer from 's tale be , that the knavery of the pair be irremediable , and that no properly conduct person should ever notice they again . these be the material which prudend gather together in , the provision and ammunition as it be with which she fortify the house against the siege which she know that and he
he wife would lay to . but if a fault may be find with she arrangement , it be this , that she be too eager : she manage rather too well ; undoubtedly she make more ill than be necessary ; and though the old invalid succumb to she authority , it be so harassing and severe , that the victim would be inclin to escape at the very first chance which fall in she way . manage woman , the ornament of they sex --woman who order everything for everybody , and know so much better than any person concern what be good for they neighbour , do not sometimes speculate upon the possibility of a domestic revolt , or upon other extreme consequence result from they overstrained authority . thus , for instance , , with the best intentions no doubt in the world , and wear herself to death as she do by foregoing sleep , dinner , fresh air , for the sake of she invalid sister - in - law , carry she conviction of the old lady 's illness so far that she almost manage she into she coffin . she point out she sacrifice and they result one day to the constant apothecary , . " I be sure , my dear , " she say , " no effort of mine have be want to restore we dear invalid , whom the ingratitude of she nephew have lay on the bed of sickness . I never shrink from personal discomfort : I never refuse to sacrifice myself . " " you devotion , it must be confess , be admirable , " say , with a low bow ; " but -- " " I have scarcely close my eye since my arrival : I give up sleep , health , every comfort , to my sense of duty . when my poor be in the smallpox , do I allow any hireling to nurse he ? no . " " you do what become a excellent mother , my dear Madam -- the best of mother ; but -- " " as the mother of a family and the wife of a english clergyman , I humbly trust that my principle be good , " . say , with a happy solemnity of conviction ; " and , as long as support I , never , never , , will I desert the post of duty . other may bring that grey head with sorrow to the bed of sickness ( here , wave she hand , point to one of old 's coffee - coloured fronts , which be perch on a stand in the dressing - room ) , but I will never quit it . ah , ! I fear , I know , that the couch need spiritual as well as medical consolation . " " what I be go to observe , my dear madam , " -- here the resolute clump once more interposed with a bland air --" what I be go to observe when you give utterance to sentiment which do you so much honour , be that I think you alarm yourself needlessly about we kind friend , and sacrifice you own health too prodigally in she favour . " " I would lay down my life for my duty , or for any member of my husband 's family , " interpose . " yes , Madam , if need were ; but we do not want to be a martyr , " say gallantly . " and myself have both consider 's case with every anxiety and care , as you may suppose . we see she low - spirited and nervous ; family event have agitate she . " " she nephew will come to perdition , " cry . " have agitate she : and you arrive like a guardian angel , my dear Madam , a positive guardian angel , I assure you , to soothe she under the pressure of calamity . but and I be think that we amiable friend be not in such a state as render confinement to she bed necessary . she be depressed , but this confinement perhaps add to she depression . she should have change , fresh air , gaiety ; the most delightful remedy in the pharmacopoeia , " say , grinn and show he handsome tooth . " persuade she to rise , dear madam ; drag she from she couch and she low spirit ; insist upon she take little drives . they will restore the rose too to you cheek , if I may so speak to . " " the sight of she horrid nephew casually in the , where I be tell the wretch drive with the brazen partner of he crime , " . say ( let the cat of selfishness out of the bag of secrecy ) , " would cause she such a shock , that we should have to bring she back to bed again . she must not go out , . she shall not go out as long as I remain to watch over she ; and as for my health , what matter it ? I give it cheerfully , sir . I sacrifice it at the altar of my duty . " " upon my word , madam , " now say bluntly , " I will not answer for she life if she remain lock up in that dark room . she be so nervous that we may lose she any day ; and if you wish to be she heir , I warn you frankly , Madam , that you be do you very best to serve he . " " gracious mercy ! be she life in danger ? " cry . " why , why , , do you not inform
inform I sooner ? " the night before , and Squills have have a consultation ( over a bottle of wine at the house of , whose lady be about to present he with a thirteenth blessing ) , regard and she case . " what a little harpy that woman from be , , " Squills remark , " that have seize upon old . Devilish good . " " what a fool have be , " Clump reply , " to go and marry a governess ! there be something about the girl , too . " " green eye , fair skin , pretty figure , famous frontal development , " remarke . " there be something about she ; and be a fool , Squills . " " a ---- fool -- always be , " the apothecary reply . " of course the old girl will fl he over , " say the physician , and after a pause add , " she will cut up well , I suppose . " " cut up , " say with a grin ; " I would not have she cut up for two hundred a year . " " that woman will kill she in two month , Clump , my boy , if she stop about she , " Squills say . " old woman ; full feeder ; nervous subject ; palpitation of the heart ; pressure on the brain ; apoplexy ; off she go . get she up , Clump ; get she out : or I would not give many week 's purchase for you two hundred a year . " and it be act upon this hint that the worthy apothecary speak with so much candour to . have the old lady under she hand : in bed : with nobody near , . have make more than one assault upon she , to induce she to alter she will . but 's usual terrors regard death increase greatly when such dismal propositions be make to she , and . see that she must get she patient into cheerful spirit and health before she could hope to attain the pious object which she have in view . Whither to take she be the next puzzle . the only place where she be not likely to meet those odious Rawdon be at church , and that will not amuse she , . justly feel . " we must go and visit we beautiful suburb of , " she then think . " I hear they be the most picturesque in the world " ; and so she have a sudden interest for , and , and find that have great charms for she , and get she victim into she carriage , drive she to those rustic spot , beguil the little journey with conversation about and he wife , and tell every story to the old lady which could add to she indignation against this pair of reprobate . perhaps pull the string unnecessarily tight . for though she work up to a proper dislike of she disobedient nephew , the invalid have a great hatred and secret terror of she victimizer , and pante to escape from she . after a brief space , she rebel against and utterly . she would go into the park . know they would meet the abominable there , and she be right . one day in the ring , 's stanhope come in sight ; be seat by he . in the enemy 's equipage occupy she usual place , with . on she leave , the poodle and on the back seat . it be a nervous moment , and 's heart beat quick as she recognize the carriage ; and as the two vehicle cross each other in a line , she clasp she hand , and look towards the spinster with a face of agonized attachment and devotion . himself tremble , and he face grow purple behind he dyed mustachio . only old be move in the other carriage , and cast she great eye nervously towards she old friend . 's bonnet be resolutely turn towards the Serpentine . happen to be in ecstasy with the poodle , and be call he a little darling , and a sweet little zoggy , and a pretty pet . the carriage move on , each in he line . " do , by , " say to he wife . " try once more , , " answer . " could not you lock you wheel into theirs , dearest ? " have not the heart for that manoeuvre . when the carriage meet again , he stand up in he stanhope ; he raise he hand ready to doff he hat ; he look with all he eye . but this time 's face be not turn away ; she and . look he full in the face , and cut they nephew pitilessly . he sank back in he seat with a oath , and strike out of the ring , dash away desperately homeward . it be a gallant and decide triumph for . but she feel the danger of many such meeting , as she see the evident nervousness of ; and she determine that it be most necessary for she dear friend 's health , that they should leave town for a while , and recommend very strongly . in as the of without know how , find himself the great promoter , arranger , and manager of the match between and . but for he it never would have take place : he could not but confess as much to himself , and smile rather bitterly as he think that he of all man in the world should be the person upon whom the care of this marriage have fall . but though indeed
indeed the conducting of this negotiation be about as painful a task as could be set to he , yet when he have a duty to perform , be accustom to go through it without many word or much hesitation : and , have make up he mind completely , that if be balk of she husband she would die of the disappointment , he be determined to use all he best endeavour to keep she alive . I forbear to enter into minute particulars of the interview between and , when the former be bring back to the foot ( or should we venture to say the arm ? ) of he young mistress by the intervention of he friend honest . a much harder heart than 's would have melt at the sight of that sweet face so sadly ravage by grief and despair , and at the simple tender accent in which she tell she little broken - hear story : but as she do not faint when she mother , trembl , bring to she ; and as she only give relief to she overcharged grief , by lay she head on she lover 's shoulder and there weep for a while the most tender , copious , and refresh tear -- old , too greatly relieve , think it be best to leave the young person to themselves ; and so quit cry over 's hand , and kiss it humbly , as if he be she supreme chief and master , and as if she be quite a guilty and unworthy person need every favour and grace from he . this prostration and sweet unrepining obedience exquisitely touche and flatter . he see a slave before he in that simple yielding faithful creature , and he soul within he thrill secretly somehow at the knowledge of he power . he would be generous - minded , Sultan as he be , and raise up this kneeling Esther and make a queen of she : besides , she sadness and beauty touch he as much as she submission , and so he cheer she , and raise she up and forgave she , so to speak . all she hope and feeling , which be die and wither , this she sun have be remove from she , bloom again and at once , it be light be restore . you would scarcely have recognise the beam little face upon 's pillow that night as the one that be laid there the night before , so wan , so lifeless , so careless of all round about . the honest irish maid - servant , delighte with the change , ask leave to kiss the face that have grow all of a sudden so rosy . put she arm round the girl 's neck and kiss she with all she heart , like a child . she be little more . she have that night a sweet refreshing sleep , like one -- and what a spring of inexpressible happiness as she wake in the morning sunshine ! " he will be here again to - day , " thought . " he be the greatest and best of man . " and the fact be , that think he be one of the generousest creature alive : and that he be make a tremendous sacrifice in marry this young creature . while she and be have they delightful tete - a - tete above stair , old and be converse below upon the state of the affair , and the chance and future arrangement of the young people . have bring the two lover together and leave they embrace each other with all they might , like a true woman , be of opinion that no power on earth would induce to consent to the match between he daughter and the son of a man who have so shamefully , wickedly , and monstrously treat he . and she tell a long story about happier day and they earlier splendour , when live in a very humble way in the , and he wife be too glad to receive some of 's little baby thing , with which accommodate she at the birth of one of 's own child . the fiendish ingratitude of that man , she be sure , have break S.'s heart : and as for a marriage , he would never , never , never , never consent . " they must run away together , ma 'am , " say , laugh , " and follow the example of , and 's friend the little governess . " be it possible ? well she never ! be all excitement about this news . she wish that be here to hear it : always mistrust that .-- what a escape have have ! and she describe the already well - know love - passage between and the Collector of . it be not , however , 's wrath which fear , so much as that of the other parent concerned , and he own that he have a very considerable doubt and anxiety respect the behaviour of the black - browed old tyrant of a merchant in . he have forbide the match peremptorily , think . he know what a savage determined man be , and how he stick by he word . " the only chance have of reconcilement , " argue he friend , " be by distinguishe himself in the come campaign . if he die they both go together . if he fail in distinction -- what then ? he have some money from he mother , I have hear enough to purchase he majority -- or he must sell out and go and dig in , or rough it in a cottage in the country . " with such a partner think he would not
not mind -- and , strange to say , this absurd and utterly imprudent young fellow never for a moment consider that the want of means to keep a nice carriage and horse , and of a income which should enable its possessor to entertain they friend genteelly , ought to operate as bar to the union of and . it be these weighty consideration which make he think too that the marriage should take place as quickly as possible . be he anxious himself , I wonder , to have it over ?-- as people , when death have occur , like to press forward the funeral , or when a parting be resolve upon , hasten it . it be certain that , have take the matter in hand , be most extraordinarily eager in the conduct of it . he urge on the necessity of immediate action : he show the chance of reconciliation with he father , which a favourable mention of he name in the must bring about . if need be he would go himself and brave both the fathers in the business . at all event , he besotch to go through with it before the order come , which everybody expect , for the departure of the regiment from on foreign service . bent upon these hymeneal project , and with the applause and consent of , who do not care to break the matter personally to she husband , go to seek at he house of call in the City , the coffee - house , where , since he own office be shut up , and fate have overtake he , the poor break - down old gentleman use to betake himself daily , and write letter and receive they , and tie they up into mysterious bundle , several of which he carry in the flap of he coat . I do not know anything more dismal than that business and bustle and mystery of a ruin man : those letter from the wealthy which he show you : those wear greasy document promise support and offer condolence which he place wistfully before you , and on which he build he hope of restoration and future fortune . my beloved reader have no doubt in the course of he experience be waylay by many such a luckless companion . he take you into the corner ; he have he bundle of papers out of he gaping coat pocket ; and the tape off , and the string in he mouth , and the favourite letter select and laid before you ; and who do not know the sad eager half - crazy look which he fix on you with he hopeless eye ? change into a man of this sort , find the once florid , jovial , and prosperous . he coat , that use to be so glossy and trim , be white at the seam , and the button show the copper . he face have fall in , and be unshorn ; he frill and neckcloth hung limp under he bagging waistcoat . when he use to treat the boy in old day at a coffee - house , he would shout and laugh louder than anybody there , and have all the waiter skip round he ; it be quite painful to see how humble and civil he be to of the , a blear - eye old attendent in dingy stocking and crack pumps , whose business it be to serve glass of wafer , and bumper of ink in pewter , and slice of paper to the frequenter of this dreary house of entertainment , where nothing else seem to be consum . as for , whom he have tip repeatedly in he youth , and who have be the old gentleman 's butt on a thousand occasion , old give he hand to he in a very hesitating humble manner now , and call he " . " a feeling of shame and remorse take possession of as the break old man so receive and address he , as if he himself have be somehow guilty of the misfortune which have bring so low . " I be very glad to see you , , sir , " say he , after a skulking look or two at he visitor ( whose lanky figure and military appearance cause some excitement likewise to twinkle in the blear eye of the waiter in the crack dancing pumps , and awaken the old lady in black , who doze among the mouldy old coffee - cup in the bar ) . " how be the worthy alderman , and my lady , you excellent mother , sir ? " he look round at the waiter as he say , " my lady , " as much as to say , " Hark ye , , I have friend still , and person of rank and reputation , too . " " be you come to do anything in my way , sir ? my young friend and do all my business for I now , until my new office be ready ; for I be only here temporarily , you know , . what can we do for you , sir ? will you like to take anything ? " Dobbin , with a great deal of hesitation and stutter , protest that he be not in the least hungry or thirsty ; that he have no business to transact ; that he only come to ask if be well , and to shake hand with a old friend ; and , he add , with a desperate perversion of truth , " my mother be very well -- that be , she be be very unwell , and be only wait for the first fine day to go out and call upon . how
how be , ? I hope she be quite well . " and here he pause , reflec on he own consummate hypocrisy ; for the day be as fine , and the sunshine as bright as it ever be in , where the - house be situate : and remember that he have see himself only a hour before , have drive down to in he gig , and leave he there tete - a - tete with . " my wife will be very happy to see she ladyship , " Sedley reply , pull out he papers . " I have a very kind letter here from you father , sir , and beg my respectful compliment to he . will find we in rather a smaller house than we be accustom to receive we friend in ; but it be snug , and the change of air do good to my daughter , who be suffer in town rather -- you remember little , sir ?-- yes , suffer a good deal . " the old gentleman 's eyes be wander as he speak , and he be think of something else , as he sate thrumm on he papers and fumbl at the worn red tape . " you be a military man , " he go on ; " I ask you , , could any man ever have speculate upon the return of that Corsican scoundrel from ? when the allied sovereign be here last year , and we give th'ey that dinner in the City , sir , and we see the Temple of , and the firework , and the chinese bridge in 's , could any sensible man suppose that peace be not really conclude , after we would actually sung for it , sir ? I ask you , , could I suppose that the emperor of be a damned traitor -- a traitor , and nothing more ? I do not mince word -- a double - face infernal traitor and schemer , who mean to have he son - in - law back all along . and I say that the escape of from be a damned imposition and plot , sir , in which half the power of be concerned , to bring the fund down , and to ruin this country . that be why I be here , . that be why my name 's in the Gazette . why , sir ?-- because I trust the emperor of and the . look here . look at my papers . look what the fund be on the 1st of -- what the french fives be when I buy for the count . and what they be at now . there be collusion , sir , or that villain never would have escape . where be the who allow he to get away ? he ought to be shot , sir -- bring to a court -martial , and shot , by . " " we be go to hunt out , sir , " say , rather alarme at the fury of the old man , the vein of whose forehead begin to swell , and who sate drumm he papers with he clenched fist . " we be go to hunt he out , sir -- the 's in already , and we expect march order every day . " " give he no quarter . bring back the villain 's head , sir . shoot the coward down , sir , " roar . " I would enlist myself , by -- ; but I be a broken old man -- ruin by that damned scoundrel -- and by a parcel of swindling thief in this country whom I make , sir , and who be roll in they carriage now , " he add , with a break in he voice . be not a little affect by the sight of this once kind old friend , craze almost with misfortune and rave with senile anger . Pity the fallen gentleman : you to whom money and fair repute be the chiefest good ; and so , surely , be they in . " yes , " he continue , " there be some viper that you warm , and they s you afterwards . there be some beggar that you put on horseback , and they be the first to ride you down . you know whom i mean , , my boy . I mean a purse - proud villain in , whom I know without a shilling , and whom I pray and hope to see a beggar as he be when I befriend he . " " I have hear something of this , sir , from my friend , " say , anxious to come to he point . " the quarrel between you and he father have cut he up a great deal , sir . indeed , I be the bearer of a message from he . " " o , that be you errand , be it ? " cry the old man , jump up . " what ! perhaps he condole with I , do he ? very kind of he , the stiff - back prig , with he dandified air and swagger . he be hanker about my house , be he still ? if my son have the courage of a man , he would shoot he . he be as big a villain as he father . I will not have he name mention in my house . I curse the day that ever I let he into it ; and I would rather see my daughter dead at my foot than marry to he . " " he father 's harshness be not 's fault , sir . you daughter 's love for he be as much
much you do as he . who be you , that you be to play with two young people 's affection and break they heart at you will ? " " Recollect it be not he father that break the match off , " old cry out . " it be I that forbid it . that family and mine be separate for ever . I be fall low , but not so low as that : no , no . and so you may tell the whole race -- son , and father and sister , and all . " " it be my belief , sir , that you have not the power or the right to separate those two , " answer in a low voice ; " and that if you do not give you daughter you consent it will be she duty to marry without it . there be no reason she should die or live miserably because you be wrong - head . to my thinking , she be just as much marry as if the banns have be read in all the church in . and what better answer can there be to 's charge against you , as charge there be , than that he son claim to enter you family and marry you daughter ? " a light of something like satisfaction seem to break over old as this point be put to he : but he still persist that with he consent the marriage between and should never take place . " we must do it without , " say , smile , and tell , as he have tell in the day , before , the story of 's elopement with . it evidently amuse the old gentleman . " you be terrible fellow , you Captains , " say he , tie up he papers ; and he face wear something like a smile upon it , to the astonishment of the blear - eyed waiter who now enter , and have never see such a expression upon 's countenance since he have use the dismal coffee - house . the idea of hit he enemy such a blow soothe , perhaps , the old gentleman : and , they colloquy presently end , he and part pretty good friend . " my sister say she have diamond as big as pigeons ' egg , " say , laugh . " how they must set off she complexion ! a perfect illumination it must be when she jewel be on she neck . she jet - black hair be as curly as 's . I dare say she wear a nose ring when she go to court ; and with a plume of feather in she top - knot she would look a perfect . " , in conversation with , be rally the appearance of a young lady of whom he father and sister have lately make the acquaintance , and who be a object of vast respect to the family . she be report to have I do not know how many plantation in the ; a deal of money in the fund ; and three star to she name in the stockholder ' list . she have a mansion in , and a house in . the name of the rich heiress have be mention with applause in the . , 's widow , she relative , " chaperon " she , and keep she house . she be just from school , where she have complete she education , and and he sister have meet she at a evening party at old 's house , ( , , and . be long the correspondent of she house in the West Indies ) , and the girl have make the most cordial advances to she , which the heiress have receive with great good humour . a orphan in she position -- with she money -- so interesting ! the say . they be full of they new friend when they return from the ball to , they companion ; they have make arrangement for continually meeting , and have the carriage and drive to see she the very next day . , 's widow , a relation of , and always talk of he , strike the dear unsophisticated girl as rather haughty , and too much inclin to talk about she great relation : but be everything they could wish -- the frankest , kindest , most agreeable creature -- want a little polish , but so good - natured . the girl - name each other at once . " you should have see she dress for court , , " Osborne cry , laugh . " she come to my sister to show it off , before she be present in state by my , the 's kinswoman . she be related to every one , that . she diamonds blaze out like on the night we be there . ( do you remember , , and singe to he dearest diddle diddle darling ? ) Diamonds and mahogany , my dear ! think what a advantageous contrast -- and the white feather in she hair -- I mean in she wool . she have earring like chandelier ; you might have light th'ey up , by -- and a yellow satin train that streel after she like the tail of a cornet . " " how old be she ? " ask , to whom be ratt away regard this dark paragon , on the morning of they reunion -- ratt away as no other man in the world surly could . " why the black princess , though she have only just left school , must be two or three and twenty . and you should see the hand she write ! usually write she letter , but in a
a moment of confidence , she put pen to paper for my sister ; she spelt satin satting , and 's , . " " why , surely it must be , the parlour boarder , " say , remembere that good - natured young mulatto girl , who have be so hysterically affect when leave 's academy . " the very name , " say . " she father be a german -- a slave - owner they say -- connect with the Cannibal Islands in some way or other . he die last year , and have finish she education . she can play two piece on the piano ; she know three song ; she can write when be by to spell for she ; and and already have get to love she as a sister . " " I wish they would have love I , " say , wistfully . " they be always very cold to I . " " my dear child , they would have love you if you have have two hundred thousand pound , " reply . " that be the way in which they have be bring up . ours be a ready - money society . we live among banker and City big - wig , and be hang to they , and every man , as he talk to you , be jingl he guinea in he pocket . there be that be go to marry -- there be , the Director , there be , in the tallow trade -- we trade , " say , with a uneasy laugh and a blush . " curse the whole pack of money - grubb vulgarian ! I fall asleep at they great heavy dinner . I feel asham in my father 's great stupid party . I have be accustom to live with gentleman , and man of the world and fashion , , not with a parcel of turtle - feed tradesman . dear little woman , you be the only person of we set who ever look , or think , or speak like a lady : and you do it because you be a angel and can not help it . do not remonstrate . you be the only lady . do not remark it , who have live in the best company in ? and as for , of the , hang it , he be a fine fellow : and I like he for marry the girl he have choose . " admire very much , too , for this ; and trust would be happy with he , and hope ( with a laugh ) Jo would be consol . and so the pair go on prattling , as in quite early day . 's confidence be perfectly restore to she , though she express a great deal of pretty jealousy about , and profess to be dreadfully frightene -- like a hypocrite as she be -- lest should forget she for the heiress and she money and she estate in 's . but the fact be , she be a great deal too happy to have fear or doubt or misgiving of any sort : and have at she side again , be not afraid of any heiress or beauty , or indeed of any sort of danger . when come back in the afternoon to these people -- which he do with a great deal of sympathy for they -- it do he heart good to see how have grow young again -- how she laugh , and chirp , and sang familiar old song at the piano , which be only interrupt by the bell from without proclaim 's return from the City , before whom receive a signal to retreat . beyond the first smile of recognition -- and even that be a hypocrisy , for she think he arrival rather provoke -- do not once notice during he visit . but he be content , so that he see she happy ; and thankful to have be the means of make she so . a love may be feel for any young lady endow with such quality as possess ; and a great dream of ambition enter into old be soul , which she be to realize . he encourage , with the utmost enthusiasm and friendliness , he daughter 's amiable attachment to the young heiress , and protest that it give he the sincerest pleasure as a father to see the love of he girl so well dispose . " you will not find , " he would say to , " that splendour and rank to which you be accustom at the , my dear miss , at we humble mansion in . my daughter be plain , disinterested girl , but they heart be in the right place , and they have conceive a attachment for you which do they honour -- I say , which do they honour . I be a plain , simple , humble british merchant -- a honest one , as my respecte friend and will vouch , who be the correspondent of you late lamented father . you will find we a united , simple , happy , and I think I may say respect , family - - a plain table , a plain people , but a warm welcome , my dear -- , let I say , for my heart warm to you , it do really . I be a frank man , and I like you . a glass of ! Hicks , to . " there be little doubt that old believe all he say , and that the girl be quite earnest in they protestation of affection for . people in fasten on to rich folk quite naturally . if the simplest people be dispose to look not a little
little kindly on great prosperity ( for I defy any member of the british public to say that the notion of have not something awful and pleasing to he ; and you , if you be tell that the man next you at dinner have get half a million , not to look at he with a certain interest ) -- if the simple look benevolently on money , how much more do you old worldling regard it ! they affection rush out to meet and welcome money . they kind sentiment awake spontaneously towards the interesting possessor of it . I know some respectable people who do not consider themselves at liberty to indulge in friendship for any individual who have not a certain competency , or place in society . they give a loose to they feeling on proper occasion . and the proof be , that the major part of the family , who have not , in fifteen year , be able to get up a hearty regard for , become as fond of in the course of a single evening as the most romantic advocate of friendship at first sight could desire . what a match for she would be ( the sister and agree ) , and how much better than that insignificant little ! such a dashing young fellow as he be , with he good look , rank , and accomplishment , would be the very husband for she . Vision of ball in place , presentations at , and introduction to half the peerage , fill the mind of the young lady ; who talk of nothing but and he grand acquaintance to they belov new friend . think she would be a great match , too , for he son . he should leave the army ; he should go into parliament ; he should cut a figure in the fashion and in the state . he blood boil with honest british exultation , as he see the name of ennoble in the person of he son , and think that he might be the progenitor of a glorious line of baronet . he work in the and on ' , until he know everything relate to the fortune of the heiress , how she money be place , and where she estate lay . yong , one of he chief informant , would have like to make a bid for she himself ( it be so the young banker express it ) , only he be book to . but not be able to secure she as a wife , the disinterested quite approve of she as a sister - in - law . " let cut in directly and win she , " be he advice . " Strike while the iron 's hot , you know -- while she be fresh to the town : in a few week some ---- fellow from the will come in with a title and a rotten rent - roll and cut all us city man out , as do last year with , who be actually engage to , of & 's . the sooner it be do the better , ; they be my sentiment , " the wag say ; though , when Osborne have leave the bank parlour , remember , and what a pretty girl she be , and how attach to ; and he give up at least ten seconds of he valuable time to regret the misfortune which have befall that unlucky young woman . while thus 's good feeling , and he good friend and genius , , be carry back the truant to 's foot , 's parent and sister be arrange this splendid match for he , which they never dream he would resist . when the elder give what he call " a hint , " there be no possibility for the most obtuse to mistake he meaning . he call kick a footman downstairs a hint to the latter to leave he service . with he usual frankness and delicacy he tell . Haggistoun that he would give she a cheque for five thousand pound on the day he son be marry to she ward ; and call that proposal a hint , and consider it a very dexterous piece of diplomacy . he give finally such another hint regard the heiress ; and order he to marry she out of hand , as he would have order he butler to draw a cork , or he clerk to write a letter . this imperative hint disturb a good deal . he be in the very first enthusiasm and delight of he second courtship of , which be inexpressibly sweet to he . the contrast of she manners and appearance with those of the heiress , make the idea of a union with the latter appear doubly ludicrous and odious . Carriage and opera - box , think he ; fancy be see in they by the side of such a mahogany charmer as that ! add to all that the junior be quite as obstinate as the senior : when he want a thing , quite as firm in he resolution to get it ; and quite as violent when angered , as he father in he most stern moment . on the first day when he father formally give he the hint that he be to place he affections at 's foot , temporise with the old gentleman . " you should have think of the matter sooner , sir , " he say . " it can not be do now , when we be expect every day to go on foreign service . wait till my return , if I do return " ; and then he represent , that the time when the regiment be daily expect to quit , be exceedingly ill - chosen
chosen : that the few day or week during which they be still to remain at home , must be devote to business and not to love - make : time enough for that when he come home with he majority ; " for , I promise you , " say he , with a satisfied air , " that one way or other you shall read the name of in the . " the father 's reply to this be founde upon the information which he have get in the City : that the West end chap would infallibly catch hold of the heiress if any delay take place : that if he do not marry , he might at least have a engagement in writing , to come into effect when he return to ; and that a man who could get ten thousand a year by stay at home , be a fool to risk he life abroad . " so that you would have I show up as a coward , sir , and we name dishonoure for the sake of 's money , " interpose . this remark stagger the old gentleman ; but as he have to reply to it , and as he mind be nevertheless make up , he say , " you will dine here to - morrow , sir , and every day come , you will be here to pay you respects to she . if you want for money , call upon . " thus a new obstacle be in 's way , to interfere with he plan regard ; and about which he and have more than one confidential consultation . he friend 's opinion respecte the line of conduct which he ought to pursue , we know already . and as for Osborne , when he be once bend on a thing , a fresh obstacle or two only render he the more resolute . the dark object of the conspiracy into which the chief of the family have enter , be quite ignorant of all they plan regard she ( which , strange to say , she friend and chaperon do not divulge ) , and , take all the young lady ' flattery for genuine sentiment , and being , as we have before have occasion to show , of a very warm and impetuous nature , respond to they affection with quite a tropical ardour . and if the truth may be tell , I dare say that she too have some selfish attraction in the house ; and in a word , think a very nice young man . he whisker have make a impression upon she , on the very first night she beheld they at the ball at Messrs . Hulker ; and , as we know , she be not the first woman who have be charme by they . have a air at once swaggering and melancholy , languid and fierce . he look like a man who have passion , secret , and private harrowing grief and adventure . he voice be rich and deep . he would say it be a warm evening , or ask he partner to take a ice , with a tone as sad and confidential as if he be break she mother 's death to she , or prelud a declaration of love . he trample over all the young buck of he father 's circle , and be the hero among those third - rate man . some few sneer at he and hate he . some , like , fanatically admire he . and he whisker have begin to do they work , and to curl themselves round the affections of . whenever there be a chance of meet he in , that simple and good - natured young woman be quite in a flurry to see she dear . she go to great expense in new gown , and bracelet , and bonnet , and in prodigious feather . she adorn she person with she utmost skill to please the Conqueror , and exhibit all she simple accomplishment to win he favour . the girl would ask she , with the greatest gravity , for a little music , and she would s she three song and play she two little piece as often as ever they ask , and with a always increase pleasure to herself . during these delectable entertainment , and the chaperon sate by , and con over the peerage , and talk about the nobility . the day after have he hint from he father , and a short time before the hour of dinner , he be lol upon a sofa in the drawing - room in a very becoming and perfectly natural attitude of melancholy . he have be , at he father 's request , to in the city ( the old - gentleman , though he give great sum to he son , would never specify any fix allowance for he , and reward he only as he be in the humour ) . he have then be to pass three hour with , he dear little , at ; and he come home to find he sister spread in starch muslin in the drawing - room , the dowager cackl in the background , and honest in she favourite amber - colou satin , with turquoise bracelet , countless ring , flower , feather , and all sort of tags and gimcrack , about as elegantly decorate as a she chimney - sweep on - day . the girl , after vain attempt to engage he in conversation , talk about fashions and the last drawing - room until he be perfectly sick of they chatter . he contrast they behaviour with little 's -- they shrill voice with she tender ring tone ; they attitude and they elbow
elbow and they starch , with she humble soft movement and modest graces . poor Swartz be seat in a place where have be accustom to sit . she bejewell hand lay sprawl in she amber satin lap . she tags and ear-ring twinkle , and she big eye roll about . she be do nothing with perfect contentment , and think herself charme . anything so become as the satin the sister have never see . " , " say to a confidential friend , " she look like a doll , which have nothing to do all day but to grin and wag its head . by , , it be all I I could do to prevent myself from throw the sofa-cushion at she . " he restrain that exhibition of sentiment , however . the sister begin to play the of . " stop that d ---- thing , " how out in a fury from the sofa . " it make I mad . you play we something , , do . S something , anything but the of . " " shall I se ' ' or the air from the cabinet ? " ask . " that sweet thing from the cabinet , " the sister say . " we have have that , " reply the misanthrope on the sofa " I can s ' , ' " say , in a meek voice , " if I have the word . " it be the last of the worthy young woman 's collection . " o , ' , ' " cry ; " we have the song , " and go off to fetch the book in which it be . now it happen that this song , then in the height of the fashion , have be give to the young lady by a young friend of theirs , whose name be on the title , and , have conclude the ditty with 's applause ( for he remember that it be a favourite of 's ) , be hope for a encore perhaps , and fiddl with the leaf of the music , when she eye fall upon the title , and she see " " write in the comer . " ! " cry , spinn swiftly round on the music - stool , " be it my ? that be at at ? I know it be . it be she , and -- tell I about she -- where be she ? " " do not mention she , " say hastily . " she family have disgrace itself . she father cheat , and as for she , she be never to be mention here . " this be 's return for 's rudeness about the of . " be you a friend of 's ? " say , bounce up . " bless you for it , . do not believe what the girl say . SHEbe not to blame at any rate . she be the best -- " " you know you be not to speak about she , , " cry . " forbid it . " " who be to prevent I ? " cry out . " I will speak of she . I say she be the best , the kindest , the gentlest , the sweetest girl in ; and that , bankrupt or no , my sister be not fit to hold candle to she . if you like she , go and see she , ; she want friend now ; and I say , bless everybody who befriend she . anybody who speak kindly of she be my friend ; anybody who speak against she be my enemy . thank you , " ; and he go up and wring she hand . " ! ! " one of the sister cry imploringly . " I say , " say fiercely , " I thank everybody who love --" he stop . be in the room with a face livid with rage , and eye like hot coal . though have stop in he sentence , yet , he blood be up , he be not to be cow by all the generation of ; rally instantly , he reply to the bullying look of he father , with another so indicative of resolution and defiance that the elder man quail in he turn , and look away . he feel that the tussle be come . " . , let I take you down to dinner , " he say . " give you arm to , , " and they march . " , I love , and we have be engage almost all we life , " say to he partner ; and during all the dinner , rattle on with a volubility which surprise himself , and make he father doubly nervous for the fight which be to take place as soon as the lady be gone . the difference between the pair be , that while the father be violent and a bully , the son have thrice the nerve and courage of the parent , and could not merely make a attack , but resist it ; and find that the moment be now come when the contest between he and he father be to be decide , he take he dinner with perfect coolness and appetite before the engagement begin . , on the contrary , be nervous , and drank much . he flounder in he conversation with the ladie , he neighbour : 's coolness only render he more angry . it make he half mad to see the calm way in which , flapp he napkin , and with a swaggering bow , open the door for the ladie to leave the room ; and fill himself a glass of wine , smack it
it , and look he father full in the face , as if to say , " gentleman of the , fire first . " the old man also take a supply of ammunition , but he decanter clink against the glass as he try to fill it . after give a great heave , and with a purple choking face , he then begin . " how dare you , sir , mention that person 's name before to - day , in my drawing - room ? I ask you , sir , how dare you do it ? " " stop , sir , " say , " do not say dare , sir . be not a word to be use to a in the . " " I shall say what I like to my son , sir . I can cut he off with a shilling if I like . I can make he a beggar if I like . I will say what I like , " the elder say . " I be a gentleman though I be you son , sir , " answer haughtily . " any communications which you have to make to I , or any order which you may please to give , I beg may be couch in that kind of language which I be accustom to hear . " whenever the lad assume he haughty manner , it always create either great awe or great irritation in the parent . stand in secret terror of he son as a better gentleman than himself ; and perhaps my reader may have remark in they experience of this Vanity fair of ours , that there be no character which a low - minded man so much mistrust as that of a gentleman . " my father do not give I the education you have have , nor the advantage you have have , nor the money you have have . if I have keep the company some folks have have through my means , perhaps my son would not have any reason to brag , sir , of he superiority and West end AIRS ( these word be uttere in the elder Osborne be most sarcastic tone ) . but it be not consider the part of a gentleman , in my time , for a man to insult he father . if I would do any such thing , mine would have kick I downstairs , sir . " " I never insult you , sir . I say I beg you to remember you son be a gentleman as well as yourself . I know very well that you give I plenty of money , " say ( finger a bundle of note which he have get in the morning from ) . " you tell it I often enough , sir . there be no fear of my forget it . " " I wish you would remember other thing as well , sir , " the sire answer . " I wish you would remember that in this house -- so long as you choose to Honour it with you company , -- I be the master , and that name , and that that -- that you -- that I say -- " " that what , sir ? " ask , with scarcely a sneer , fill another glass of claret . " ----! " burst out he father with a screaming oath -- " that the name of those never be mention here , sir -- not one of the whole damne lot of 'em , sir . " " it be not i , sir , that introduce 's name . it be my sister who speak ill of she to ; and by I will defend she wherever I go . nobody shall speak lightly of that name in my presence . we family have do she quite enough injury already , I think , and may leave off revil she now she be down . I will shoot any man but you who say a word against she . " " go on , sir , go on , " the old gentleman say , he eye start out of he head . " go on about what , sir ? about the way in which we have treat that angel of a girl ? who tell I to love she ? it be you do . I might have chosen elsewhere , and look higher , perhaps , than you society : but I obey you . and now that she heart 's mine you give I order to fl it away , and punish she , kill she perhaps -- for the fault of other people . it be a shame , by , " say , work himself up into passion and enthusiasm as he proceed , " to play at fast and loose with a young girl 's affection -- and with such a angel as that -- one so superior to the people amongst whom she liv , that she might have excited envy , only she be so good and gentle , that it be a wonder anybody da to hate she . if I desert she , sir , do you suppose she forget I ? " " I be not go to have any of this dam sentimental nonsense and humbug here , sir , " the father cry out . " there shall be no beggar - marriage in my family . if you choose to fl away eight thousand a year , which you may have for the asking , you may do it : but by you take you pack and walk out of this house , sir . will you do as I tell you , once for all , sir , or will you not
not ? " " marry that mulatto woman ? " say , pull up he shirt - collar . " I do not like the colour , sir . ask the black that sweep opposite fleet market , sir . I be not go to marry a . " pull frantically at the cord by which he be accustom to summon the butler when he want wine -- and almost black in the face , order that functionary to call a coach for . " I have do it , " say , come into the ' a hour afterwards , look very pale . " what , my boy ? " say . tell what have pass between he father and himself . " I will marry she to - morrow , " he say with a oath . " I love she more every day , . " and of a the most obstinate and courageous can not hold out against starvation ; so the elder feel himself pretty easy about he adversary in the encounter we have just describe ; and as soon as 's supplies fell short , confidently expect he unconditional submission . it be unlucky , to be sure , that the lad should have secure a stock of provision on the very day when the first encounter take place ; but this relief be only temporary , old thought , and would but delay 's surrender . no communication pass between father and son for some day . the former be sulky at this silence , but not disquiet ; for , as he say , he know where he could put the screw upon , and only wait the result of that operation . he tell the sister the upshot of the dispute between they , but order they to take no notice of the matter , and welcome on he return as if nothing have happen . he cover be laid as usual every day , and perhaps the old gentleman rather anxiously expect he ; but he never come . some one inquire at the ' regard he , where it be say that he and he friend have leave town . one gusty , raw day at the end of -- the rain whipp the pavement of that ancient street where the old Slaughter ' coffee - house be once situate -- come into the coffee - room , look very haggard and pale ; although dress rather smartly in a blue coat and brass button , and a neat buff waistcoat of the fashion of those day . here be he friend , in blue and brass too , have abandon the military frock and french - grey trousers , which be the usual coverings of he lanky person . have be in the coffee - room for a hour or more . he have try all the papers , but could not read they . he have look at the clock many score of time ; and at the street , where the rain be patter down , and the people as they clink by in patten , leave long reflection on the shining stone : he tattoo at the table : he bit he nail most completely , and nearly to the quick ( he be accustom to ornament he great big hand in this way ) : he balance the tea - spoon dexterously on the milk jug : upset it , & c. , & c. ; and in fact show those sign of disquietude , and practise those desperate attempt at amusement , which man be accustom to employ when very anxious , and expectant , and pertur in mind . some of he comrade , gentleman who use the room , joke he about the splendour of he costume and he agitation of manner . one ask he if he be go to be marry ? laugh , and say he would send he acquaintance ( major Wagstaff of the Engineers ) a piece of cake when that event take place . at length make he appearance , very smartly dress , but very pale and agitate as we have say . he wip he pale face with a large yellow bandan to pocket - handkerchief that be prodigiously scent . he shook hand with , look at the clock , and tell , the waiter , to bring he some curacao . of this cordial he swallow off a couple of glass with nervous eagerness . he friend ask with some interest about he health . " could not get a wink of sleep till daylight , , " say he . " Infernal headache and fever . get up at nine , and go down to the for a bath . I say , , I feel just as I do on the morning I go out with at . " " so do I , " respond . " I be a deuced deal more nervous than you be that morning . you make a famous breakfast , I remember . eat something now . " " you be a good old fellow , . I will drink you health , old boy , and farewell to -- " " no , no ; two glass be enough , " interrupt he . " here , take away the liqueur , . have some cayenne - pepper with you fowl . make haste though , for it be time we be there . " it be about half a hour from twelve when this brief meeting and colloquy take place between the two captain . a coach , into which 's servant put he master 's desk and dressing - case , have be in waiting for some time ; and into this the two gentleman hurrie under a umbrella , and the valet mount on the box , curse
curse the rain and the dampness of the coachman who be steam beside he . " we shall find a better trap than this at the church - door , " say he ; " that be a comfort . " and the carriage drive on , take the road down , where and 's red jacket 's still ; where there be oil - lamps ; where Achille be not yet bear ; nor the arch raise ; nor the hideous equestrian monster which pervade it and the neighbourhood ; and so they drive down by to a certain chapel near the there . a chariot be in waiting with four horse ; likewise a coach of the kind call glass coach . only a very few idler be collect on account of the dismal rain . " hang it ! " say , " I say only a pair . " " my master would have four , " say 's servant , who be in waiting ; and he and 's man agree as they follow and into the church , that it be a " reg'lar shabby turn hout ; and with scarce so much as a breakfast or a wedding faviour . " " here you be , " say we old friend , , come forward . " you be five minute late , , my boy . what a day , eh ? Demmy , it be like the commencement of the rainy season in . but you will find my carriage be watertight . come along , my mother and Emmy be in the vestry . " be splendid . he be fatter than ever . he shirt collar be higher ; he face be redder ; he shirt - frill flaunt gorgeously out of he variegated waistcoat . Varnished boot be not invent as yet ; but the on he beautiful leg shone so , that they must have be the identical pair in which the gentleman in the old picture use to shave himself ; and on he light green coat there bloom a fine wedding favour , like a great white spreading magnolia . in a word , have throw the great cast . he be go to be marry . hence he pallor and nervousness -- he sleepless night and agitation in the morning . I have hear people who have go through the same thing own to the same emotion . after three or four ceremony , you get accustom to it , no doubt ; but the first dip , everybody allow , be awful . the bride be dress in a brown silk pelisse ( as have since inform I ) , and wear a straw bonnet with a pink ribbon ; over the bonnet she have a veil of white lace , a gift from , she brother . himself have ask leave to present she with a gold chain and watch , which she sport on this occasion ; and she mother give she she diamond brooch -- almost the only trinket which be leave to the old lady . as the service go on , sit and whimper a great deal in a pew , consol by the irish maid - servant and from the lodging . would not be present . act for he father , give away the bride , whilst step up as groomsman to he friend . there be nobody in the church besides the officiating person and the small marriage party and they attendant . the two valet sit aloon superciliously . the rain come ratt down on the window . in the interval of the service you hear it , and the sobbing of old in the pew . the parson 's tone echo sadly through the empty wall . 's " I will " be sound in very deep bass . 's response come flutter up to she lip from she heart , but be scarcely hear by anybody except . when the service be complete , come forward and kiss he sister , the bride , for the first time for many month -- 's look of gloom have go , and he seem quite proud and radiant . " it be you turn , , " say he , put he hand fondly upon 's shoulder ; and go up and touch on the cheek . then they go into the vestry and sign the register . " bless you , , " say , grasp he by the hand , with something very like moisture glisten in he eye . reply only by nodd he head . he heart be too full to say much . " write directly , and come down as soon as you can , you know , " Osborne say . after have take a hysterical adieu of she daughter , the pair go off to the carriage . " get out of the way , you little devils , " cry to a small crowd of damp urchin , that be hang about the chapel - door . the rain drive into the bride and bridegroom 's faces as they pass to the chariot . the postilion 's favour draggle on they dripping jacket . the few child make a dismal cheer , as the carriage , splash mud , drive away . stand in the church - porch , look at it , a queer figure . the small crew of spectator jeer he . he be not think about they or they laughter . " come home and have some tiffin , , " a voice cry behind he ; as a pudgy hand be laid on he shoulder , and the honest fellow 's reverie be interrupt . but the have no heart to go a - feasting with . he put the weeping old lady and she attendant into the carriage along with
with , and leave they without any farther word pass . this carriage , too , drive away , and the urchin give another sarcastical cheer . " here , you little beggar , " say , give some sixpence amongst they , and then go off by himself through the rain . it be all over . they be married , and happy , he pray . never since he be a boy have he feel so miserable and so lonely . he longe with a heart - sick yearning for the first few day to be over , that he might see she again . some ten day after the above ceremony , three young man of we acquaintance be enjoy that beautiful prospect of bow window on the one side and blue sea on the other , which affords to the traveller . sometimes it be towards the ocean -- smile with countless dimple , speckle with white sail , with a hundr bathing - machine kiss the skirt of he blue garment -- that the look enrapture : sometimes , on the contrary , a lover of human nature rather than of prospect of any kind , it be towards the bow window that he turn , and that swarm of human life which they exhibit . from one issue the note of a piano , which a young lady in ringlet practise six hour daily , to the delight of the fellow - lodger : at another , lovely Polly , the nurse - maid , may be see dandling master Omnium in she arm : whilst , he papa , be beheld eat prawns , and devour the for breakfast , at the window below . Yonder be the , who be look out for the young officer of the , who be pretty sure to be pace the cliff ; or again it be a city man , with a nautical turn , and a telescope , the size of a six - pounder , who have he instrument point seaward , so as to command every pleasure - boat , herr - boat , or bathing - machine that come to , or quit , the shore , & c. , &c . but have we any leisure for a description of ?-- for , a clean Naple with genteel lazzaroni -- for , that always look brisk , gay , and gaudy , like a harlequin 's jacket -- for , which use to be seven hour distant from at the time of we story ; which be now only a hundred minute off ; and which may approach who know how much nearer , unless come and untimely bombard it ? " what a monstrous fine girl that be in the lodging over the milliner 's , " one of these three promenader remark to the other ; " , , do you see what a wink she give I as I pass ? " " do not break she heart , , you rascal , " say another . " do not trifle with she affections , you ! " " get away , " say , quite pleased , and leer up at the maid - servant in question with a most killing ogle . be even more splendo at than he have be at he sister 's marriage . he have brilliant under- waistcoat , any one of which would have set up a moderate buck . he sport a military frock - coat , ornament with frog , knob , black buttons , and meander embroidery . he have affect a military appearance and habits of late ; and he walk with he two friend , who be of that profession , clink he boot-spur , swagger prodigiously , and shoot death - glance at all the servant girl who be worthy to be slain . " what shall we do , boy , till the lady return ? " the buck ask . the lady be out to in he carriage on a drive . " let 's have a game at billiards , " one of he friend say -- the tall one , with lacquer mustachio . " no , dammy ; no , , " reply , rather alarmed . " no billiards to - day , , my boy ; yesterday be enough . " " you play very well , " say , laugh . " do not he , ? how well he make that - five stroke , eh ? " " famous , " say . " be a devil of a fellow at billiards , and at everything else , too . I wish there be any tiger - hunt about here ! we might go and kill a few before dinner . ( there go a fine girl ! what a ankle , eh , ? ) tell we that story about the tiger - hunt , and the way you do for he in the jungle -- it be a wonderful story that , . " here give a yawn . " it be rather slow work , " say he , " down here ; what shall we do ? " " shall we go and look at some horse that 's just bring from fair ? " say . " suppose we go and have some jelly at 's , " and the rogue , willing to kill two bird with one stone . " Devilish fine gal at 's . " " suppose we go and see the Lightning come in , it be just about time ? " say . this advice prevail over the stable and the jelly , they turn towards the coach - office to witness the Lightning 's arrival . as they pass , they meet the carriage -- 's open carriage , with its magnificent armorial
armorial bearing -- that splendo conveyance in which he use to drive , about at , majestic and solitary , with he arm fold , and he hat cock ; or , more happy , with lady by he side . two be in the carriage now : one a little person , with light hair , and dress in the height of the fashion ; the other in a brown silk pelisse , and a straw bonnet with pink ribbon , with a rosy , round , happy face , that do you good to behold . she check the carriage as it neare the three gentleman , after which exercise of authority she look rather nervous , and then begin to blush most absurdly . " we have have a delightful drive , , " she say , " and -- and we be so glad to come back ; and , , do not let he be late . " " do not be lead we husband into mischief , , you wick , wick man you , " say , shak at a pretty little finger cover with the neatest french kid glove . " no billiards , no smoking , no naughtiness ! " " my dear -- now ! upon my honour ! " be all Jos could ejaculate by way of reply ; but he manage to fall into a tolerable attitude , with he head lie on he shoulder , grinn upwards at he victim , with one hand at he back , which he support on he cane , and the other hand ( the one with the diamond ring ) fumbl in he shirt - frill and among he under-waistcoat . as the carriage drive off he kiss the diamond hand to the fair lady within . he wish all Cheltenham , all Chowringhee , all , could see he in that position , wave he hand to such a beauty , and in company with such a famous buck as of the Guard . we young bride and bridegroom have choose as the place where they would pass the first few day after they marriage ; and have engage apartment at the , enjoy themselves there in great comfort and quietude , until presently join they . be he the only companion they find there . as they be come into the hotel from a sea -side walk one afternoon , on whom should they light but and she husband . the recognition be immediate . fly into the arm of she dearest friend . and shook hand together cordially enough : and , in the course of a very few hour , find mean to make the latter forget that little unpleasant passage of word which have happene between they . " do you remember the last time we meet at 's , when I be so rude to you , dear ? I think you seem careless about dear . it be that make I angry : and so pert : and so unkind : and so ungrateful . do forgive I ! " say , and she hold out she hand with so frank and win a grace , that Osborne could not but take it . by humbly and frankly acknowledge yourself to be in the wrong , there be no knowing , my son , what good you may do . I know once a gentleman and very worthy practitioner in , who use to do little wrongs to he neighbour on purpose , and in order to apologise for they in a open and manly way afterwards -- and what ensue ? my friend be like everywhere , and deem to be rather impetuous -- but the honestest fellow . 's humility pass for sincerity with . these two young couple have plenty of tale to relate to each other . the marriage of either be discuss ; and they prospects in life canvass with the greatest frankness and interest on both side . 's marriage be to be make known to he father by he friend ; and young tremble rather for the result of that communication . , on whom all 's hope depend , still hold out . unable to make a entry into she house in , she affectionate nephew and niece have follow she to , where they have emissary continually plant at she door . " I wish you could see some of 's friend who be always about we door , " say , laugh . " do you ever see a dun , my dear ; or a bailiff and he man ? two of the abominable wretch watch all last week at the greengrocer 's opposite , and we could not get away until . if do not relent , what shall we do ? " , with roar of laughter , relate a dozen amuse anecdote of he dun , and 's adroit treatment of they . he vowe with a great oath that there be no woman in who could talk a creditor over as she could . almost immediately after they marriage , she practice have begin , and she husband find the immense value of such a wife . they have credit in plenty , but they have bill also in abundance , and laboure under a scarcity of ready money . do these debt - difficulties affect 's good spirit ? no . everybody in fair must have remark how well those live who be comfortably and thoroughly in debt : how they deny themselves nothing ; how jolly and easy they be in they minds . and he wife have the very best apartment at the inn at ; the landlord , as he bring in the first dish , bow before they as to he greatest customer : and abuse the dinner and wine with a audacity which
which no grandee in the land could surpass . custom , a manly appearance , faultless boot and clothes , and a happy fierceness of manner , will often help a man as much as a great balance at the banker 's . the two wedding party meet constantly in each other 's apartment . after two or three night the gentleman of a evening have a little piquet , as they wife sate and chat apart . this pastime , and the arrival of , who make he appearance in he grand open carriage , and who play a few game at billiards with , replenish 's purse somewhat , and give he the benefit of that ready money for which the greatest spirit be sometimes at a stand - still . so the three gentleman walk down to see the Lightning coach come in . punctual to the minute , the coach crowd inside and out , the guard blow he accustom tune on the horn -- the come tear down the street , and pull up at the coach - office . " Hullo ! there be old , " cry , quite delighted to see he old friend perch on the roof ; and whose promise visit to have be delay until now . " how be you , old fellow ? glad you be come down . Emmy will be delighted to see you , " Osborne say , shak he comrade warmly by the hand as soon as he descent from the vehicle be effect -- and then he add , in a lower and agitate voice , " what be the news ? have you be in ? what do the governor say ? tell I everything . " look very pale and grave . " I have see you father , " say he . " how be -- . ? I will tell you all the news presently : but I have bring the great news of all : and that be -- " " out with it , old fellow , " say . " we be order to . all the army go -- guard and all . 's get the gout , and be mad at not be able to move . go in command , and we embark from next week . " this news of war could not but come with a shock upon we lover , and cause all these gentleman to look very serious . on his Canvass what be the secret mesmerism which friendship possess , and under the operation of which a person ordinarily sluggish , or cold , or timid , become wise , active , and resolute , in another 's behalf ? as , after a few pass from , despise pain , read with the back of he head , see mile off , look into next week , and perform other wonder , of which , in he own private normal condition , he be quite incapable ; so you see , in the affair of the world and under the magnetism of friendship , the modest man become bold , the shy confident , the lazy active , or the impetuous prudent and peaceful . what be it , on the other hand , that make the lawyer eschew he own cause , and call in he learned brother as a adviser ? and what cause the doctor , when ail , to send for he rival , and not sit down and examine he own tongue in the chimney bass , or write he own prescription at he study - table ? I throw out these query for intelligent reader to answer , who know , at once , how credulous we be , and how sceptical , how soft and how obstinate , how firm for other and how diffident about ourselves : meanwhile , it be certain that we friend , who be personally of so comply a disposition that if he parent have press he much , it be probable he would have step down into the kitchen and marry the cook , and who , to further he own interest , would have find the most insuperable difficulty in walk across the street , find himself as busy and eager in the conduct of 's affair , as the most selfish tactician could be in the pursuit of he own . whilst we friend and he young wife be enjoy the first blushing day of the honeymoon at , honest be leave as 's plenipotentiary in , to transact all the business part of the marriage . he duty it be to call upon old and he wife , and to keep the former in good humour : to draw and he brother - in - law nearer together , so that 's position and dignity , as collector of , might compensate for he father 's loss of station , and tend to reconcile old to the alliance : and finally , to communicate it to the latter in such a way as should least irritate the old gentleman . now , before he face the head of the house with the news which it be he duty to tell , bethotch he that it would be polintic to make friend of the rest of the family , and , if possible , have the lady on he side . they can not be angry in they heart , think he . no woman ever be really angry at a romantic marriage . a little cry out , and they must come round to they brother ; when the three of we will lay siege to old . so this Machiavellian captain of infantry cast about he for some happy means or stratagem by which he could gently and gradually bring the to a knowledge of they brother 's secret .
. by a little inquiry regard he mother 's engagement , he be pretty soon able to find out by whom of she ladyship 's friend party be give at that season ; where he would be likely to meet 's sister ; and , though he have that abhorrence of rout and evening party which many sensible man , ala ! aentertain , he soon find one where the be to be present . make he appearance at the ball , where he dance a couple of set with both of they , and be prodigiously polite , he actually have the courage to ask for a few minute ' conversation at a early hour the next day , when he have , he say , to communicate to she news of the very greatest interest . what be it that make she start back , and gaze upon he for a moment , and then on the ground at she foot , and make as if she would faint on he arm , have he not by opportunely tread on she toe , bring the young lady back to self - control ? why be she so violently agitate at 's request ? this can never be know . but when he come the next day , be not in the drawing - room with she sister , and go off for the purpose of fetch the latter , and the and be leave together . they be both so silent that the ticktock of the of clock on the mantelpiece become quite rudely audible . " what a nice party it be last night , " at length begin , encouragingly ; " and -- and how you be improve in you dancing , . surely somebody have teach you , " she add , with amiable archness . " you should see I dance a reel with of ours ; and a jig -- do you ever see a jig ? but I think anybody could dance with you , , who dance so well . " " be the major 's lady young and beautiful , ? " the fair questioner continue . " ah , what a terrible thing it must be to be a soldier 's wife ! I wonder they have any spirits to dance , and in these dreadful time of war , too ! of , I tremble sometimes when I think of we dearest , and the dangers of the poor soldier . be there many married officer of the -- th , ? " " upon my word , she have play she hand rather too openly , " think ; but this observation be merely parenthetic , and be not hear through the crevice of the door at which the governess utter it . " one of we young man be just marry , " say , now come to the point . " it be a very old attachment , and the young couple be as poor as church mouse . " " o , how delightful ! o , how romantic ! " cry , as the say " old attachment " and " poor . " she sympathy encourage he . " the finest young fellow in the regiment , " he continue . " not a braver or handsomer officer in the army ; and such a charme wife ! how you would like she ! how you will like she when you know she , . " the young lady think the actual moment have arrive , and that 's nervousness which now come on and be visible in many twitching of he face , in he manner of beat the ground with he great foot , in the rapid buttoning and unbuttoning of he frock - coat , &c.-- , I say , think that when he have give himself a little air , he would unbosom himself entirely , and prepare eagerly to listen . and the clock , in the altar on which be situate , begin , after a preparatory convulsion , to toll twelve , the mere tolling seem as if it would last until one -- so prolonge be the knell to the anxious spinster . " but it be not about marriage that I come to speak -- that be that marriage -- that be -- no , I mean --my dear , it be about we dear friend , " say . " ? " she say in a tone so discomfit that and laugh at the other side of the door , and even that abandon wretch of a felt inclin to smile himself ; for he be not altogether unconscious of the state of affair : have often banter he gracefully and say , " hang it , , why do not you take old ? she will have you if you ask she . I will bet you five to two she will . " " yes , about , then , " he continue . " there have be a difference between he and . and I regard he so much -- for you know we have be like brothers -- that I hope and pray the quarrel may be settle . we must go abroad , . we may be order off at a day 's warning . who know what may happen in the campaign ? do not be agitate , dear ; and those two at least should part friend . " " there have be no quarrel , , except a little usual scene with , " the lady say . " we be expect back daily . what want be only for he good . he have but to come back , and I be sure all will be well ; and dear , who go away from here in sad sad anger , I know
know will forgive he . woman forgive but too readily , . " " such a angel as you I be sure would , " say , with atrocious astuteness . " and no man can pardon himself for give a woman pain . what would you feel , if a man be faithless to you ? " " I should perish -- I should throw myself out of window -- I should take poison -- I should pine and die . I know I should , " cry , who have nevertheless go through one or two affair of the heart without any idea of suicide . " and there be other , " continue , " as true and as kind - hear as yourself . I be not speak about the west indian heiress , , but about a poor girl whom once love , and who be breed from she childhood to think of nobody but he . I have see she in she poverty uncomplaining , break - heart , without a fault . it be of I speak . dear miss , can you generous heart quarrel with you brother for be faithful to she ? could he own conscience ever forgive he if he desert she ? be she friend -- she always love you -- and -- and I be come here charge by to tell you that he hold he engagement to she as the most sacred duty he have ; and to entreat you , at least , to be on he side . " when any strong emotion take possession of , and after the first word or two of hesitation , he could speak with perfect fluency , and it be evident that he eloquence on this occasion make some impression upon the lady whom he address . " well , " say she , " this be -- most surprising -- most painful -- most extraordinary -- what will say ?-- that should fl away such a superb establishment as be offer to he but at any rate he have find a very brave champion in you , . it be of no use , however , " she continue , after a pause ; " I feel for poor , most certainly -- most sincerely , you know . we never think the match a good one , though we be always very kind to she here -- very . but will never consent , I be sure . and a well bring up young woman , you know -- with a well - regulate mind , must -- must give she up , dear , indeed he must . " " ought a man to give up the woman he love , just when misfortune befell she ? " say , hold out he hand . " dear , be this the counsel I hear from you ? my dear young lady ! you must befriend she . he can not give she up . he must not give she up . would a man , think you , give you up if you be poor ? " this adroit question touch the heart of not a little . " I do not know whether we poor girl ought to believe what you men say , , " she say . " there be that in woman 's tenderness which induce she to believe too easily . I be afraid you be cruel , cruel deceiver , " -- and certainly think he feel a pressure of the hand which have extend to he . he drop it in some alarm . " Deceiver ! " say he . " no , dear , all man be not ; you brother be not ; have love ever since they be child ; no wealth would make he marry any but she . ought he to forsake she ? would you counsel he to do so ? " what could say to such a question , and with she own peculiar view ? she could not answer it , so she parry it by say , " well , if you be not a deceiver , at least you be very romantic " ; and let this observation pass without challenge . at length when , by the help of farther polite speech , he deem that be sufficiently prepared to receive the whole news , he pour it into she ear . " could not give up -- be marry to she " -- and then he relate the circumstance of the marriage as we know they already : how the poor girl would have die have not she lover keep he faith : how have refuse all consent to the match , and a licence have be get : and have come from to give away the bride : how they have go to in 's chariot - and - four to pass the honeymoon : and how count on he dear kind sister to befriend he with they father , as woman -- so true and tender as they be -- assuredly would do . and so , ask permission ( readily grant ) to see she again , and rightly conjectur that the news he have bring would be tell in the next five minute to the other lady , make he bow and take he leave . he be scarcely out of the house , when and rush in to , and the whole wonderful secret be impart to they by that lady . to do they justice , neither of the sister be very much displeased . there be something about a runaway match with which few lady can be seriously angry , and rather rise in they estimation , from the spirit which she have display in consent to the union . as they debat the story , and prattle
prattle about it , and wonder what would do and say , come a loud knock , as of a avenging thunder - clap , at the door , which make these conspirator start . it must be , they think . but it be not he . it be only , who have come from the City accord to appointment , to conduct the lady to a flower - show . this gentleman , as may be imagine , be not keep long in ignorance of the secret . but he face , when he hear it , show a amazement which be very different to that look of sentimental wonder which the countenance of the sister wore . be a man of the world , and a junior partner of a wealthy firm . he know what money be , and the value of it : and a delightful throb of expectation light up he little eye , and cause he to smile on he , as he think that by this piece of folly of 's she might be worth thirty thousand pound more than he have ever hope to get with she . " ! , " say he , survey even the elder sister with some interest , " Eels will be sorry he cry off . you may be a fifty thousand pounder yet . " the sister have never think of the money question up to that moment , but banter they with graceful gaiety about it during they forenoon 's excursion ; and they have risen not a little in they own esteem by the time when , the morning amusement over , they drive back to dinner . and do not let my respecte reader exclai m against this selfishness as unnatural . it be but this present morning , as he ride on the omnibus from ; while it change horse , this present chronicler , be on the roof , mark three little child play in a puddle below , very dirty , and friendly , and happy . to these three presently come another little one . " POLLy , " say she , " you 's . " at which the child get up from the puddle instantly , and run off to pay they court to . and as the omnibus drive off I see with the infantine procession at she tail , march with great dignity towards the stall of a neighbour lollipop-woman . in the so have prepare the sister , hasten away to the City to perform the rest and more difficult part of the task which he have undertaken . the idea of face old render he not a little nervous , and more than once he think of leave the young lady to communicate the secret , which , as he be aware , they could not long retain . but he have promise to report to upon the manner in which the elder Osborne bear the intelligence ; so go into the City to the paternal counting - house in , he despatch thence a note to begge for a half - hour 's conversation relative to the affair of he son . 's messenger return from 's house of business , with the compliment of the latter , who would be very happy to see the immediately , and away accordingly go to confront he . the , with a half - guilty secret to confess , and with the prospect of a painful and stormy interview before he , enter 's office with a most dismal countenance and abash gait , and , pass through the outer room where , be greet by that functionary from he desk with a waggish air which farther discomfit he . wink and nod and point he pen towards he patron 's door , and say , " you will find the governor all right , " with the most provoke good humour . Osborne rise too , and shake he heartily by the hand , and say , " how do , my dear boy ? " with a cordiality that make poor 's ambassador feel doubly guilty . he hand lay as if dead in the old gentleman 's grasp . he feel that he , , be more or less the cause of all that have happen . it be he have bring back to : it be he have applaude , encourage , transact almost the marriage which he be come to reveal to 's father : and the latter be receive he with smile of welcome ; pat he on the shoulder , and call he " , my dear boy . " the envoy have indeed good reason to hang he head . fully believe that have come to announce he son 's surrender . and he principal be talk over the matter between and he father , at the very moment when 's messenger arrive . both agree that be send in he submission . both have be expect it for some day -- and " ! , what a marriage we will have ! " say to he clerk , snapp he big finger , and jingl all the guinea and shilling in he great pocket as he eye he subordinate with a look of triumph . with similar operations conduct in both pocket , and a know jolly air , from he chair regard seat blank and silent opposite to he . " what a bumpkin he be for a in the army , " old thought . " I wonder have not teach he better manners . " at last summon courage to begin . " , " say he , " I have bring you some very grave news . I have be at the horse Guards this morning , and there be no doubt that we regiment will be order abroad
abroad , and on its way to Belgium before the week be over . and you know , sir , that we sha not be home again before a tussle which may be fatal to many of we . " look grave . " my be --, the regiment will do its duty , sir , I daresay , " he say . " the be very strong , sir , " go on . " the and will be a long time before they can bring they troops down . we shall have the first of the fight , sir ; and depend on it Boney will take care that it shall be a hard one . " " what be you drive at , ? " he interlocutor say , uneasy and with a scowl . " I suppose no 's afraid of any ---- , hey ? " " I only mean , that before we go , and consider the great and certain risk that hang over every one of we -- if there be any difference between you and -- it would be as well , sir , that -- that you should shake hand : would not it ? should anything happen to he , I think you would never forgive yourself if you have not part in charity . " as he say this , poor blush crimson , and feel and own that he himself be a traitor . but for he , perhaps , this severance need never have take place . why have not 's marriage be delay ? what call be there to press it on so eagerly ? he feel that would have part from at any rate without a mortal pang . , too , have recovere the shock of lose he . it be he counsel have brotch about this marriage , and all that be to ensue from it . and why be it ? because he love she so much that he could not bear to see she unhappy : or because he own suffering of suspense be so unendurable that he be glad to crush they at once -- as we hasten a funeral after a death , or , when a separation from those we love be imminent , can not rest until the parting be over . " you be a good fellow , , " say in a soften voice ; " and I and should not part in anger , that be true . look here . I have do for he as much as any father ever do . he be have three time as much money from I , as I warrant you father ever give you . but I do not brag about that . how I have toil for he , and work and employ my talents and energy , I will not say . ask . ask himself . ask the City of . well , I propose to he such a marriage as any nobleman in the land might be proud of -- the only thing in life I ever ask he -- and he refuse I . be I wrong ? be the quarrel of my make ? what do I seek but he good , for which I have be toil like a convict ever since he be bear ? nobody can say there be anything selfish in I . let he come back . I say , here be my hand . I say , forget and forgive . as for marry now , it be out of the question . let he and make it up , and make out the marriage afterwards , when he come back a Colonel ; for he shall be a , by g -- he shall , if money can do it . I be glad you have bring he round . I know it be you , . you have take he out of many a scrape before . let he come . I sha not be hard . come along , and dine in to - day : both of you . the old shop , the old hour . you will find a neck of venison , and no question ask . " this praise and confidence smote 's heart very keenly . every moment the colloquy continue in this tone , he feel more and more guilty . " , " say he , " I fear you deceive yourself . I be sure you do . be much too high - minde a man ever to marry for money . a threat on you part that you would disinherit he in case of disobedience would only be follow by resistance on he . " " why , hang it , man , you do not call offer he eight or ten thousand a year threaten he ? " say , with still provoke good humour . " ' , if will have I , I be she man . I be not particular about a shade or so of tawny . " and the old gentleman give he know grin and coarse laugh . " you forget , sir , previous engagement into which have enter , " the ambassador say , gravely . " what engagement ? what the do you mean ? you do not mean , " continue , gather wrath and astonishment as the thought now first come upon he ; " you do not mean that he be such a ---- fool as to be still hanker after that swindl old bankrupt 's daughter ? you have not come here for to make I suppose that he want to marry she ? , that be a good one . my son and hey marry a beggar 's girl out of a gutter . d ---- he , if he do , let he buy
buy a broom and sweep a crossing . she be always dangl and ogl after he , I recollect now ; and I 've no doubt she be put on by she old sharper of a father . " " be you very good friend , sir , " interpose , almost pleased at finding himself grow angry . " time be you call he better name than rogue and swindler . the match be of you making . have no right to play fast and loose -- " " fast and loose ! " how out old . " fast and loose ! why , hang I , those be the very word my gentleman use himself when he give himself air , last be a fortnight , and talk about the british army to he father who make he . what , it be you who have be a setting of he up -- be it ? and my service to you , . it be you who want to introduce beggar into my family . thank you for nothing , . indeed -- he , he ! why wshould he ? I warrant you she would go to he fast enough without . " " , " say , start up in undisguised anger ; " no man shall abuse that lady in my hearing , and you least of all . " " o , you be a - go to call I out , be you ? stop , let I ring the bell for pistol for two . send you here to insult he father , do he ? " say , pull at the bell - cord . " , " say , with a falter voice , " it be you who be insult the best creature in the world . you have best spare she , sir , for she be you son 's wife . " and with this , feel that he could say no more , go away , sink back in he chair , and look wildly after he . a clerk come in , obedient to the bell ; and the be scarcely out of the court where 's office be , when the chief clerk come rush hatless after he . " for 's sake , what be it ? " say , catch the by the skirt . " the 's in a fit . what have be do ? " " he marry five day ago , " reply . " I be he groomsman , , and you must stand he friend . " the old clerk shook he head . " if that be you news , , it be bad . the governor will never forgive he . " beg to report progress to he at the hotel where he be stop , and walk off moodily westwards , greatly pertur as to the past and the future . when the family come to dinner that evening , they find the father of the house seat in he usual place , but with that air of gloom on he face , which , whenever it appear there , keep the whole circle silent . the lady , and who dine with they , feel that the news have be communicate to . he dark look affect so far as to render he still and quiet : but he be unusually bland and attentive to , by whom he sit , and to she sister presid at the head of the table . , by consequence , be alone on she side of the board , a gap be leave between she and . now this be 's place when he dine at home ; and he cover , as we say , be laid for he in expectation of that truant 's return . nothing occur during dinner - time except smile 's flagge confidential whisper , and the clinking of plate and china , to interrupt the silence of the repast . the servant go about stealthily do they duty . Mute at funeral could not look more glum than the domestic of the neck of venison of which he have invite to partake , be carve by he in perfect silence ; but he own share go away almost untasted , though he drank much , and the butler assiduously fill he glass . at last , just at the end of the dinner , he eye , which have be star at everybody in turn , fix themselves for a while upon the plate laid for . he point to it presently with he left hand . he daughter look at he and do not comprehend , or choose to comprehend , the signal ; nor do the servants at first understand it . " take that plate away , " at last he say , get up with a oath -- and with this push he chair back , he walk into he own room . 's dining - room be the usual apartment which go in he house by the name of the study ; and be sacr to the master of the house . Hither would retire of a forenoon when not mind to go to church ; and here pass the morning in he crimson leather chair , read the paper . a couple of glazed book - case be here , contain standard work in stout gilt bindings . the " annual register , " the " 's , " " 's , " and " and . " from year 's end to year 's end he never take one of these volume from the shelf ; but there be no member of the family that would dare for he life to touch one of the book , except upon those rare evening when there be no dinner - party , and
and when the great scarlet Bible and prayer - book be take out from the corner where they stand beside he copy of the Peerage , and the servants be ring up to the dining parlour , Osborne read the evening service to he family in a loud grat pompous voice . no member of the household , child , or domestic , ever enter that room without a certain terror . here he check the housekeeper 's account , and overhaule the butler 's cellar - book . hence he could command , across the clean gravel court -yard , the back entrance of the stable with which one of he bell communicate , and into this yard the coachman issue from he premise as into a dock , and swore at he from the study window . four time a year miss enter this apartment to get she salary ; and he daughter to receive they quarterly allowance . as a boy have be horsewhip in this room many time ; he mother sit sick on the stair listen to the cut of the whip . the boy be scarcely ever know to cry under the punishment ; the poor woman use to fondle and kiss he secretly , and give he money to soothe he when he come out . there be a picture of the family over the mantelpiece , remove thither from the front room after 's death -- be on a pony , the elder sister hold he up a bunch of flower ; the younger lead by she mother 's hand ; all with red cheek and large red mouth , simper on each other in the approve family - portrait manner . the mother lay underground now , long since forget -- the sister and brother have a hundred different interest of they own , and , familiar still , be utterly estrange from each other . some few score of year afterwards , when all the party represent be grow old , what bitter satire there be in those flaunt childish family - portrait , with they farce of sentiment and smile lie , and innocence so self - conscious and self - satisfied . be own state portrait , with that of he great silver inkstand and arm -chair , have take the place of honour in the dining - room , vacate by the family - piece . to this study old retir then , greatly to the relief of the small party whom he leave . when the servant have withdraw , they begin to talk for a while volubly but very low ; then they go upstairs quietly , accompany they stealthily on he creaking shoe . he have no heart to sit alone drink wine , and so close to the terrible old gentleman in the study hard at hand . a hour at least after dark , the butler , not have receive any summon , venture to tap at he door and take he in wax candles and tea . the master of the house sate in he chair , pretend to read the paper , and when the servant , place the light and refreshment on the table by he , retire , get up and lock the door after he . this time there be no mistaking the matter ; all the household know that some great catastrophe be go to happen which be likely direly to affect . in the large shining mahogany escritoire have a drawer especially devoted to he son 's affair and papers . here he keep all the document relate to he ever since he have be a boy : here be he prize copy - book and draw - book , all bear 's hand , and that of the master : here be he first letter in large round - hand send he love to papa and mamma , and convey he petition for a cake . he dear godpapa be more than once mention in they . Curs quiver on old 's livid lip , and horrid hatred and disappointment writh in he heart , as look through some of these papers he come on that name . they be all mark and docket , and tie with red tape . it be -- " from , request 5s. , 23 , 18 --; answer , 25 " -- or " about a pony , 13 " -- and so forth . in another packet be " account " --" g .' tailor 's bills and outfit , draft on I by , . , " &c .-- he letter from the -- he agent 's letter , and the newspaper contain he commission : here be a whip he have when a boy , and in a paper a locket contain he hair , which he mother use to wear . turn one over after another , and muse over these memorial , the unhappy man pass many hour . he dearest vanity , ambitious hope , have all be here . what pride he have in he boy ! he be the handsomest child ever see . everybody say he be like a nobleman 's son . a royal princess have remark he , and kiss he , and ask he name in . what city man could show such another ? could a prince have be better care for ? anything that money could buy have be he son 's . he use to go down on speech - day with four horse and new livery , and scatter new shilling among the boy at the school where be : when he go with to the of he regiment , before the boy embark for , he give the officer such a dinner as the of might have sit down to . have he ever refuse a bill when draw one ?
? there they be -- pay without a word . many a general in the army could not ride the horse he have ! he have the child before he eye , on a hundred different day when he remember after dinner , when he use to come in as bold as a lord and drink off he glass by he father 's side , at the head of the table -- on the pony at , when he clear the hedge and keep up with the huntsman -- on the day when he be present to the at the levee , when all 's could not produce a finer young fellow . and this , this be the end of all ! -- to marry a bankrupt and fly in the face of duty and fortune ! what humiliation and fury : what pang of sickening rage , balk ambition and love ; what wound of outraged vanity , tenderness even , have this old worldling now to suffer under ! have examine these papers , and ponder over this one and the other , in that bitterest of all helpless woe , with which miserable man think of happy past time -- 's father take the whole of the document out of the drawer in which he have keep they so long , and lock they into a writing - box , which he tie , and seal with he seal . then he open the book - case , and take down the great red we have speak of a pompous book , seldom look at , and shin all over with gold . there be a frontispiece to the volume , represent sacrifice . here , accord to , have record on the fly - leaf , and in he large clerk - like hand , the date of he marriage and he wife 's death , and the birt and Christian name of he child . come first , then , then , and the day of the christening of each . take a pen , he carefully obliterate 's name from the page ; and when the leaf be quite dry , restore the volume to the place from which he have move it . then he take a document out of another drawer , where he own private papers be keep ; and have read it , crumple it up and light it at one of the candle , and see it burn entirely away in the grate . it be he will ; which be burn , he sate down and write off a letter , and rang for he servant , whom he charge to deliver it in the morning . it be morning already : as he go up to bed , the whole house be alight with the sunshine ; and the bird be singe among the fresh green leave in . anxious to keep all 's family and dependant in good humour , and to make as many friend as possible for in he hour of adversity , , who know the effect which good dinner and good wine have upon the soul of man , write off immediately on he return to he inn the most hospitable of invitation to , , begge that gentleman to dine with he at the 's next day . the note reach before he leave the City , and the instant reply be , that " present he respectful compliment , and will have the honour and pleasure of waiting on . " the invitation and the rough draft of the answer be show to and she daughter on he return to 's town that evening , and they talk about military gent and West end man with great exultation as the family sate and partook of tea . when the girl have go to rest , and discourse upon the strange event which be occur in the governor 's family . never have the clerk see he principal so move . when he go in to , after 's departure , find he chief black in the face , and all but in a fit : some dreadful quarrel , he be certain , have occur between . and the young . have be instruct to make out a account of all sum pay to within the last three year . " and a precious lot of money he have have too , " the chief clerk say , and respecte he old and young master the more , for the liberal way in which the guinea have be fling about . the dispute be something about . vow and declare she pitie that poor young lady to lose such a handsome young fellow as the Capting . as the daughter of a unlucky speculator , who have pay a very shabby dividend , have no great regard for . he respecte the house of before all other in the City of : and he hope and wish be that should marry a nobleman 's daughter . the clerk sleep a great deal sounder than he principal that night ; and , cuddl he child after breakfast ( of which he partake with a very hearty appetite , though he modest cup of life be only sweeten with brown sugar ) , he set off in he best suit and frilled shirt for business , promise he admiring wife not to punish 's port too severely that evening . 's countenance , when he arrive in the City at he usual time , strike those dependant who be accustom , for good reason , to watch its expression , as peculiarly ghastly and worn . at twelve o'clock ( of the firm of Higgs & Blatherwick , solicitor , row ) call by appointment , and be usher into the governor 's private room , and close there for more than
than a hour . at about one receive a note bring by 's man , and contain a inclosure for , which the clerk go in and deliver . a short time afterwards and , the next clerk , be summon , and request to witness a paper . " I have be make a new will , " say , to which these gentleman append they name accordingly . no conversation pass . look exceedingly grave as he come into the outer room , and very hard in 's face ; but there be not any explanations . it be remark that be particularly quiet and gentle all day , to the surprise of those who have augure ill from he darkling demeanour . he call no man name that day , and be not hear to swear once . he leave business early ; and before go away , summon he chief clerk once more , and have give he general instruction , ask he , after some see hesitation and reluctance to speak , if he know whether be in town ? say he believe he be . indeed both of they know the fact perfectly . take a letter direct to that officer , and give it to the clerk , request the latter to deliver it into 's own hand immediately . " and now , , " say he , take he hat , and with a strange look , " my mind will be easy . " exactly as the clock struck two ( there be no doubt a appointment between the pair ) call , and he and walk away together . the Colonel of the -- th regiment , in which and have company , be a old General who have make he first campaign under at , and be long since quite too old and feeble for command ; but he take some interest in the regiment of which he be the nominal head , and make certain of he young officer welcome at he table , a kind of hospitality which I believe be not now common amongst he breth . be a especial favourite of this old General . be verse in the literature of he profession , and could talk about the great , and the , and they wars , almost as well as the general himself , who be indifferent to the triumph of the present day , and whose heart be with the tactician of fifty year back . this officer send a summon to to come and breakfast with he , on the morning when alte he will and put on he best shirt frill , and then inform he young favourite , a couple of day in advance , of that which they be all expect -- a march order to go to . the order for the regiment to hold itself in readiness would leave the horse Guard in a day or two ; and as transport be in plenty , they would get they route before the week be over . recruit have come in during the stay of the regiment at ; and the old hope that the regiment which have help to beat in , and to rout on , would prove itself worthy of its historical reputation on the oft -trodden battle - grounds of the . " and so , my good friend , if you have any affaire la , " say the old General , take a pinch of snuff with he trembling white old hand , and then point to the spot of he robe de chambre under which he heart be still feebly beat , " if you have any Phillis to conseal , or to bid farewell to papa and mamma , or any will to make , I recommend you to set about you business without delay . " with which the give he young friend a finger to shake , and a good - natured nod of he powdered and pigtail head ; and the door be close upon , sate down to pen a poulet ( he be exceedingly vain of he French ) to of 's . this news make grave , and he think of we friend at , and then he be asham of himself that be always the first thing in he thought ( always before anybody -- before father and mother , sister and duty -- always at waking and sleep indeed , and all day long ) ; and return to he hotel , he send off a brief note to acquaint he with the information which he have receive , and which might tend farther , he hope , to bring about a reconciliation with . this note , despatch by the same messenger who have carry the invitation to on the previous day , alarme the worthy clerk not a little . it be inclose to he , and as he open the letter he tremble lest the dinner should be put off on which he be calculate . he mind be inexpressibly relieve when he find that the envelope be only a reminder for himself . ( " I shall expect you at half - past five , " write . ) he be very much interested about he employer 's family ; but , que voulez -vous ? a grand dinner be of more concern to he than the affair of any other mortal . be quite justifi in repeat the general 's information to any officer of the regiment whom he should see in the course of he peregrination ; accordingly he impart it to , whom he meet at the agent 's , and who -- such be he military ardour -- go off instantly to purchase a new sword at the accoutrement - maker 's . here this young fellow , who , though only seventeen
seventeen year of age , and about sixty - five inch high , with a constitution naturally rickety and much impaire by premature brandy and water , have a undoubted courage and a lion 's heart , poise , try , bent , and balance a weapon such as he think would do execution amongst . Shout " , ha ! " and stamp he little foot with tremendous energy , he deliver the point twice or thrice at , who parry the thrust laughingly with he bamboo walking - stick . , as may be suppose from he size and slenderness , be of the . , on the contrary , be a tall youth , and belong to ( 's ) the , and he try on a new bearskin cap , under which he look savage beyond he year . then these two lad go off to the ' , and have order a famous dinner , sate down and write off letter to the kind anxious parent at home -- letter full of love and heartiness , and pluck and bad spelling . ah ! there be many anxious heart beat through at that time ; and mother ' prayer and tear flow in many homestead . see young engage in composition at one of the coffee - room table at the ' , and the tear trickl down he nose on to the paper ( for the youngster be think of he mamma , and that he might never see she again ) , , who be go to write off a letter to , relent , and lock up he desk . " why should I ? " say he . " let she have this night happy . I will go and see my parent early in the morning , and go down to myself to - morrow . " so he go up and lay he big hand on young 's shoulder , and back up that young champion , and tell he if he would leave off brandy and water he would be a good soldier , as he always be a gentlemanly good - hear fellow . yong 's eye brighten up at this , for be greatly respect in the regiment , as the best officer and the cleverest man in it . " thank you , , " he say , rub he eye with he knuckle , " I be just -- just tell she I would . and , of , she be so dam kind to I . " the water pumps be at work again , and I be not sure that the soft - hear 's eye do not also twinkle . the two ensign , the , and , dine together in the same box . bring the letter from , in which the latter briefly present he compliment to , and request he to forward the inclose to . know nothing further ; he describe 's appearance , it be true , and he interview with he lawyer , wonder how the governor have swear at nobody , and -- especially as the wine circle round -- abound in speculation and conjecture . but these grow more vague with every glass , and at length become perfectly unintelligible . at a late hour put he guest into a hackney coach , in a hiccupping state , and swear that he would be the kick -- the kick -- 's friend for ever and ever . when take leave of we have say that he ask leave to come and pay she another visit , and the spinster expect he for some hour the next day , when , perhaps , have he come , and have he ask she that question which she be prepare to answer , she would have declare herself as she brother 's friend , and a reconciliation might have be effect between and he angry father . but though she wait at home the never come . he have he own affair to pursue ; he own parent to visit and conseal ; and at a early hour of the day to take he place on the Lightning coach , and go down to he friend at . in the course of the day hear she father give order that that meddl scoundrel , , should never be admit within he door again , and any hope in which she may have indulge privately be thus abruptly bring to a end . come , and be particularly affectionate to , and attentive to the broken - spirited old gentleman . for though he say he mind would be easy , the means which he have take to secure quiet do not seem to have succeed as yet , and the event of the past two day have visibly shatter he . in all the to leave conduct to the ladie , at the , assume a jovial and rattling manner , which prove that this young officer be become a more consummate hypocrite every day of he life . he be try to hide he own private feeling , first upon see in she new condition , and secondly to mask the apprehension he entertain as to the effect which the dismal news bring down by he would certainly have upon she . " it be my opinion , , " he say , " that the french emperor will be upon we , horse and foot , before three week be over , and will give the such a dance as shall make the appear mere child 's play . but you need not say that to , you know . there may not be any fighting on we side after all , and we business in may turn out to be a mere military occupation . many person think so ; and be full of
of fine people and lady of fashion . " so it be agree to represent the duty of the british army in in this harmless light to . this plot be arrange , the hypocritical Dobbin salute quite gaily , try to pay she one or two compliment relative to she new position as a bride ( which compliment , it must be confess , be exceedingly clumsy and hang fire woefully ) , and then fall to talk about , and the sea-air , and the gaiety of the place , and the beauty of the road and the merit of the coach and horse -- all in a manner quite incomprehensible to , and very amusing to , who be watch the , as indeed she watch every one near whom she come . , it must be own , have rather a mean opinion of she husband 's friend , . he lisp -- he be very plain and homely - look : and exceedingly awkward and ungainly . she like he for he attachment to she husband ( to be sure there be very little merit in that ) , and she think be most generous and kind in extend he friendship to he brother officer . have mimick 's lisp and queer manners many time to she , though to do he justice , he always speak most highly of he friend 's good quality . in she little day of triumph , and not know he intimately as yet , she make light of honest -- and he know she opinion of he quite well , and acquiesce in they very humbly . a time come when she know he better , and change she notion regard he ; but that be distant as yet . as for , have not be two hour in the ladie 's company before she understand he secret perfectly . she do not like he , and fear he privately ; nor be he very much prepossess in she favour . he be so honest , that she art and cajolery do not affect he , and he shrank from she with instinctive repulsion . and , as she be by no means so far superior to she sex as to be above jealousy , she dislike he the more for he adoration of . nevertheless , she be very respectful and cordial in she manner towards he . a friend to the ! a friend to she dearest benefactor ! she vow she should always love he sincerely : she remember he quite well on the Vauxhall night , as she tell archly , and she make a little fun of he when the two lady go to dress for dinner . pay scarcely any attention to , look upon he as a good - natured nincompoop and under - breed City man . patronise he with much dignity . when and be alone in the latter 's room , to which have follow he , take from he desk the letter which he have be charge by to deliver to he son . " it be not in my father 's handwriting , " say , look rather alarmed ; nor be it : the letter be from 's lawyer , and to the follow effect : " , 7 , 1815 . " sir , " I be commission by to inform you , that he abide by the determination which he before express to you , and that in consequence of the marriage which you have be pleased to contract , he cease to consider you henceforth as a member of he family . this determination be final and irrevocable . " although the money expend upon you in you minority , and the bill which you have draw upon he so unsparingly of late year , far exceed in amount the sum to which you be entitle in you own right ( be the third part of the fortune of you mother , the late and which revert to you at she decease , and to and ) ; yet I be instruct by to say , that he waive all claim upon you estate , and that the sum of 2,000 pound , 4 per cent . annuity , at the value of the day ( be you one - third share of the sum of 6,000 pound ) , shall be pay over to yourself or you agent upon you receipt for the same , by " you obedient Servt. , " . " p.s. -- desire I to say , once for all , that he decline to receive any message , letter , or communication from you on this or any other subject . " a pretty way you have manage the affair , " say , look savagely at . " look there , , " and he fling over to the latter he parent 's letter . " a beggar , by , and all in consequence of my would --d sentimentality . why could not we have wait ? a ball might have do for I in the course of the war , and may still , and how will be bettere by be leave a beggar 's widow ? it be all you do . you be never easy until you have get I marry and ruin . what the deuce be I to do with two thousand pound ? such a sum will not last two years . I have lose a hundred and forty to Crawley at card and billiards since I have be down here . a pretty manager of a man 's matter you be , forsooth . " " there be no denying that the position be a hard one , " reply , after read over the letter with a blank countenance ; " and as you say , it
it be partly of my making . there be some man who would not mind change with you , " he add , with a bitter smile . " how many captain in the regiment have two thousand pound to the fore , think you ? you must live on you pay till you father relent , and if you die , you leave you wife a hundr a year . " " do you suppose a man of my habits call live on he pay and a hundr a year ? " cry out in great anger . " you must be a fool to talk so , . how the deuce be I to keep up my position in the world upon such a pitiful pittance ? I can not change my habits . I must have my comforts . I be not bring up on porridge , like , or on potatoe , like old . do you expect my wife to take in soldier ' washing , or ride after the regiment in a baggage waggon ? " " well , well , " say , still good - naturedly , " we will get she a better conveyance . but try and remember that you be only a dethroned prince now , , my boy ; and be quiet whilst the tempest last . it will not be for long . let you name be mention in the Gazette , and I will engage the old father relent towards you :" " mention in the Gazette ! " answer . " and in what part of it ? among the kill and wound return , and at the top of the list , very likely . " " ! it will be time enough to cry out when we be hurt , " say . " and if anything happen , you know , , I have get a little , and I be not a marrying man , and I shall not forget my godson in my will , " he add , with a smile . Whereupon the dispute end -- as many score of such conversation between and he friend have conclude previously -- by the former declaring there be no possibility of be angry with Dobbin long , and forgive he very generously after abuse he without cause . " I say , , " cry out of he dressing - room , to he lady , who be attir herself for dinner in she own chamber . " what ? " say 's shrill voice . she be look over she shoulder in the glass . she have put on the neatest and freshest white frock imaginable , and with bare shoulders and a little necklace , and a light blue sash , she look the image of youthful innocence and girlish happiness . " I say , what will o . do , when o . go out with the regiment ? " say come into the room , perform a duet on he head with two huge hair - brush , and look out from under he hair with admiration on he pretty little wife . " I suppose she will cry she eye out , " answer . " she have be whimper half a dozen time , at the very notion of it , already to I . " " you do not care , I suppose ? " say , half angry at he wife 's want of feeling . " you wretch ! do not you know that I intend to go with you , " reply . " , you be different . you go as 's aide - de -camp . we do not belong to the line , " . say , throw up she head with a air that so enchant she husband that he stoop down and kiss it . " Rawdon dear -- do not you think -- you would better get that -- money from , before he go ? " continue , fix on a kill bow . she call , . she have flatter he about he good look a score of time already . she watch over he kindly at ecarte of a night when he would drop in to 's quarter for a half - hour before bed - time . she have often call he a horrid dissipate wretch , and threaten to tell of he wicked way and naughty extravagant habit . she bring he cigar and light it for he ; she know the effect of that manoeuvre , have practise it in former day upon . he think she gay , brisk , arch , distinguee , delightful . in they little drive and dinner , , of course , quite outshone poor , who remain very mute and timid while and she husband rattle away together , and ( and after he join the young marry people ) gobble in silence . 's mind somehow misgave she about she friend . 's wit , spirit , and accomplishment troublead she with a rueful disquiet . they be only a week married , and here be already suffer ennui , and eager for other 's society ! she tremble for the future . how shall I be a companion for he , she think -- so clever and so brilliant , and I such a humble foolish creature ? how noble it be of he to marry I -- to give up everything and stoop down to I ! I ought to have refuse he , only I have not the heart . I ought to have stop at home and take care of poor . and she neglect of she parent ( and indeed there be some foundation for this charge which the poor child 's uneasy conscience bring against she ) be now remember for the first time
time , and cause she to blush with humiliation . oh ! think she , I have be very wicked and selfish -- selfish in forget they in they sorrow -- selfish in force to marry I . I know I be not worthy of he -- I know he would have be happy without I -- and yet -- I try , I try to give he up . it be hard when , before seven day of marriage be over , such thoughts and confession as these force themselve on a little bride 's mind . but so it be , and the night before come to join these young people -- on a fine brilliant moonlight night of -- so warm and balmy that the window be fling open to the balcony , from which and . be ga upon the calm ocean spread shining before they , while and be engage at backgammon within -- couch in a great chair quite neglect , and watch both these party , feel a despair and remorse such as be bitter companion for that tender lonely soul . Scarce a week be past , and it be come to this ! the future , have she regard it , offer a dismal prospect ; but be too shy , so to speak , to look to that , and embark alone on that wide sea , and unfit to navigate it without a guide and protector . I know have a mean opinion of she . but how many , my dear madam , be endow with you prodigious strength of mind ? " , what a fine night , and how bright the moon be ! " say , with a puff of he cigar , which go soar up skyward . " how delicious they smell in the open air ! I adore they . who would think the moon be two hundred and thirty - six thousand eight hundred and forty - seven mile off ? " add , gaze at that orb with a smile . " be not it clever of I to remember that ? Pooh ! we learn it all at 's ! how calm the sea be , and how clear everything . I declare I can almost see the coast of ! " and she bright green eye stream out , and shoot into the night as if they could see through it . " do you know what I intend to do one morning ? " she say ; " I find I can swim beautifully , and some day , when my 's companion -- old Briggs , you know -- you remember she -- that hook - nos woman , with the long wisp of hair -- when go out to bathe , I intend to dive under she awning , and insist on a reconciliation in the water . be not that a stratagem ? " burst out laugh at the idea of this aquatic meeting . " what be the row there , you two ? " shoute out , ratt the box . be make a fool of herself in a absurd hysterical manner , and retire to she own room to whimper in private . we history be destin in this chapter to go backwards and forward in a very irresolute manner seemingly , and have conduct we story to to - morrow presently , we shall immediately again have occasion to step back to yesterday , so that the whole of the tale may get a hearing . as you behold at she Majesty 's drawing - room , the ambassador ' and high dignitary ' carriage whisk off from a private door , while 's lady be wait for they fly : as you see in the Secretary of the 's antechamber , a half - dozen of petitioner wait patiently for they audience , and call out one by one , when suddenly a irish member or some eminent personage enter the apartment , and instantly walk into under - Secretary over the head of all the people present : so in the conduct of a tale , the romancer be obliged to exercise this most partial sort of justice . although all the little incidents must be hear , yet they must be put off when the great event make they appearance ; and surely such a circumstance as that which bring to , viz. , the ordering out of the and the line to , and the mustering of the ally armie in that country under the command of he the of -- such a dignified circumstance as that , I say , be entitle to the pa over all minor occurrence whereon this history be compose mainly , and hence a little trifling disarrangement and disorder be excusable and become . we have only now advanc in time so far beyond as to have get we various character up into they dressing - room before the dinner , which take place as usual on the day of 's arrival . be too humane or too much occupy with the tie of he neckcloth to convey at once all the news to which he comray have bring with he from . he come into she room , however , hold the attorney 's letter in he hand , and with so solemn and important a air that he wife , always ingeniously on the watch for calamity , think the worst be about to befall , and run up to she husband , besotch she dearest to tell she everything -- he be order abroad ; there would be a battle next week -- she know there would . parry the question about foreign service , and with a melancholy shake of the head say , " no , ; it be not that : it be not myself
myself I care about : it be you . I have have bad news from my father . he refuse any communication with I ; he have fling we off ; and leave we to poverty . I can rough it well enough ; but you , my dear , how will you bear it ? read here . " and he hand she over the letter . , with a look of tender alarm in she eyes , listen to she noble hero as he utter the above generous sentiment , and sit down on the bed , read the letter which give she with such a pompous martyr - like air . she face clear up as she read the document , however . the idea of share poverty and privation in company with the beloved object be , as we have before say , far from be disagreeable to a warm - hear woman . the notion be actually pleasant to litle . then , as usual , she be asham of herself for feeling happy at such a indecorous moment , and check she pleasure , say demurely , " o , , how you poor heart must bleed at the idea of be separate from you papa ! " " it do , " say , with a agonised countenance . " but he can not be angry with you long , " she continue . " nobody could , I be sure . he must forgive you , my dearest , kindest husband . o , I shall never forgive myself if he do not . " " what vex I , my poor Emmy , be not my misfortune , but yours , " say . " I do not care for a little poverty ; and I think , without vanity , I have talent enough to make my own way . " " that you have , " interpose he wife , who think that war should cease , and she husband should be make a general instantly . " yes , I shall make my way as well as another , " Osborne go on ; " but you , my dear girl , how can I bear you be deprive of the comfort and station in society which my wife have a right to expect ? my dearest girl in barrack ; the wife of a soldier in a marching regiment ; subject to all sort of annoyance and privation ! it make I miserable . " Emmy , quite at ease , as this be she husband 's only cause of disquiet , take he hand , and with a radiant face and smile begin to warble that stanza from the favourite song of " , " in which the heroine , after rebuk she for inattention , promise " he trousers to mmend , and he grog too to make , " if he will be constant and kind , and not forsake she . " , " she say , after a pause , during which she look as pretty and happy as any young woman need , " be not two thousand pound a immense deal of money , ? " laugh at she naivete ; and finally they go down to dinner , cling to 's arm , still warbl the tune of " , " and more pleased and light of mind than she have be for some day past . thus the repast , which at length come off , instead of be dismal , be a exceedingly brisk and merry one . the excitement of the campaign counteract in 's mind the depression occasion by the disinheriting letter . still keep up he character of rattle . he amuse the company with account of the army in ; where nothing but fete and gaiety and fashion be go on . then , have a particular end in view , this dexterous captain proceed to describe pack she own and she major 's wardrobe , and how he best epaulet have be stow into a tea canister , whilst she own famous yellow turban , with the bird of paradise wrap in brown paper , be lock up in the major 's tin cock - hat case , and wonder what effect it would have at the french king 's court at , or the great military ball at Brussels . " ! Brussels ! " cry out with a sudden shock and start . " be the regiment order away , -- be it order away ? " a look of terror come over the sweet smiling face , and she cling to as by a instinct . " do not be afraid , dear , " he say good - naturedly ; " it be but a twelve hour ' passage . it will not hurt you . you shall go , too , . " " I intend to go , " say . " I be on the staff . be a great flirt of mine . be not he , ? " laugh out with he usual roar . flush up quite red . " she can not go , " he say ; " think of the -- of the danger , " he be go to add ; but have not all he conversation during dinner - time tend to prove there be none ? he become very confused and silent . " I must and will go , " cry with the greatest spirit ; and , applaud she resolution , pat she under the ching , and ask all the person present if they ever see such a termagant of a wife , and agree that the lady should bear he company . " we will have . to chaperon you , " he say . what care she so long as she husband
husband be near she ? thus somehow the bitterness of a parting be juggle away . though war and danger be in store , war and danger might not befall for month to come . there be a respite at any rate , which make the timid little almost as happy as a full reprieve would have do , and which even own in he heart be very welcome . for , to be permit to see she be now the greatest privilege and hope of he life , and he think with himself secretly how he would watch and protect she . I would not have let she go if I have be marry to she , he think . but be the master , and he friend do not think fit to remonstrate . put she arm round she friend 's waist , at length carry off from the dinner - table where so much business of importance have be discuss , and leave the gentleman in a highly exhilarated state , drink and talk very gaily . in the course of the evening get a little family - note from he wife , which , although he crumple it up and burn it instantly in the candle , we have the good luck to read over 's shoulder . " great news , " she write . " . be gone . get the money from tonight , as he will be off to - morrow most likely . mind this .-- . " so when the little company be about adjourn to coffee in the woman 's apartment , touch on the elbow , and say gracefully , " I say , , my boy , if quite convenient , I will trouble you for that ' ere small trifle . " it be not quite convenient , but nevertheless give he a considerable present instalment in bank - note from he pocket - book , and a bill on he agent at a week 's date , for the remaining sum . this matter arrange , , and , and , hold a council of war over they cigar , and agree that a general move should be make for in 's open carriage the next day . , I think , would have prefer stay until quit , but and overrule he , and he agree to carry the party to town , and order four horse , as become he dignity . with these they set off in state , after breakfast , the next day . have risen very early in the morning , and pack she little trunk with the greatest alacrity , while lay in bed deploring that she have not a maid to help she . she be only too glad , however , to perform this office for herself . a dim uneasy sentiment about fill she mind already ; and although they kiss each other most tenderly at parting , yet we know what jealousy be ; and possess that among other virtue of she sex . besides these character who be come and go away , we must remember that there be some other old friend of ours at ; , namely , and the suite in attendance upon she . now , although and she husband be but at a few stone ' throw of the lodging which the invalid occupy , the old lady 's door remain as pitilessly close to they as it have be heretofore in . as long as she remain by the side of she sister - in - law , take care that she belov should not be agitate by a meeting with she nephew . when the spinster take she drive , the faithful sate beside she in the carriage . when take the air in a chair , . march on one side of the vehicle , whilst honest Briggs occupy the other wing . and if they meet and he wife by chance -- although the former constantly and obsequiously take off he hat , the - party pass he by with such a frigid and kill indifference , that begin to despair . " we might as well be in as here , " often say , with a downcast air . " a comfortable inn in be better than a spunging - house in , " he wife answer , who be of a more cheerful temperament . " think of those two aide - de - camp of , the sheriff 's - officer , who watch we lodging for a week . we friend here be very stupid , but and be better companion than 's man , , my love . " " I wonder the writ have not follow I down here , " continue , still despond . " when they do , we will find mean to give they the slip , " say dauntless little , and further point out to she husband the great comfort and advantage of meet and , whose acquaintance have bring to a most timely little supply of ready money . " it will hardly be enough to pay the inn bill , " grumble the . " why need we pay it ? " say the lady , who have a answer for everything . through 's valet , who still keep up a trifling acquaintance with the male inhabitant of 's servants ' hall , and be instruct to treat the coachman to drink whenever they meet , old 's movement be pretty well know by we young couple ; and luckily bethotch herself of be unwell , and of call in the same apothecary who be in attendance upon the spinster , so that they information be on the whole tolerably complete . be , although force to adopt a hostile attitude , secretly inimical to and he wife .
. she be naturally of a kindly and forgive disposition . now that the cause of jealousy be remove , she dislike for disappear also , and she remember the latter 's invariable good word and good humour . and , indeed , she and , the lady 's - maid , and the whole of 's household , groan under the tyranny of the triumphant . as often will be the case , that good but imperious woman push she advantage too far , and she success quite unmercifully . she have in the course of a few week bring the invalid to such a state of helpless docility , that the poor soul yield herself entirely to she sister 's order , and do not even dare to complain of she slavery to or . measure out the glassis of wine which be daily allow to take , with irresistible accuracy , greatly to the annoyance of and the butler , who find themselves deprive of control over even the sherry - bottle . she apportion the sweetbread , jelly , chicken ; they quantity and order . night and noon and morne she bring the abominable drink ordain by the Doctor , and make she patient swallow they with so affect a obedience that say " my poor do take she physic like a lamb . " she prescribe the drive in the carriage or the ride in the chair , and , in a word , ground down the old lady in she convalescence in such a way as only belong to you proper -manage , motherly moral woman . if ever the patient faintly resist , and plead for a little bit more dinner or a little drop less medicine , the nurse threaten she with instantaneous death , when instantly give in . " she be no spirit leave in she , " remark to ; " she be not ave call I a fool these three week . " finally , have make up she mind to dismiss the aforesaid honest lady 's - maid , the large confidential man , and herself , and to send for she daughter from the Rectory , previous to remove the dear invalid bodily to 's , when a odious accident happen which call she away from duty so pleasing . the , she husband , ride home one night , fell with he horse and break he collar - bone . and inflammatory symptom set in , and be force to leave for . as soon as ever be restore , she promise to return to she dearest friend , and depart , leave the strongest injunction with the household regard they behaviour to they mistress ; and as soon as she get into the coach , there be such a jubilee and sense of relief in all 's house , as the company of person assemble there have not experience for many a week before . that very day leave off she afternoon dose of medicine : that afternoon open a independent bottle of sherry for himself and : that night and indulge in a game of piquet instead of one of 's sermon . it be as in the old nursery - story , when the stick forget to beat the dog , and the whole course of event undergo a peaceful and happy revolution . at a very early hour in the morning , twice or thrice a week , use to betake herself to a bathing - machine , and disport in the water in a flannel gown and a oilskin cap . , as we have see , be aware of this circumstance , and though she do not attempt to storm as she have threaten , and actually dive into that lady 's presence and surprise she under the sacredness of the awning , determined to attack as she come away from she bath , refresh and invigorate by she dip , and likely to be in good humour . so get up very early the next morning , bring the telescope in they sitting - room , which face the sea , to bear upon the bathing - machine on the beach ; see Briggs arrive , enter she box ; and put out to sea ; and be on the shore just as the nymph of whom she come in step out of the little caravan on to the shingles . it be a pretty picture : the beach ; the bathing - woman 's face ; the long line of rock and building be blushing and bright in the sunshine . wear a kind , tender smile on she face , and be hold out she pretty white hand as emerge from the box . what could do but accept the salutation ? " -- . , " she say . seize she hand , press it to she heart , and with a sudden impulse , flinge she arm round , kiss she affectionately . " dear , dear friend ! " she say , with a touch of such natural feeling , that of course at once begin to melt , and even the bathing - woman be mollify . find no difficulty in engage in a long , intimate , and delightful conversation . everything that have pass since the morning of 's sudden departure from 's house in up to the present day , and 's happy retreat , be discuss and describe by . all 's symptom , and the particular of she illness and medical treatment , be narrate by the confidante with that fulness and accuracy which woman delight in . about they complaints and they doctor do lady ever tire of talk to each other ? do not on this occasion ; nor do weary of listen . she be thankful , truly thankful , that the dear kind
kind Briggs , that the faithful , the invaluable , have be permit to remain with they benefactress through she illness . bless she ! though she , , have seem to act undutifully towards ; yet be not she fault a natural and excusable one ? could she help give she hand to the man who have win she heart ? , the sentimental , could only turn up she eye to heaven at this appeal , and heave a sympathetic sigh , and think that she , too , have give away she affections long year ago , and own that be no very great criminal . " can I ever forget she who so befriend the friendless orphan ? no , though she have cast I off , " the latter say , " I shall never cease to love she , and I would devote my life to she service . as my own benefactress , as my belov 's adore relative , I love and admire , dear , beyond any woman in the world , and next to she I love all those who be faithful to she . I would never have treat 's faithful friend as that odious designe have do . , who be all heart , " continue , " although he outward manners might seem rough and careless , have say a hundred time , with tear in he eye , that he bless for send he dearest two such admirable nurse as she attach and she admirable . should the machination of the horrible end , as she too much fear they wwould , in banish everybody that love from she side , and leave that poor lady a victim to those harpy at the Rectory , besotch she ( ) to remember that she own home , humble as it be , be always open to receive . dear friend , " she exclaim , in a transport of enthusiasm , " some heart can never forget benefit ; all woman be not Bute Crawley ! though why should I complain of she , " add ; " though I have be she tool and the victim to she arts , do I not owe my dearest to she ? " and unfold to all 's conduct at 's , which , though unintelligible to she then , be clearly enough explain by the event now -- now that the attachment have spring up which . have encourage by a thousand artifice -- now that two innocent people have fall into the snare which she have laid for they , and loved and married and be ruin through she scheme . it be all very true . see the stratagem as clearly as possible . have make the match between and . yet , though the latter be a perfectly innocent victim , could not disguise from she friend she fear that 's affections be hopelessly estrange from , and that the old lady would never forgive she nephew for make so imprudent a marriage . on this point have she own opinion , and still keep up a good heart . if do not forgive they at present , she might at least relent on a future day . even now , there be only that pule , sickly between and a baronetcy ; and should anything happen to the former , all would be well . at all event , to have 's design expose , and herself well abuse , be a satisfaction , and might be advantageous to 's interest ; and , after a hour 's chat with she recover friend , leave she with the most tender demonstration of regard , and quite assure that the conversation they have have together would be report to before many hour be over . this interview end , it become full time for to return to she inn , where all the party of the previous day be assemble at a farewell breakfast . take such a tender leave of as become two woman who love each other as sister ; and have use she handkerchief plentifully , and hang on she friend 's neck as if they be part for ever , and wave the handkerchief ( which be quite dry , by the way ) out of window , as the carriage drive off , she come back to the breakfast table , and eat some prawns with a good deal of appetite , consider she emotion ; and while she be munch these delicacies , explain to what have occur in she morning walk between herself and . she hope be very high : she make she husband share they . she generally succeed in make she husband share all she opinion , whether melancholy or cheerful . " you will now , if you please , my dear , sit down at the writing - table and pen I a pretty little letter to , in which you will say that you be a good boy , and that sort of thing . " so sate down , and write off , " , , " and " my dear aunt , " with great rapidity : but there the gallant officer 's imagination fail he . he mumble the end of he pen , and look up in he wife 's face . she could not help laugh at he rueful countenance , and march up and down the room with she hand behind she , the little woman begin to dictate a letter , which he take down . " before quit the country and commence a campaign , which very possibly may be fatal . " " what ? " say , rather surprised , but take the humour of the phrase , and presently write it down with a grin . " which very possibly may be
be fatal , I have come hither -- " " why not say come here , ? come here 's grammar , " the dragoon interpose . " I have come hither , " insist , with a stamp of she foot , " to say farewell to my dearest and earliest friend . I beseech you before I go , not perhaps to return , once more to let I press the hand from which I have receive nothing but kindness all my life . " " Kindness all my life , " echo , scratch down the word , and quite amaze at he own facility of composition . " I ask nothing from you but that we should part not in anger . I have the pride of my family on some point , though not on all . I marry a painter 's daughter , and be not asham of the union . " " no , run I through the body if I be ! " ejaculate . " you old booby , " say , pinch he ear and look over to see that he make no mistakes in spelling -- " beseech be not spelt with a a , and earliest be . " so he alter these word , bow to the superior knowledge of he little . " I think that you be aware of the progress of my attachment , " continue : " I know that confirm and encourage it . but I make no reproach . I marry a poor woman , and be content to abide by what I have do . leave you property , dear aunt , as you will . I shall never complain of the way in which you dispose of it . I would have you believe that I love you for yourself , and not for money 's sake . I want to be reconcile to you ere I leave . let I , let I see you before I go . a few week or month hence it may be too late , and I can not bear the notion of quit the country without a kind word of farewell from you . " " she will not recognise my style in that , " say . " I make the sentence short and brisk on purpose . " and this authentic missive be despatch under cover to . laugh when , with great mystery , hand she over this candid and simple statement . " we may read it now be away , " she say . " read it to I , . " when have read the epistle out , she patroness laugh more . " do not you see , you goose , " she say to , who profess to be much touch by the honest affection which pervad the composition , " do not you see that never write a word of it . he never write to I without ask for money in he life , and all he letter be full of bad spelling , and dash , and bad grammar . it be that little serpent of a governess who rule he . " they be all alike , think in she heart . they all want I dead , and be hanker for my money . " I do not mind see , " she add , after a pause , and in a tone of perfect indifference . " I have just as soon shake hand with he as not . provide there be no scene , why should not we meet ? I do not mind . but human patience have its limit ; and mind , my dear , I respectfully decline to receive -- I can not support that quite " -- and be fain to be content with this half - message of conciliation ; and think that the best method of bring the old lady and she nephew together , be to warn to be in wait on the Cliff , when go out for she air in she chair . there they meet . I do not know whether have any private feeling of regard or emotion upon see she old favourite ; but she hold out a couple of finger to he with as smiling and good - humoure a air , as if they have meet only the day before . and as for , he turn as red as scarlet , and wring off 's hand , so great be he rapture and he confusion at the meeting . perhaps it be interest that move he : or perhaps affection : perhaps he be touch by the change which the illness of the last week have wrotch in he aunt . " the old girl have always act like a trump to I , " he say to he wife , as he narrate the interview , " and I feel , you know , rather queer , and that sort of thing . I walk by the side of the what - dy 'e - call - 'em , you know , and to she own door , where come to help she in . and I want to go in very much , only -- " " you do not go in , ! " scream he wife . " no , my dear ; I be hang if I be not afraid when it come to the point . " " you fool ! you ought to have go in , and never come out again , " say . " do not call I name , " say the big , sulkily . " perhaps I be a fool , , but you should not say so " ; and he give he wife a look , such as he countenance could wear when angered , and
and such as be not pleasant to face . " well , dearest , to - morrow you must be on the look - out , and go and see she , mind , whether she ask you or no , " say , try to soothe she angry yoke - mate . on which he reply , that he would do exactly as he like , and would just thank she to keep a civil tongue in she head -- and the wounded husband go away , and pass the forenoon at the billiard - room , sulky , silent , and suspicious . but before the night be over he be compelle to give in , and own , as usual , to he wife 's superior prudence and foresight , by the most melancholy confirmation of the presentiment which she have regard the consequence of the mistake which he have make . must have have some emotion upon see he and shake hand with he after so long a rupture . she muse upon the meeting a considerable time . " be get very fat and old , , " she say to she companion . " he nose have become red , and he be exceedingly coarse in appearance . he marriage to that woman have hopelessly vulgarise he . always say they drank together ; and I have no doubt they do . yes : he smelt of gin abominably . I remarke it . do not you ? " in vain interpose that . speak ill of everybody : and , as far as a person in she humble position could judge , be a -- " a artful designing woman ? yes , so she be , and she do speak ill of every one -- but I be certain that woman have make drink . all those low people do -- " " he be very much affect at see you , ma 'am , " the companion say ; " and I be sure , when you remember that he be go to the field of danger -- " " how much money have he promise you , ? " the old spinster cry out , work herself into a nervous rage -- " there now , of course you begin to cry . I hate scene . why be I always to be worried ? go and cry up in you own room , and send to I -- no , stop , sit down and blow you nose , and leave off cry , and write a letter to . " poor Brigg go and place herself obediently at the writing - book . it be leave be blot all over with relic of the firm , strong , rapid handwriting of the spinster 's late amanuensis , . " begin ' my dear sir , ' or ' dear sir , ' that will be better , and say you be desire by -- no , by 's medical man , by , to state that my health be such that all strong emotion would be dangerous in my present delicate condition -- and that I must decline any family discussion or interview whatever . and thank he for come to , and so forth , and beg he not to stay any longer on my account . and , , you may add that I wish he a bon voyage , and that if he will take the trouble to call upon my lawyer 's in 's , he will find there a communication for he . yes , that will do ; and that will make he leave . " the benevolent penn this sentence with the utmost satisfaction . " to seize upon I the very day after be go , " the old lady prattle on ; " it be too indecent . , my dear , write to , and say she need not come back . no -- she need not -- and she sha not -- and I will not be a slave in my own house -- and I will not be starve and chok with poison . they all want to kill I -- all -- all " -- and with this the lonely old woman burst into a scream of hysterical tear . the last scene of she dismal Vanity fair comedy be fast approach ; the tawdry lamps be go out one by one ; and the dark curtain be almost ready to descmend . that final paragraph , which refer to 's solicitor in , and which have write so good - naturedly , consol the dragoon and he wife somewhat , after they first blank disappointment , on read the spinster 's refusal of a reconciliation . and it effect the purpose for which the old lady have cause it to be write , by make very eager to get to . out of 's losings and 's bank - note , he pay he bill at the inn , the landlord whereor do not probably know to this day how doubtfully he account once stood . for , as a general send he baggage to the rear before a action , have wisely pack up all they chief valuable and send they off under care of 's servant , who go in charge of the trunk on the coach back to . and he wife return by the same conveyance next day . " I should have like to see the old girl before we go , " say . " she look so cut up and alte that I be sure she can not last long . I wonder what sort of a cheque I shall have at 's . two hundred -- it can not be less than two hundred -- hey , ? " in consequence of the repeat visit of the
the aide - de - camp of the Sheriff of , and he wife do not go back to they lodging at , but put up at a inn . early the next morning , have a opportunity of see they as she skirt that suburb on she road to old 's house at , whither she go to look for she dear and she friend . they be all off to , thence to , to take shipping for with the regiment -- kind old very much depressed and tearful , solitary . return from this visit , find she husband , who have be off to 's , and lear not he fate . he come back furious . " by , , " say he , " she be only give I twenty pound ! " though it tell against themselves , the joke be too good , and burst out laugh at 's discomfiture . and On quit , we friend , as become a person of rank and fashion travel in a barouche with four horse , drive in state to a fine hotel in , where a suite of splendid room , and a table magnificently furnish with plate and surround by a half - dozen of black and silent waiter , be ready to receive the young gentleman and he bride . do the honour of the place with a princely air to and ; and , for the first time , and with exceeding shyness and timidity , preside at what call she own table . pooh - pooh the wine and bully the waiter royally , and gobble the turtle with immense satisfaction . help he to it ; for the lady of the house , before whom the tureen be place , be so ignorant of the contents , that she be go to help without bestow upon he either calipash or calipee . the splendour of the entertainment , and the apartment in which it be give , alarme , who remonstrate after dinner , when be asleep in the great chair . but in vain he cry out against the enormity of turtle and champagne that be fit for a archbishop . " I have always be accustom to travel like a gentleman , " say , " and , damme , my wife shall travel like a lady . as long as there be a shot in the locker , she shall want for nothing , " say the generous fellow , quite pleased with himself for he magnificence of spirit . do try and convince he that 's happiness be not cent in turtle - soup . a while after dinner , timidly express a wish to go and see she mamma , at : which permission grant she with some grumbling . and she trip away to she enormous bedroom , in the centre of which stand the enormous funereal bed , " that the 's sister slep in when the allied suffering be here , " and put on she little bonnet and shawl with the utmost eagerness and pleasure . be still drink claret when she return to the dining - room , and make no sign of move . " ar ' not you come with I , dearest ? " she ask he . no ; the " dearest " have " business " that night . he man should get she a coach and go with she . and the coach be at the door of the hotel , make a little disappointed curtsey after look vainly into he face once or twice , and go sadly down the great staircase , after , who hand she into the vehicle , and see it drive away to its destination . the very valet be asham of mention the address to the hackney - coachman before the hotel waiter , and promise to instruct he when they get further on . walk home to he old quarter and the ' , think very likely that it would be delightful to be in that hackney - coach , along with . be evidently of quite a different taste ; for when he have take wine enough , he go off to half - price at the play , to see perform in . be a great lover of the drama , and have himself perform high - comedy character with great distinction in several garrison theatrical entertainment . sleep on until long after dark , when he wake up with a start at the motion of he servant , who be remove and empty the decanter on the table ; and the hackney - coach stand be again put into requisition for a carriage to convey this stout hero to he lodging and bed . , you may be sure , clasp she daughter to she heart with all maternal eagerness and affection , run out of the door as the carriage draw up before the little garden - gate , to welcome the weeping , trembling , young bride . , who be in he shirt - sleeve , trimm the garden - plot , shrank back alarm . the irish servant - lass rush up from the kitchen and smile a " bless you . " could hardly walk along the flag and up the step into the parlour . how the floodgate be open , and mother and daughter wept , when they be together embrace each other in this sanctuary , may readily be imagine by every reader who possess the least sentimental turn . when do not lady weep ? at what occasion of joy , sorrow , or other business of life , and , after such a event as a marriage , mother and daughter be surely at liberty to give way to a sensibility which be as tender as it be refresh . about a
a question of marriage I have see woman who hate each other kiss and cry together quite fondly . how much more do they feel when they love ! good mother be marry over again at they daughter 's wedding : and as for subsequent event , who do not know how ultra-maternal grandmother be ?-- in fact a woman , until she be a grandmother , do not often really know what to be a mother be . let we respect and she mamma whisper and whimper and laugh and cry in the parlour and the twilight . do . he have not divine who be in the carriage when it drive up . he have not fly out to meet he daughter , though he kiss she very warmly when she enter the room ( where he be occupi , as usual , with he papers and tap and statement of account ) , and after sit with the mother and daughter for a short time , he very wisely leave the little apartment in they possession . 's valet be look on in a very supercilious manner at in he shirt - sleeve , water he rose - bushes . he take off he hat , however , with much condescension to , who ask news about he son - in - law , and about 's carriage , and whether he horse have be down to , and about that infernal traitor Bonaparty , and the war ; until the irish maid - servant come with a plate and a bottle of wine , from which the old gentleman insiste upon help the valet . he give he a half - guinea too , which the servant pocket with a mixture of wonder and contempt . " to the health of you master and mistress , Trotter , " say , " and here be something to drink you health when you get home , . " there be but nine day past since have leave that little cottage and home -- and yet how far off the time seem since she have bide it farewell . what a gulf lay between she and that past life . she could look back to it from she present standing - place , and contemplate , almost as another being , the young unmarried girl absorb in she love , have no eye but for one special object , receive parental affection if not ungratefully , at least indifferently , and as if it be she due -- she whole heart and thought bend on the accomplishment of one desire . the review of those day , so lately go yet so far away , touch she with shame ; and the aspect of the kind parent fill she with tender remorse . be the prize gain -- the heaven of life -- and the winner still doubtful and unsatisfied ? as he hero and heroine pass the matrimonial barrier , the novelist generally drop the curtain , as if the drama be over then : the doubt and struggle of life end : as if , once land in the marriage country , all be green and pleasant there : and wife and husband have nothing to do but to link each other 's arm together , and wander gently downwards towards old age in happy and perfect fruition . but we little be just on the bank of she new country , and be already look anxiously back towards the sad friendly figure waive farewell to she across the stream , from the other distant shore . in honour of the young bride 's arrival , she mother think it necessary to prepare I do not know what festive entertainment , and after the first ebullition of talk , take leave of for a while , and div down to the lower region of the house to a sort of kitchen - parlour ( occupy by and , and in the evening , when she dish be wash and she curl -paper remove , by , the irish servant ) , there to take measure for the preparing of a magnificent ornamented tea . all people have they way of expressing kindness , and it seem to . that a muffin and a quantity of orange marmalay spread out in a little cut - glass saucer would be peculiarly agreeable refreshment to in she most interesting situation . while these delicacy be be transact below , , leave the drawing - room , walk upstairs and find herself , she scarce know how , in the little room which she have occupy before she marriage , and in that very chair in which she have pass so many bitter hour . she sank back in its arm as if it be a old friend ; and fall to think over the past week , and the life beyond it . already to be look sadly and vaguly back : always to be pin for something which , when obtain , bring doubt and sadness rather than pleasure ; here be the lot of we poor little creature and harmless lose wanderer in the great struggling crowd of . here she sate , and recall to herself fondly that image of to which she have knelt before marriage . do she own to herself how different the real man be from that superb young hero whom she have worship ? it require many , many year -- and a man must be very bad indeed -- before a woman 's pride and vanity will let she own to such a confession . then 's twinkl green eye and baleful smile light upon she , and fill she with dismay . and so she sate for a while indulge in she usual mood of selfish brooding , in that very listless melancholy attitude in which the honest maid -
- servant have find she , on the day when she bring up the letter in which renew he offer of marriage . she look at the little white bed , which have be hers a few day before , and think she would like to sleep in it that night , and wake , as formerly , with she mother smile over she in the morning : then she think with terror of the great funereal damask pavilion in the vast and dingy state bedroom , which be await she at the grand hotel in . dear little white bed ! how many a long night have she wept on its pillow ! how she have despaire and hope to die there ; and now be not all she wish accomplish , and the lover of whom she have despair she own for ever ? kind mother ! how patiently and tenderly she have watch round that bed ! she go and knelt down by the bedside ; and there this wounded and timorous , but gentle and loving soul , seek for consolation , where as yet , it must be own , we little girl have but seldom look for it . love have be she faith hithertoo ; and the sad , bleed disappointed heart begin to feel the want of another consoler . have we a right to repeat or to overhear she prayer ? these , brother , be secret , and out of the domain of , in which we story lie . but this may be say , that when the tea be finally announce , we young lady come downstairs a great deal more cheerful ; that she do not despond , or deplore she fate , or think about 's coldness , or 's eye , as she have be will nt to do of late . she go downstairs , and kiss she father and mother , and talk to the old gentleman , and make he more merry than he have be for many a day . she sate down at the piano which have buy for she , and sang over all she father 's favourite old song . she pronounce the tea to be excellent , and praise the exquisite taste in which the marmalade be arrange in the saucer . and in determine to make everybody else happy , she find herself so ; and be sound asleep in the great funereal pavilion , and only wake up with a smile when arrive from the theatre . for the next day , have more important " business " to transact than that which take he to see in . immediately on he arrival in he have write off to he father 's solicitor , signify he royal pleasure that a interview should take place between they on the morrow . he hotel bill , loss at billiards and card to have almost drain the young man 's purse , which want replenish before he set out on he travels , and he have no resource but to infringe upon the two thousand pound which the attorney be commission to pay over to he . he have a perfect belief in he own mind that he father would relent before very long . how could any parent be obdurate for a length of time against such a paragon as he be ? if he mere past and personal merits do not succeed in mollify he father , determine that he would distinguish himself so prodigiously in the ensue campaign that the old gentleman must give in to he . and if not ? Bah ! the world be before he . he luck might change at card , and there be a deal of spending in two thousand pound . so he send off once more in a carriage to she mamma , with strict order and carte blanco to the two lady to purchase everything requisite for a lady of 's fashion , who be go on a foreign tour . they have but one day to complete the outfit , and it may be imagine that they business therefore occupy they pretty fully . in a carriage once more , bustle about from milliner to linen - draper , escort back to the carriage by obsequious shopman or polite owner , be herself again almost , and sincerely happy for the first time since they misfortune . be at all above the pleasure of shopping , and bargain , and see and buy pretty thing . ( would any man , the most philosophic , give twopence for a woman who be ? ) she give herself a little treat , obedient to she husband 's order , and purchase a quantity of lady 's gear , show a great deal of taste and elegant discernment , as all the shopfolk say . and about the war that be ensue , Osborne be not much alarm ; be to be crush almost without a struggle . Margate packet be sail every day , fill with man of fashion and lady of note , on they way to and . people be go not so much to a war as to a fashionable tour . the newspaper laugh the wretched upstart and swindler to scorn . such a Corsican wretch as that withstand the armie of and the genius of the immortal ! hold he in utter contempt ; for it need not to be say that this soft and gentle creature take she opinion from those people who surround she , such fidelity be much too humble - minded to think for itself . well , in a word , she and she mother perform a great day 's shopping , and she acquit herself with considerable liveliness and credit on this she first appearance in the genteel world of . meanwhile , with he
he hat on one side , he elbow square , and he swagger martial air , make for , and stalk into the attorney 's office as if he be lord of every pale - face clerk who be scribbl there . he order somebody to inform that be wait , in a fierce and patronize way , as if the pekin of a attorney , who have thrice he brain , fifty time he money , and a thousand time he experience , be a wretched underling who should instantly leave all he business in life to attend on the 's pleasure . he do not see the sneer of contempt which pass all round the room , from the first clerk to the article gent , from the article gent to the rag writer and white - faced runner , in clothes too tight for they , as he sate there tap he boot with he cane , and think what a parcel of miserable poor devils these be . the miserable poor devils know all about he affair . they talk about they over they pint of beer at they public - house club to other clerk of a night . ye gods , what do not attorney and attorney ' clerk know in ! nothing be hide from they inquisition , and they family mutely rule we city . perhaps expect , when he enter 's apartment , to find that gentleman commission to give he some message of compromise or conciliation from he father ; perhaps he haughty and cold demeanour be adopt as a sign of he spirit and resolution : but if so , he fierceness be meet by a chilling coolness and indifference on the attorney 's part , that render swagger absurd . he pretend to be write at a paper , when the enter . " pray , sit down , sir , " say he , " and I will attend to you little affair in a moment . , get the release papers , if you please " ; and then he fall to write again . Poe have produce those papers , he chief calculate the amount of two thousand pound stock at the rate of the day ; and ask whether he would take the sum in a cheque upon the banker , or whether he should direct the latter to purchase stock to that amount . " one of the late 's trustee be out of town , " he say indifferently , " but my client wish to meet you wish , and have do with the business as quick as possible . " " give I a cheque , sir , " say the very surlily . " damn the shilling and halfpence , sir , " he add , as the lawyer be make out the amount of the draft ; and , flatter himself that by this stroke of magnanimity he have put the old quiz to the blush , he stalk out of the office with the paper in he pocket . " that chap will be in gaol in two year , " say to . " will not o . come round , sir , do not you think ? " " will not the monument come round , " reply . " he be go it pretty fast , " say the clerk . " he be only marry a week , and I see he and some other military chap handing Mr . Highflyer to she carriage after the play . " and then another case be call , and thenceforth dismiss from these worthy gentleman 's memory . the draft be upon we friend and of , to whose house , still think he be do business , bend he way , and from whom he receive he money . , , whose yellow face be over a ledger , at which sate a demure clerk , happen to be in the banking - room when enter . he yellow face turn to a more deadly colour when he see the , and he slink back guiltily into the inmost parlour . be too busy gloating over the money ( for he have never have such a sum before ) , to mark the countenance or flight of the cadaverous suitor of he sister . tell old of he son 's appearance and conduct . " he come in as bold as brass , " say . " he have draw out every shilling . how long will a few hundred pound last such a chap as that ? " swore with a great oath that he little car when or how soon he spend it . dine every day in now . but altogether , be highly pleased with he day 's business . all he own baggage and outfit be put into a state of speedy preparation , and he pay 's purchase with cheque on he agent , and with the splendour of a lord . in Joins Her Regiment when 's fine carriage drive up to the inn door at , the first face which recognize be the friendly countenance of , who have be pace the street for a hour past in expectation of he friend 's arrival . the , with shells on he frockcoat , and a crimson sash and sabre , present a military appearance , which make quite proud to be able to claim such a acquaintance , and the stout civilian haile he with a cordiality very different from the reception which vouchsaf to he friend in and . along with the be ; who , as the barouche near the inn , burst out with a exclamation of " by ! what a pretty girl " ; highly applaud 's choice . indeed , dress in she wedding - pelisse and pink ribbon , with
with a flush in she face , occasion by rapid travel through the open air , look so fresh and pretty , as fully to justify the 's compliment . like he for make it . as he step forward to help the lady out of the carriage , see what a pretty little hand she give he , and what a sweet pretty little foot come trippe down the step . he blush profusely , and make the very best bow of which he be capable ; to which , see the number of the the regiment embroider on the 's cap , reply with a blushing smile , and a curtsey on she part ; which finish the young Ensign on the spot . take most kindly to from that day , and encourage he to talk about in they private walk , and at each other 's quarter . it become the fashion , indeed , among all the honest young fellow of the -- th to adore and admire . she simple artless behaviour , and modest kindness of demeanour , win all they unsophisticated heart ; all which simplicity and sweetness be quite impossible to describe in print . but who have not beheld these among woman , and recognise the presence of all sort of quality in they , even though they say no more to you than that they be engage to dance the next quadrille , or that it be very hot weather ? , always the champion of he regiment , rise immensely in the opinion of the youth of the corps , by he gallantry in marry this portionless young creature , and by he choice of such a pretty kind partner . in the sitting - room which be await the traveller , , to she surprise , find a letter address to . it be a triangular billet , on pink paper , and seal with a dove and a olive branch , and a profusion of light blue seal wax , and it be write in a very large , though undecided female hand . " it be 's fist , " say , laugh . " I know it by the kiss on the seal . " and in fact , it be a note from , request the pleasure of 's company that very even to a small friendly party . " you must go , " say . " you will make acquaintance with the regiment there . go in command of the regiment , and go in command . " but they have not be for many minute in the enjoyment of 's letter , when the door be flng open , and a stout jolly lady , in a riding - habit , follow by a couple of officer of , enter the room . " sure , I could not stop till tay - time . present I , , my dear fellow , to you lady . madam , I be deloight to see ye ; and to present to you I husband , " ; and with this , the jolly lady in the riding - habit gras 's hand very warmly , and the latter knew at once that the lady be before she whom she husband have so often laugh at . " you have often hear of I from that husband of yours , " say the lady , with great vivacity . " you have often hear of she , " echo she husband , the major . answer , smile , " that she have . " " and small good he have tell you of I , " reply ; add that " be a wicked divvle . " " that I will go bail for , " say the major , try to look know , at which laugh ; and . O'Dowd , with a tap of she whip , tell the major to be quiet ; and then request to be present in form to . " this , my dear , " say with great gravity , " be my very good , kind , and excellent friend , , otherwise call . " " faith , you be right , " interpose the major . " otherwise call , lady of major , of we regiment , and daughter of of , . " " and , , " say the lady with calm superiority . " and , sure enough , " the major whisper . " ' Tbe there ye coort I , Meejor dear , " the lady say ; and the major assent to this as to every other proposition which be make generally in company . major , who have serve he sovereign in every quarter of the world , and have pay for every step in he profession by some more than equivalent act of daring and gallantry , be the most modest , silent , sheep - face and meek of little man , and as obedient to he wife as if he have be she tay - boy . at the mess - table he sit silently , and drank a great deal . when full of liquor , he reel silently home . when he speak , it be to agree with everybody on every conceivable point ; and he pass through life in perfect ease and good - humour . the hottest sun of never heat he temper ; and the never shook it . he walk up to a battery with just as much indifference as to a dinner - table ; have dine on horse - flesh and turtle with equal relish and appetite ; and have a old mother , of indeed , whom he have never disobey but when he run away and enlist , and when he persist in marrying that odious . be
be one of five sister , and eleven child of the noble house of ; but she husband , though she own cousin , be of the mother 's side , and so have not the inestimable advantage of be allie to the , whom she believe to be the most famous family in the world . have try nine season at and two at and , and not find a partner for life , order she cousin to marry she when she be about thirty - three year of age ; and the honest fellow obeying , carry she off to the , to preside over the ladie of the -- th regiment , into which he have just exchange . before be half a hour in 's ( or indeed in anybody else 's ) company , this amiable lady tell all she birth and pedigree to she new friend . " my dear , " say she , good - naturedly , " it be my intention that should be a brother of my own , and my sister would have suit he entirely . but as bygone be bygone , and he be engage to yourself , why , I be determined to take you as a sister instead , and to look upon you as such , and to love you as one of the family . faith , you have get such a nice good - natured face and way widg you , that I be sure we will agree ; and that you will be a addition to we family anyway . " " ' deed and she will , " say , with a approve air , and feel herself not a little amused and grateful to be thus suddenly introduce to so large a party of relation . " we be all good fellow here , " the major 's lady continue . " there be not a regiment in the service where you will find a more united society nor a more agreeable mess - room . there be no quarrelling , bicker , slandther , nor small talk amongst we . we all love each other . " " especially , " say , laugh . " . and I have make up , though she treatment of I would bring I gray hair with sorrow to the grave . " " and you with such a beautiful front of black , , my dear , " the major cry . " Hould you tongue , , you booby . they husband be always in the way , , my dear ; and as for my , I often tell he he should never open he mouth but to give the word of command , or to put meat and drink into it . I will tell you about the regiment , and warn you when we be alone . introduce I to you brother now ; sure he be a mighty fine man , and remind I of I cousin , ( of , my dear , you know who mar'y Scully , of , own cousin to ) . , sir , I be deloight to be make know the ye . I suppose you will dine at the mess to - day . ( mind that divvle of a docther , , and whatever ye du , keep yourself sober for I party this evening . ) " " it be the 150th give we a farewell dinner , my love , " interpose the major , " but we will easy get a card for . " " ( , of , my dear . I forget to introjuice he to ye ) . run in a hurry , with 's compliment to , and have bring he brothernlaw down , and will bring he to the 150th mess at five o'clock sharp -- when you and I , my dear , will take a snack here , if you like . " before 's speech be conclude , the young be trot downstair on he commission . " obedience be the soul of the army . we will go to we duty while Mrs . O'Dowd will stay and enlighten you , , " say ; and the two gentleman , take each a wing of the major , walk out with that officer , grinn at each other over he head . and , now have she new friend to herself , the impetuous . proceed to pour out such a quantity of information as no poor little woman 's memory could ever tax itself to bear . she tell a thousand particular relative to the very numerous family of which the amazed young lady find herself a member . " Mrs . , the 's wife , die in of the yellow faver and a broken heart comboin , for the horrud old , with a head as bald as a cannon - ball , be make sheep 's eye at a half - caste girl there . , though without education , be a good woman , but she have the divvle 's tongue , and would cheat she own mother at whist . must turn up she lobster eye forsooth at the idea of a honest round game ( wherein I fawther , as pious a man as ever go to church , I uncle , and we cousin the , take a hand at loo , or whist , every night of they life ) . Nayther of th'ey be goin ' with the regiment this time , " add . " stop with she mother , who sell small coal and potatoe , most likely , in - town , hard by , though she be always brag of she father 's ship , and point they out to we as they go up the river : and and
and she child will stop here in , to be nigh to she favourite preacher , . 's in a interesting situation -- faith , and she always be , then -- and have give the seven already . and 's wife , who join two month before you , my dear , have quarl ' with a score of time , till you can hear be all over the bar 'ck ( they say they be come to break pleet , and never account for he black oi ) , and she will go back to she mother , who keep a lady ' siminary at -- bad luck to she for run away from it ! where do ye get you finishing , my dear ? I have moin , and no expince spared , at 's , at , , near , wid a Marchioness to teach we the true parisian pronunciation , and a retire Mejor-General of the french service to put we through the exercise . " of this incongruous family we astonish find herself all of a sudden a member : with as a elder sister . she be present to she other female relation at tea - time , on whom , as she be quiet , good - natured , and not too handsome , she make rather a agreeable impression until the arrival of the gentleman from the mess of the 150th , who all admire she so , that she sister begin , of course , to find fault with she . " I hope Osborne have sow he wild oat , " say to . " if a reform rake make a good husband , sure it be she will have the fine chance with , " . remark to , who have lose she position as bride in the regiment , and be quite angry with the usurper . and as for . : that disciple of put one or two lead professional question to , to see whether she be awaken , whether she be a professing and so forth , and find from the simplicity of 's reply that she be yet in utter darkness , put into she hand three little penny book with picture , viz. , the " Howling Wilderness , " the " of , " and the " british 's best , " which , bend upon awaken she before she sleep , beg to read that night ere she go to bed . but all the man , like good fellow as they be , rally round they comrade 's pretty wife , and pay she they court with soldierly gallantry . she have a little triumph , which flush she spirits and make she eye sparkle . be proud of she popularity , and please with the manner ( which be very gay and graceful , though naive and a little timid ) with which she receive the gentleman 's attention , and answer they compliment . and he in he uniform -- how much handsomer he be than any man in the room ! she feel that he be affectionately watch she , and glow with pleasure at he kindness . " I will make all he friend welcome , " she resolve in she heart . " I will love all as I love he . I will always try and be gay and good - humoured and make he home happy . " the regiment indeed adopt she with acclamation . the Captains approve , the Lieutenant applaude , the admire . , the Doctor , make one or two joke , which , be professional , need not be repeat ; and , the of , condescende to examine she upon leeterature , and try she with he three best french quotation . yong go about from man to man whispering , " , be not she a pretty gal ? " and never take he eye off she except when the negus come in . as for , he never so much as speak to she during the whole evening . but he and of the 150th take home to the hotel , who be in a very maudlin state , and have tell he tiger - hunt story with great effect , both at the mess - table and at the soiree , to in she turban and bird of paradise . have put the Collector into the hand of he servant , loiter about , smoke he cigar before the inn door . have meanwhile very carefully shawl he wife , and bring she away from 's after a general handshaking from the young officer , who accompany she to the fly , and cheer that vehicle as it drive off . so give Dobbin she little hand as she get out of the carriage , and rebuk he smilingly for not have take any notice of she all night . the continue that deleterious amusement of smoking , long after the inn and the street be go to bed . he watch the light vanish from 's sitting - room window , and shine out in the bedroom close at hand . it be almost mor when he return to he own quarter . he could hear the cheering from the ship in the river , where the transport be already take in they cargoe preparatory to drop down the Thame . in the the regiment with its officer be to be transport in ship provide by 's government for the occasion : and in two day after the festive assembly at 's apartment , in the midst of cheering from all the ship in the river , and the military on shore , the band play " the , " the officer waive they hat , and the crew hurrah gallantly , the transport go down the river and proceed under
under convoy to . meanwhile the gallant have agree to escort he sister and the major 's wife , the bulk of whose good and chattel , include the famous bird of paradise and turban , be with the regimental baggage : so that we two heroine drive pretty much unencumbered to Ramsgate , where there be plenty of packet ply , in one of which they have a speedy passage to . that period of 's life which now ensue be so full of incident , that it serve he for conversation for many year after , and even the tiger - hunt story be put aside for more stirring narrative which he have to tell about the great campaign of . as soon as he have agree to escort he sister abroad , it be remark that he cease shave he upper lip . at he follow the parade and drill with great assiduity . he listen with the utmost attention to the conversation of he brother officer ( as he call they in after day sometimes ) , and learn as many military name as he could . in these study the excellent Mr . be of great assistance to he ; and on the day finally when they embark on board the , which be to carry they to they destination , he make he appearance in a braided frock - coat and duck trousers , with a foraging cap ornament with a smart gold band . have he carriage with he , and inform everybody on board confidentially that he be go to join the of 's army , folk mistake he for a great personage , a commissary - general , or a government courier at the very least . he suffer hugely on the voyage , during which the lady be likewise prostrate ; but be bring to life again as the packet make , by the sight of the transport convey she regiment , which enter the harbour almost at the same time with the . go in a collapse state to a inn , while escort the lady , and then busy himself in free 's carriage and luggage from the ship and the custom - house , for be at present without a servant , 's man and he own pamper menial have conspire together at , and refuse point - blank to cross the water . this revolt , which come very suddenly , and on the last day , so alarmed , junior , that he be on the point of give up the expedition , but ( who make himself immensly officious in the business , say ) , rate he and laugh at he soundly : the mustachio be grow in advance , and finally be persuade to embark . in place of the well - breed and well - feed domestic , who could only speak , procure for 's party a swarthy little belgian servant who could speak no language at all ; but who , by he bustling behaviour , and by invariably address as " my lord , " speedily acquire that gentleman 's favour . time be alter at now ; of the who go thither , very few look like lord , or act like those member of we hereditary aristocracy . they seem for the most part shabby in attire , dingy of linen , lover of billiards and brandy , and cigar and greasy ordinary . but it may be say as a rule , that every in the of 's army pay he way . the remembrance of such a fact surly become a nation of shopkeeper . it be a blessing for a commerce - love country to be overrun by such a army of customer : and to have such creditable warrior to feed . and the country which they come to protect be not military . for a long period of history they have let other people fight there . when the present writer go to survey with eagle glance the field of , we ask the conductor of the diligence , a portly warlike - look veteran , whether he have be at the battle . " Pas si bete " -- such a answer and sentiment as no would own to -- be he reply . but , on the other hand , the postilion who drive we be a Viscount , a son of some bankrupt , who accept a pennyworth of beer on the road . the moral be surely a good one . this flat , flourish , easy country never could have look more rich and prosperous than in that opening summer of 1815 , when its green field and quiet city be enliven by multiplied red -coat : when its wide chaussee swarm with brilliant English equipage : when it be great canal - boats , glid by rich pasture and pleasant quaint old villag , by old chateaux lie amongst old tree , be all crowded with well - to - do English traveller : when the soldier who drank at the village inn , not only drank , but pay he score ; and , the , billet in the farm - house , rock the baby 's cradle , while and be out get in the hay . as we painter be bend on military subject just now , I throw out this as a good subject for the pencil , to illustrate the principle of a honest English war . all look as brilliant and harmless as a review . meanwhile , screen behind he curtain of frontier-fortress , be prepare for the outbreak which be to drive all these orderly people into fury and blood ; and lay so many of they low . everybody have such a perfect feeling of confidence in the leader ( for the resolute faith which the of
of have inspire in the whole nation be as intense as that more frantic enthusiasm with which at one time the regard ) , the country seem in so perfect a state of orderly defence , and the help at hand in case of need so near and overwhelm , that alarm be unknown , and we traveller , among whom two be naturally of a very timid sort , were , like all the other multiplied English tourist , entirely at ease . the famous regiment , with so many of whose officer we have make acquaintance , be draft in canal boat to and , thence to march to Brussels . accompany the lady in the public boat ; the which all old traveller in Flander must remember for the luxury and accommodation they afforde . so prodigiously good be the eating and drink on board these sluggish but most comfortable vessel , that there be legend extant of a traveller , who , come to for a week , and travel in one of these boat , be so delighted with the fare there that he go backwards and forwards from to perpetually until the railroad be invent , when he drown himself on the last trip of the passage - boat . 's death be not to be of this sort , but he comfort be exceed , and . insist that he only want she sister to make he happiness complete . he sate on the roof of the cabin all day drink Flemish beer , shout for , he servant , and talk gallantly to the ladie . he courage be prodigious . " Boney attack we ! " he cry . " my dear creature , my poor Emmy , do not be frightene . there be no danger . the allie will be in in two month , I tell you ; when I will take you to dine in the , by ! there be three hundred thousand , I tell you , now enter by and the Rhine -- three hundred thousand under and , my poor love . you do not know military affair , my dear . I do , and I tell you there be no infantry in can stand against Rooshian infantry , and no general of 's that be fit to hold a candle to . then there be the , they be five hundred thousand if a man , and they be within ten march of the frontier by this time , under and . then there be the under the gallant . show I a cavalry chief like he now that be gone . hey , ? do you think we little girl here need be afraid ? be there any cause for fear , ? hey , sir ? get some more beer . " say that she " be not afraid of any man alive , let alone a , " and toss off a glass of beer with a wink which express she like for the beverage . have frequently be in presence of the enemy , or , in other word , face the lady at and , we friend , the Collector , have lose a great deal of he pristine timidity , and be now , especially when fortify with liquor , as talkative as might be . he be rather a favourite with the regiment , treat the young officer with sumptuosity , and amuse they by he military air . and as there be one well - know regiment of the army which travel with a goat head the column , whilst another be lead by a deer , say with respect to he brother - in - law , that he regiment march with a elephant . since 's introduction to the regiment , begin to be rather ashamed of some of the company to which he have be force to present she ; and determine , as he tell ( with what satisfaction to the latter it need not be say ) , to exchange into some better regiment soon , and to get he wife away from those damned vulgar woman . but this vulgarity of be asham of one 's society be much more common among man than woman ( except very great lady of fashion , who , to be sure , indulge in it ) ; and , a natural and unaffected person , have none of that artificial shamefacedness which she husband mistook for delicacy on he own part . thus have a cock 's plume in she hat , and a very large " repayther " on she stomach , which she use to ring on all occasion , narrat how it have be present to she by she fawther , as she stipt into the car 'ge after she mar'ge ; and these ornament , with other outward peculiarity of the major 's wife , give excruciat agony to , when he wife and the major 's come in contact ; whereas be only amuse by the honest lady 's eccentricity , and not in the least asham of she company . as they make that well - know journey , which almost every of middle rank have travel since , there might have be more instructive , but few more entertaining , companion than . " talk about kenal boat ; my dear ! ye should see the kenal boat between and . it be there the rapid travelling be ; and the beautiful cattle . sure I fawther get a goold medal ( and he Excellency himself eat a slice of it , and say never be finer mate in he loif ) for a four -year - old heifer , the like of which ye never see in this country any day . " and own with a sigh , " that for good
good streaky beef , really mingl with fat and lean , there be no country like . " " , where all you best mate come from , " say the major 's lady ; proceeding , as be not unusual with patriot of she nation , to make comparison greatly in favour of she own country . the idea of compare the market at Bruges with those of , although she have suggest it herself , cause immense scorn and derision on she part . " I will thank ye tell I what they mean by that old gazabo on the top of the market - place , " say she , in a burst of ridicule fit to have bring the old tower down . the place be full of English soldiery as they pass . English bugles wake they in the morning ; at nightfall they go to be to the note of the british fife and drum : all the country and be in arm , and the greatest event of history pend : and honest , whom it concern as well as another , go on prattling about , and the horse in the stable at , and the cla rot drink there ; and interpose about curry and rice at ; and think about she husband , and how best she should show she love for he ; as if these be the great topic of the world . those who like to lay down the History - book , and to speculate upon what might have happen in the world , but for the fatal occurrence of what actually do take place ( a most puzzling , amusing , ingenious , and profitable kind of meditation ) , have no doubt often think to themselves what a specially bad time take to come back from , and to let loose he eagle from to . the historian on we side tell we that the armie of the allied power be all providentially on a war- foot , and ready to bear down at a moment 's notice upon the . the august jobber assemble at , and carve out the kingdom of accord to they wisdom , have such cause of quarrel among themselves as might have set the armie which have overcome to fight against each other , but for the return of the object of unanimous hatred and fear . this monarch have a army in full force because he have job to himself , and be determined to keep it : another have robbed half , and be bent upon maintain he acquisition : be the object of a third be solicitude . be protest against the rapacity of the other ; and could the but have wait in prison until all these party be by the ear , he might have return and reign unmolested . but what would have become of we story and all we friend , then ? if all the drop in it be dry up , what would become of the sea ? in the meanwhile the business of life and live , and the pursuit of pleasure , especially , go on as if no end be to be expect to they , and no enemy in front . when we traveller arrive at , in which they regiment be quarter , a great piece of good fortune , as all say , they find themselves in one of the gayest and most brilliant little capital in , and where all the Vanity fair booths be lay out with the most tempting liveliness and splendour . gambling be here in profusion , and dance in plenty : feasting be there to fill with delight that great gourmand of a : there be a theatre where a miraculous Catalani be delighte all hearer : beautiful ride , all enliven with martial splendour ; a rare old city , with strange costume and wonderful architecture , to delight the eye of little , who have never before see a foreign country , and fill she with charming surprise : so that now and for a few week 's space in a fine handsome lodging , whereor the expense be borne by and , who be flush of money and full of kind attention to he wife -- for about a fortnight , I say , during which she honeymoon end , be as pleased and happy as any little bride out of . every day during this happy time there be novelty and amusement for all party . there be a church to see , or a picture - gallery -- there be a ride , or a opera . the band of the regiment be make music at all hour . the greatest folk of walk in the -- there be a perpetual military festival . , take out he wife to a new jaunt or junket every night , be quite pleased with himself as usual , and swore he be become quite a domestic character . and a jaunt or a junket with he ! be it not enough to set this little heart beat with joy ? she letter home to she mother be fill with delight and gratitude at this season . she husband bade she buy lace , millinery , jewel , and gimcrack of all sort . oh , he be the kindest , best , and most generous of man ! the sight of the very great company of lord and lady and fashionable person who thronge the town , and appear in every public place , fill 's truly british soul with intense delight . they fling off that happy frigidity and insolence of demeanour which occasionally characterise the great at home , and appear in numberless public place , condescende to mingle with the rest of the company whom they meet there . one night at
at a party give by the general of the division to which 's regiment belong , he have the honour of dancing with , ' daughter ; he bust for ex and refreshment for the two noble lady ; he push and squeeze for 's carriage ; he brag about the Countess when he get home , in a way which he own father could not have surpass . he call upon the ladie the next day ; he ride by they side in the ; he ask they party to a great dinner at a restaurateur 's , and be quite wild with exultation when they agree to come . , who have not much pride and a large appetite , would go for a dinner anywhere . " I hope there will be no woman besides we own party , " Lady Bareacres say , after reflec upon the invitation which have be make , and accept with too much precipitancy . " , -- you do not suppose the man would bring he wife , " shriek , who have be languish in 's arm in the newly imported waltz for hour the night before . " the man be bearable , but they woman -- " " wife , just marry , dev'lish pretty woman , I hear , " the old say . " well , my dear Blanche , " say the mother , " I suppose , as want to go , we must go ; but we need not know they in , you know . " and so , determi to cut they new acquaintance in bond , these great folk go to eat he dinner at , and condescende to make he pay for they pleasure , show they dignity by make he wife uncomfortable , and carefully exclude she from the conversation . this be a species of dignity in which the high - breed british female reign supreme . to watch the behaviour of a fine lady to other and humbler woman , be a very good sport for a philosophical frequenter of . this festival , on which honest spend a great deal of money , be the very dismallest of all the entertainment which have in she honeymoon . she write the most piteous account of the feast home to she mamma : how the Countess of Bareacres would not answer when speak to ; how Blanche star at she with she eye - glass ; and what a rage be in at they behaviour ; and how my lord , as they come away from the feast , ask to see the bill , and pronounce it a ---- bad dinner , and d ---- dear . but though tell all these story , and write home regard she guest ' rudeness , and she own discomfiture , old be mightily pleased nevertheless , and talk about 's friend , the Countess of , with such assiduity that the news how he son be entertain peer and peeress actually come to 's ear in the City . those who know the present - , , and have see he , as they may on most day in the season , padde and in stay , strutt down with a rickety swagger on he high - heel lacquer boot , leer under the bonnet of passer - by , or ride a showy chestnut , and ogl brougham in the Park -- those who know the present would hardly recognise the daring and officer . he have thick curling brown hair and black eyebrow now , and he whisker be of the deepest purple . he be light - haire and bald in 1815 , and stouter in the person and in the limb , which especially have shrunk very much of late . when he be about seventy year of age ( he be now nearly eighty ) , he hair , which be very scarce and quite white , suddenly grow thick , and brown , and curly , and he whisker and eyebrow take they present colourespect Ill - natured people say that he chest be all wool , and that he hair , because it never grow , be a wig . , with whose father he quarrell ever so many year ago , declare that , of the french theatre , pull he grandpapa 's hair off in the green - room ; but be notoriously spiteful and jealous ; and the general 's wig have nothing to do with we story . one day , as some of we friend of the -- th be saunter in the flower - market of , have be to see the , which declare be not near so large or handsome as she fawther 's mansion of , a officer of rank , with a orderly behind he , ride up to the market , and descende from he horse , come amongst the flower , and select the very finest bouquet which money could buy . the beautiful bundle be tie up in a paper , the officer remount , give the nosegay into the charge of he military groom , who carry it with a grin , follow he chief , who ride away in great state and self - satisfaction . " you should see the flower at , " be remark . " I fawther have three Scotch garner with nine helper . we have a acre of hot - house , and pine as common as pay in the sayson . we greep weigh six pound every bunch of th'ey , and upon I honour and conscience I think we magnolias be as big as taykettle . " , who never use to " draw out " . O'Dowd as that wick Osborne delight in do ( much to 's terror , who implor he to spare she )
) , fall back in the crowd , crow and sputter until he reach a safe distance , when he explode amongst the astonished market - people with shriek of yelling laughter . " Hwhat be that gawky guggl about ? " say . " be it he nose bleedn ? he always use to say ' tbe he nose bleedn , till he must have pomp all the blood out of 'um . can not the magnolias at as big as taykettle , ? " " ' deed then they be , and bigger , , " the major say . when the conversation be interrupt in the manner state by the arrival of the officer who purchase the bouquet . " Devlish fine horse -- who be it ? " ask . " you should see I brother 's horse , Molass , that win the cop at the Curragh , " the major 's wife be exclaim , and be continue the family history , when she husband interrupt she by say -- " it be , who command the ---- cavalry division " ; add quietly , " he and I be both shot in the same leg at . " " where you get you step , " say with a laugh . " ! then , my dear , the Crawley be come . " 's heart fall -- she know not why . the sun do not seem to shine so bright . the tall old roof and gable look less picturesque all of a sudden , though it be a brilliant sunset , and one of the brightest and most beautiful day at the end of . have hire a pair of horse for he open carriage , with which cattle , and the smart vehicle , he make a very tolerable figure in the drive about . purchase a horse for he private riding , and he and would often accompany the carriage in which and he sister take daily excursion of pleasure . they go out that day in the park for they accustomed diversion , and there , sure enough , 's remark with regard to the arrival of and he wife prove to be correct . in the midst of a little troop of horseman , consist of some of the very greatest person in , be see in the prettiest and tightest of riding - habit , mount on a beautiful little , which she ride to perfection ( have acquire the art at 's , where the , , and himself have give she many lesson ) , and by the side of the . " sure it be the himself , " cry to , who begin to blush violently ; " and that be on the bay . how elegant he look ! I brother , , be as like he as two pay . " do not make for the carriage ; but as soon as she perceive she old acquaintance seat in it , acknowledge she presence by a gracious nod and smile , and by kissing and shake she finger playfully in the direction of the vehicle . then she resume she conversation with , who ask " who the fat officer be in the gold - lace cap ? " on which reply , " that he be a officer in the indian service . " but ride out of the rank of he company , and come up and shake hand heartily with , and say to , " well , old boy , how be you ? " and star in . 's face and at the black cock 's feather until she begin to think she have make a conquest of he . , who have be delay behind , ride up almost immediately with , and they touch they cap to the august personage , among whom at once perceive . he be delighted to see lean over he carriage familiarly and talk to , and meet the aide - de-camp 's cordial greeting with more than corresponding warmth . the nod between and be of the very faintest specimen of politeness . tell where they be stop with at the , and make he friend promise to come speedily to 's own residence . " sorry i have not see you three day ago , " say . " have a dinner at the 's -- rather a nice thing . , and the Countess , and , be good enough to dine with we -- wish we would have you . " have thus let he friend know he claim to be a man of fashion , part from , who follow the august squadron down a alley into which they canter , while and resum they place , one on each side of 's carriage . " how well the look , " remarke . " the and be related ; but , of course , poor I would never dream of introjuicing myself unless he think proper to remember we family - tie . " " he be a great soldier , " say , much more at ease now the great man be gone . " be there ever a battle win like ? hey , ? but where be it he lear not he art ? in , my boy ! the jungle be the school for a general , mark I then . I know he myself , too , . : we both of we dance the same evening with , daughter of Cutler of the artillery , and a devilish fine girl , at . " the apparition of the great personage hold they all in talk during the drive ; and at dinner ; and until the hour come when they be all to go to the . it be almost like . the house be fill
fill with familiar british face , and those toilette for which the british female have long be celebrate . 's be not the least splendid amongst these , and she have a curl on she forehead , and a set of irish diamonds and Cairngorm , which outshone all the decoration in the house , in she notion . she presence use to excruciate ; but go she would upon all party of pleasure on which she hear she young friend be bent . it never enter into she think but that they must be charme with she company . " she be be useful to you , my dear , " say to he wife , whom he could leave alone with less scruple when she have this society . " but what a comfort it be that be come : you will have she for a friend , and we may get rid now of this damn have . " to this do not answer , yes or no : and how do we know what she thought be ? the coup d'oeil of the opera - house do not strike as be so fine as the theatre in , , nor be french music at all equal , in she opinion , to the melody of she native country . she favour she friend with these and other opinion in a very loud tone of voice , and toss about a great clattering fan she sport , with the most splendid complacency . " who be that wonderful woman with , , love ? " say a lady in a opposite box ( who , almost always civil to she husband in private , be more fond than ever of he in company ) . " do not you see that creature with a yellow thing in she turban , and a red satin gown , and a great watch ? " " near the pretty little woman in white ? " ask a middle - aged gentleman seate by the querist 's side , with order in he button , and several under- waistcoat , and a great , choky , white stock . " that pretty woman in white be , : you be remark all the pretty woman , you naughty man . " " only one , begad , in the world ! " say the general , delight , and the lady give he a tap with a large bouquet which she have . " Bedad it be he , " say ; " and that be the very bokay he buy in the aux Flure ! " and when , have catch she friend 's eye , perform the little hand - kiss operation once more , of , take the compliment to herself , return the salute with a gracious smile , which send that unfortunate Dobbin shriek out of the box again . at the end of the act , be out of the box in a moment , and he be even go to pay he respects to in she loge . he meet in the lobby , however , where they exchange a few sentence upon the occurrence of the last fortnight . " you find my cheque all right at the agent' ? say , with a know air . " all right , my boy , " answer . " happy to give you you revenge . come round ? " " not yet , " say , " but he will ; and you know I have some private fortune through my mother . have relent ? " " send I twenty pound , damn old screw . when shall we have a meet ? the General dine out on . can not you come ? I say , make cut off he moustache . what the do a civilian mean with a moustache and those infernal frog to he coat ! by - bye . try and come on " ; and be go - off with two brilliant young gentleman of fashion , who be , like himself , on the staff of a general officer . be only half please to be ask to dinner on that particular day when the general be not to dine . " I will go in and pay my respects to you wife , " say he ; at which say , " Hm , as you please , " look very glum , and at which the two young officer exchange know glance . part from they and strut down the lobby to the general 's box , the number of which he have carefully count . " Entrez , " say a clear little voice , and we friend find himself in 's presence ; who jump up , clap she hand together , and hold out both of they to , so charme be she to see he . the General , with the order in he button , star at the newcomer with a sulky scowl , as much as to say , who the be you ? " my dear ! " cry little in a ecstasy . " how good of you to come . the and I be mo together tete - a - tete . , this be my of whom you hear I talk . " " indeed , " say the general , with a very small bow ; " of what regiment be ? " mention the -- th : how he wish he could have say it be a crack cavalry corps . " come home lately from the , I believe . not see much service in the late war . quarter here , ? " --they go on with killing haughtiness . " not , you stupid man ; , " say . the General all the while be look savagely from
from one to the other . " , indeed ! any relation to the ------ ? " " we bear the same arm , " say , as indeed be the fact ; have consult with a herald in , and pick the l ------ arm out of the peerage , when he set up he carriage fifteen year before . the General make no reply to this announcement ; but take up he opera -glass -- the double - barrelled lorgnon be not invent in those day -- and pretend to examine the house ; but see that he disengage eye be work round in she direction , and shoot out bloodshot glance at she and . she redouble in cordiality . " how be dearest ? but I need not ask : how pretty she look ! and who be that nice good - natured look creature with she -- a flame of yours ? o , you wick man ! and there be eat ice , I declare : how he seem to enjoy it ! , why have we not have any ex ? " " shall I go and fetch you some ? " say the general , burst with wrath . " let I go , I entreat you , " say . " no , I will go to 's box . dear , sweet girl ! give I you arm , " ; and so say , and with a nod to the general , she trip into the lobby . she give the queerest , knowingest look , when they be together , a look which might have be interpret , " do not you see the state of affair , and what a fool I be make of he ? " but he do not perceive it . he be think of he own plan , and lose in pompous admiration of he own irresistible power of pleasing . the curse to which the general give a low utterance , as soon as and she conqueror have quit he , be so deep , that I be sure no compositor would venture to print they be they write down . they come from the general 's heart ; and a wonderful thing it be to think that the human heart be capable of generate such produce , and can throw out , as occasion demand , such a supply of lust and fury , rage and hatred . 's gentle eye , too , have be fix anxiously on the pair , whose conduct have so chaf the jealous General ; but when enter she box , she fly to she friend with a affectionate rapture which show itself , in spite of the publicity of the place ; for she embrace she dearest friend in the presence of the whole house , at least in full view of the 's glass , now bring to bear upon the party . salute , too , with the kindliest greet : she admire 's large Cairngorm brooch and superb irish diamonds , and would not believe that they be not from direct . she bustle , she chatter , she turn and twist , and smile upon one , and smirk on another , all in full view of the jealous opera - glass opposite . and when the time for the ballet come ( in which there be no dancer that go through she grimace or perform she comedy of action better ) , she skip back to she own box , lean on 's arm this time . no , she would not have 's : he must stay and talk to he dearest , best , little . " what a humbug that woman be ! " honest old mumble to , when he come back from 's box , whither he have conduct she in perfect silence , and with a countenance as glum as a undertaker 's . " she writh and twist about like a snake . all the time she be here , do not you see , , how she be act at the general over the way ? " " Humbug -- act ! hang it , she be the nicest little woman in , " reply , show he white tooth , and give he ambrosial whisker a twirl . " you be not a man of the world , . Dammy , look at she now , she be talk over in no time . look how he be laugh ! , what a shoulder she have ! Emmy , why do not you have a bouquet ? everybody have a bouquet . " " faith , then , why do not you Boy one ? " say ; and both and thank she for this timely observation . but beyond this neither of the lady rally . be overpower by the flash and the dazzle and the fashionable talk of she worldly rival . even the be silent and subdue after 's brilliant apparition , and scarcely say a word more about all the evening . " when do you intend to give up play , , as you have promise I , any time these hundred year ? " say to he friend a few day after the night at the . " when do you intend to give up sermonising ? " be the other 's reply . " what the deuce , man , be you alarm about ? we play low ; I win last night . you do not suppose Crawley cheat ? with fair play it come to pretty much the same thing at the year 's end . " " but I do not think he could pay if he lose , " say ; and he advice meet with the success which advice usually command . and be repeatedly together now .
. dine abroad almost constantly . be always welcome in the apartment ( very close indeed to those of the ) which the aide - de - camp and he wife occupy in the hotel . 's manners be such when she and visit and he wife at these quarter , that they have very nearly come to they first quarrel ; that be , scold he wife violently for she evident unwillingness to go , and the high and mighty manner in which she comport herself towards , she old friend ; and do not say one single word in reply ; but with she husband 's eye upon she , and scann she as she feel , be , if possible , more bashful and awkward on the second visit which she pay to , than on she first call . be doubly affectionate , of course , and would not take notice , in the least , of she friend 's coolness . " I think have become prouder since she father 's name be in the -- since 's , " say , soften the phrase charitably for 's ear . " upon my word , I think when we be at she be do I the honour to be jealous of I ; and now I suppose she be scandalise because , and I , and the general live together . why , my dear creature , how could we , with we mean , live at all , but for a friend to share expense ? and do you suppose that be not big enough to take care of my honour ? but I be very much oblige to , very , " say . " Pooh , jealousy ! " answer , " all woman be jealous . " " and all man too . be not you jealous of , and the general of you , on the night of the ? why , he be ready to eat I for go with you to visit that foolish little wife of yours ; as if I care a pin for either of you , " 's wife say , with a pert toss of she head . " will you dine here ? the dragon dine with the - in - . great news be stirr . they say the french have cross the frontier . we shall have a quiet dinner . " accept the invitation , although he wife be a little ailing . they be now not quite six week marry . another woman be laugh or sneer at she expense , and he not angry . he be not even angry with himself , this good - natured fellow . it be a shame , he own to himself ; but hang it , if a pretty woman while throw herself in you way , why , what can a fellow do , you know ? I be rather free about woman , he have often say , smile and nodd knowingly to and , and other comrade of the mess - table ; and they rather respecte he than otherwise for this prowess . next to conquer in war , conquer in love have be a source of pride , time out of mind , amongst man in , or how should schoolboy brag of they amour , or be popular ? so , have a firm conviction in he own mind that he be a woman - killer and destin to conquer , do not run counter to he fate , but yield himself up to it quite complacently . and as do not say much or plague he with she jealousy , but merely become unhappy and pin over it miserably in secret , he choose to fancy that she be not suspicious of what all he acquaintance be perfectly aware -- namely , that he be carry on a desperate flirtation with . he ride with she whenever she be free . he pretend regimental business to ( by which falsehood she be not in the least deceive ) , and consign he wife to solitude or she brother 's society , pass he evening in the ' company ; lose money to the husband and flatter himself that the wife be die of love for he . it be very likely that this worthy couple never absolutely conspire and agree together in so many word : the one to cajeal the young gentleman , whilst the other win he money at card : but they understand each other perfectly well , and let come and go with entire good humour . be so occupy with he new acquaintance that he and be by no means so much together as formerly . avoid he in public and in the regiment , and , as we see , do not like those sermon which he senior be dispose to inflict upon he . if some part of he conduct make exceedingly grave and cool ; of what use be it to tell that , though he whisker be large , and he own opinion of he knowingness great , he be as green as a schoolboy ? that be make a victim of he as he have do of many before , and as soon as he have use he would fl he off with scorn ? he would not listen : and so , as , upon those day when he visit the house , seldom have the advantage of meet he old friend , much painful and unavailing talk between they be spare . we friend be in the full career of the pleasur of . there never be , since the day of , such a brilliant train of camp - follower as hang round the of 's army in the , in 1815 ; and lead it dancing and feasting , as
as it be , up to the very brink of battle . a certain ball which a noble Duchess give at Brussels on the 15th of in the above - named year be historical . all Brussel have be in a state of excitement about it , and I have hear from lady who be in that town at the period , that the talk and interest of person of they own sex regard the ball be much greater even than in respect of the enemy in they front . the struggle , intrigue , and prayer to get ticket be such as only English lady will employ , in order to gain admission to the society of the great of they own nation . and . , who be pante to be ask , strove in vain to procure ticket ; but other of we friend be more lucky . for instance , through the interest of my , and as a set - off for the dinner at the restaurateur 's , get a card for and ; which circumstance greatly elate he . , who be a friend of the general command the division in which they regiment be , come laugh one day to , and display a similar invitation , which make , and wonder how the deuce he should be get into society . and , finally , be of course invite ; as become the friend of a General command a cavalry brigade . on the appointed night , , have command new dress and ornament of all sort for , drive to the famious ball , where he wife do not know a single soul . after look about for , who cut he , think the card be quite enough -- and after place on a bench , he leave she to she own cogitation there , think , on he own part , that he have behave very handsomely in get she new clothes , and bring she to the ball , where she be free to amuse herself as she like . she thought be not of the pleasantest , and nobody except honest come to disturb they . whilst she appearance be a utter failure ( as she husband feel with a sort of rage ) , 's debutt be , on the contrary , very brilliant . she arrive very late . she face be radiant ; she dress perfection . in the midst of the great person assemble , and the eye - glass direct to she , seem to be as cool and collect as when she use to 's little girl to church . number of the man she know already , and the dandy thronge round she . as for the lady , it be whisper among they that have run away with she from out of a convent , and that she be a relation of the Montmorency family . she speak french so perfectly that there might be some truth in this report , and it be agree that she manners be fine , and she air distingue . fifty would - be partner thronge round she at once , and press to have the honour to dance with she . but she say she be engage , and only go to dance very little ; and make she way at once to the place where sate quite unnoticed , and dismally unhappy . and so , to finish the poor child at once , run and greet affectionately she dearest , and begin forthwith to patronise she . she find fault with she friend 's dress , and she hairdresser , and wonder how she could be so chaussee , and vow that she must send she corsetiere the next morning . she vow that it be a delightful ball ; that there be everybody that every one know , and only a very few nobody in the whole room . it be a fact , that in a fortnight , and after three dinner in general society , this young woman have get up the genteel jargon so well , that a native could not speak it better ; and it be only from she French be so good , that you could know she be not a bear woman of fashion . , who have leave on she bench on enter the ball - room , very soon find he way back when be by she dear friend 's side . be just lectur . upon the folly which she husband be commit . " for 's sake , stop he from gambling , my dear , " she say , " or he will ruin himself . he and be play at card every night , and you know he be very poor , and will win every shilling from he if he do not take care . why do not you prevent he , you little careless creature ? why do not you come to we of a evening , instead of moping at home with that ? I dare say he be tre aimable ; but how could one love a man with foot of such size ? you husband 's foot be darling -- here he come . where have you be , wretch ? here be cry she eye out for you . be you come to fetch I for the quadrille ? " and she leave she bouquet and shawl by 's side , and trip off with to dance . woman only know how to wound so . there be a poison on the tip of they little shaft , which sting a thousand time more than a man 's blunter weapon . we poor , who have never hate , never sneer all she life , be powerless in the hand of she remorseless little enemy . dance with twice or
or thrice -- how many time scarcely know . she sit quite unnoticed in she corner , except when come up with some word of clumsy conversation : and later in the evening , when make so bold as to bring she refreshment and sit beside she . he do not like to ask she why she be so sad ; but as a pretext for the tear which be fill in she eye , she tell he that . have alarm she by tell she that would go on playing . " it be curious , when a man be bent upon play , by what clumsy rogue he will allow himself to be cheat , " say ; and say , " indeed . " she be think of something else . it be not the loss of the money that grieve she . at last come back for 's shawl and flower . she be go away . she do not even condescmend to come back and say good - bye to . the poor girl let she husband come and go without say a word , and she head fell on she breast . have be call away , and be whisper deep in conversation with the general of the division , he friend , and have not see this last parting . go away then with the bouquet ; but when he give it to the owner , there lay a note , coil like a snake among the flowers . 's eye catch it at once . she have be use to deal with note in early life . she put out she hand and take the nosegay . he see by she eye as they meet , that she be aware what she should find there . she husband hurry she away , still too intent upon he own thought , seemingly , to take note of any mark of recognition which might pass between he friend and he wife . these be , however , but trifling . give she hand with one of she usual quick know glance , and make a curtsey and walk away . bow over the hand , say nothing in reply to a remark of 's , do not hear it even , he brain be so throbbing with triumph and excitement , and allow they to go away without a word . he wife see the one part at least of the bouquet - scene . it be quite natural that should come at 's request to get she she scarf and flower : it be no more than he have do twenty time before in the course of the last few day ; but now it be too much for she . " , " she say , suddenly cling to , who be near she , " you have always be very kind to I -- I be - - I be not well . take I home . " she do not know she call he by he name , as be accustom to do . he go away with she quickly . she lodging be hard by ; and they threade through the crowd without , where everything seem to be more astir than even in the ball - room within . have be angry twice or thrice at find he wife up on he return from the party which he frequent : so she go straight to be now ; but although she do not sleep , and although the din and clatter , and the galloping of horseman be incessant , she never hear any of these noise , have quite other disturbance to keep she awake . Osborne meanwhile , wild with elation , go off to a play - table , and begin to bet frantically . he win repeatedly . " everything succeed with I to - night , " he say . but he luck at play even do not cure he of he restlessness , and he start up after awhile , pocket he winnings , and go to a buffet , where he drank off many bumper of wine . here , as he be ratt away to the people around , laugh loudly and wild with spirit , find he . he have be to the card - table to look there for he friend . look as pale and grave as he comrade be flushed and jovial . " Hullo , ! and drink , old ! the 's wine be famous . give I some more , you sir " ; and he hold out a trembling glass for the liquor . " come out , , " say , still gravely ; " do not drink . " " drink ! there be nothing like it . drink yourself , and light up you lantern jaw , old boy . here be to you . " go up and whisper something to he , at which , give a start and a wild hurray , toss off he glass , clap it on the table , and walk away speedily on he friend 's arm . " the enemy have pass the , " say , " and we left be already engage . come away . we be to march in three hour . " go , he nerve quiver with excitement at the news so long look for , so sudden when it come . what be love and intrigue now ? he think about a thousand thing but these in he rapid walk to he quarter -- he past life and future chance -- the fate which might be before he -- the wife , the child perhaps , from whom unseen he might be about to part . oh , how he wish that night 's work undone ! and that with a clear conscience at
at least he might say farewell to the tender and guileless be by whose love he have set such little store ! he think over he brief marry life . in those few week he have frightfully dissipate he little capital . how wild and reckless he have be ! should any mischance befall he : what be then leave for she ? how unworthy he be of she . why have he marry she ? he be not fit for marriage . why have he disobey he father , who have be always so generous to he ? hope , remorse , ambition , tenderness , and selfish regret fill he heart . he sate down and write to he father , remember what he have say once before , when he be engage to fight a duel . faintly streak the sky as he close this farewell letter . he seal it , and kiss the superscription . he think how he have desert that generous father , and of the thousand kindness which the stern old man have do he . he have look into 's bedroom when he enter ; she lay quiet , and she eye seem close , and he be glad that she be asleep . on arrive at he quarter from the ball , he have find he regimental servant already make preparation for he departure : the man have understand he signal to be still , and these arrangement be very quickly and silently make . should he go in and wake , he think , or leave a note for she brother to break the news of departure to she ? he go in to look at she once again . she have be awake when he first enter she room , but have keep she eye close , so that even she wakefulness should not seem to reproach he . but when he have return , so soon after herself , too , this timid little heart have feel more at ease , and turn towards he as he steep softly out of the room , she have fall into a light sleep . come in and look at she again , enter still more softly . by the pale night - lamp he could see she sweet , pale face -- the purple eyelid be fringe and close , and one round arm , smooth and white , lay outside of the coverlet . ! how pure she be ; how gentle , how tender , and how friendless ! and he , how selfish , brutal , and black with crime ! heart - stain , and shame - stricken , he stand at the bed 's foot , and look at the sleeping girl . how da he -- who be he , to pray for one so spotless ! bless she ! bless she ! he come to the bedside , and look at the hand , the little soft hand , lie asleep ; and he bend over the pillow noiselessly towards the gentle pale face . two fair arm close tenderly round he neck as he stoop down . " I be awake , , " the poor child say , with a sob fit to break the little heart that nestle so closely by he own . she be awake , poor soul , and to what ? at that moment a bugle from the place of Arms begin sound clearly , and be take up through the town ; and amidst the drum of the infantry , and the shrill pipe of the , the whole city awoke . " the I " we do not claim to rank among the military novelist . we place be with the non-combatant . when the deck be clear for action we go below and wait meekly . we should only be in the way of the manoeuvr that the gallant fellow be perform overhead . we shall go no farther with the -- th than to the city gate : and leave major to he duty , come back to the major 's wife , and the lady and the baggage . now the major and he lady , who have not be invite to the ball at which in we last chapter other of we friend figure , have much more time to take they wholesome natural rest in bed , than be accord to people who wish to enjoy pleasure as well as to do duty . " it be my belief , , my dear , " say he , as he placidly pull he nightcap over he ear , " that there will be such a ball dance in a day or two as some of th'ey have never hear the chune of " ; and he be much more happy to retire to rest after partaking of a quiet tumbler , than to figure at any other sort of amusement . , for she part , would have like to have show she turban and bird of paradise at the ball , but for the information which she husband have give she , and which make she very grave . " I would like ye wake I about half a hour before the assembly beat , " the major say to he lady . " call I at half - past one , dear , and see I thing be ready . may be I will not come back to breakfast , o ' . " with which word , which signify he opinion that the regiment would march the next morning , the major cease talk , and fall asleep . , the good housewife , array in curl papers and a camisole , feel that she duty be to act , and not to sleep , at this juncture . " time enough for that , "
" she say , " when 's gone " ; and so she pack he travel valise ready for the march , brush he cloak , he cap , and other warlike habiliment , set they out in order for he ; and stow away in the cloak pocket a light package of portable refreshment , and a wicker - cover flask or pocket - pistol , contain near a pint of a remarkably sound , of which she and the major approve very much ; and as soon as the hand of the " repayther " point to half - past one , and its interior arrangement ( it have a tone quite equal to a cathaydral , its fair owner consider ) knell forth that fatal hour , . wake up she major , and have as comfortable a cup of coffee prepare for he as any make that morning in . and who be there will deny that this worthy lady 's preparation betoken affection as much as the fit of tear and hysteric by which more sensitive female exhibit they love , and that they partaking of this coffee , which they drank together while the bugles be sound the turn - out and the drum beat in the various quarter of the town , be not more useful and to the purpose than the outpouring of any mere sentiment could be ? the consequence be , that the major appear on parade quite trim , fresh , and alert , he well - shave rosy countenance , as he sate on horseback , give cheerfulness and confidence to the whole corps . all the officer salute she when the regiment march by the balcony on which this brave woman stood , and wave they a cheer as they pass ; and I daresay it be not from want of courage , but from a sense of female delicacy and propriety , that she refrain from lead the gallant -- th personally into action . on , and at period of a solemn nature , . use to read with great gravity out of a large volume of she uncle the 's sermon . it have be of great comfort to she on board the transport as they be come home , and be very nearly wreck , on they return from the West Indies . after the regiment 's departure she betake herself to this volume for meditation ; perhaps she do not understand much of what she be read , and she thought be elsewhere : but the sleep project , with poor 's nightcap there on the pillow , be quite a vain one . so it be in the world . or march away to glory with he knapsack on he shoulder , step out briskly to the tune of " the I . " it be she who remain and suffer -- and have the leisure to think , and brood , and remember . know how useless regret be , and how the indulgence of sentiment only serve to make people more miserable , wisely determi to give way to no vain feeling of sorrow , and bear the parting from she husband with quite a equanimity . indeed himself be much more affect at the leave - take than the resolute little woman to whom he bay farewell . she have master this rude coarse nature ; and he love and worship she with all he faculty of regard and admiration . in all he life he have never be so happy , as , during the past few month , he wife have make he . all former delights of turf , mess , hunt - field , and gambling - table ; all previous love and courtship of milliner , opera-dancer , and the like easy triumph of the clumsy military Adonis , be quite insipid when compare to the lawful matrimonial pleasure which of late he have enjoy . she have know perpetually how to divert he ; and he have find he house and she society a thousand time more pleasant than any place or company which he have ever frequent from he childhood until now . and he curse he past folly and extravagance , and bemoan he vast outly debt above all , which must remain for ever as obstacle to prevent he wife 's advancement in the world . he have often groane over these in midnight conversation with , although as a bachelor they have never give he any disquiet . he himself be strike with this phenomenon . " hang it , " he would say ( or perhaps use a still stronger expression out of he simple vocabulary ) , " before I be marry I do not care what bill I put my name to , and so long as would wait or would renew for three month , I keep on never min . but since I be married , except renewing , of course , I give you my honou I have not touch a bit of stamped paper . " always know how to conjure away these mood of melancholy . " why , my stupid love , " she would say , " we have not do with you aunt yet . if she fail we , be not there what you call the ? or , stop , when you uncle 's life drop , I have another scheme . the living have always belong to the younger brother , and why should not you sell out and go into the Church ? " the idea of this conversion set into roar of laughter : you might have hear the explosion through the hotel at midnight , and the haw - haw of the great dragoon 's voice . hear he from he quarter on the first floor above they ; and act the
the scene with great spirit , and preach 's first sermon , to the immense delight of the general at breakfast . but these be mere by - gone day and talk . when the final news arrive that the campaign be open , and the troops be to , 's gravity become such that rally he about it in a manner which rather hurt the feeling of the . " you do not suppose I be afraid , , I should think , " he say , with a tremor in he voice . " but I be a pretty good mark for a shot , and you see if it bring I down , why I leave one and perhaps two behind I whom I should wish to provide for , as I bring th'ey into the scrape . it be no laughing matter that , , anyways . " by a hundred caress and kind word try to soothe the feeling of the wounded lover . it be only when she vivacity and sense of humwe get the better of this sprightly creature ( as they would do under most circumstance of life indeed ) that she would break out with she satire , but she could soon put on a demure face . " Dearest love , " she say , " do you suppose I feel nothing ? " and hastily dash something from she eye , she look up in she husband 's face with a smile . " look here , " say he . " if I drop , let we see what there be for you . I have have a pretty good run of luck here , and here 's two hundred and thirty pound . I have get ten Napoleon in my pocket . that be as much as I shall want ; for the general pay everything like a prince ; and if I be hit , why you know I cost nothing . do not cry , little woman ; I may live to vex you yet . well , I sha not take either of my horse , but shall ride the general 's grey charger : it be cheaper , and I tell he mine be lame . if I be done , those two ought to fetch you something . offer ninety for the mare yesterday , before this confound news come , and like a fool I would not let she go under the two of 's . Bullfinch will fetch he price any day , only you would better sell he in this country , because the dealer have so many bill of mine , and so I would rather he should not go back to . you little mare the give you will fetch something , and there be no d --d livery stable bill here as there be in , " add , with a laugh . " there be that dressing - case cost I two hundred -- that be , I owe two for it ; and the gold top and bottle must be worth thirty or forty . please to put that up the spout , ma 'am , with my pins , and ring , and watch and chain , and thing . they cost a precious lot of money . , I know , pay a hundred down for the chain and ticker . gold top and bottle , indeed ! dammy , I be sorry I do not take more now . presse on I a silver - gilt boot - jack , and I might have have a dressing - case fit up with a silver warming - pan , and a service of plate . but we must make the best of what we have get , , you know . " and so , make he last disposition , , who have seldom think about anything but himself , until the last few month of he life , when love have obtain the mastery over the dragoon , go through the various item of he little catalogue of effect , strive to see how they might be turn into money for he wife 's benefit , in case any accident should befall he . he please himself by no down with a pencil , in he big schoolboy handwriting , the various item of he portable property which might be sell for he widow 's advantage as , for example , " my double - barril by , say 40 guinea ; my drive cloak , line with sable fur , 50 pound ; my duel pistol in rosewood case ( same which I shoot ) , 20 pound ; my regulation saddle - holster and housing ; my ditto , " and so forth , over all of which article he make the mistress . faithful to he plan of economy , the dress himself in he oldest and shabbiest uniform and epaulet , leave the newest behind , under he wife 's ( or it might be he widow 's ) guardianship . and this famous dandy of and go off on he campaign with a kit as modest as that of a sergeant , and with something like a prayer on he lip for the woman he be leave . he take she up from the ground , and hold she in he arm for a minute , tight press against he strong - beat heart . he face be purple and he eye dim , as he put she down and leave she . he ride by he General 's side , and smoke he cigar in silence as they hasten after the troops of the 's brigade , which proceed they ; and it be not until they be some mile on they way that he leave off twirl he moustache and break silence . and ,
, as we have say , wisely determine not to give way to unavail sentimentality on she husband 's departure . she wav he a adieu from the window , and stand there for a moment look out after he be gone . the cathedral towers and the full gable of the quaint old house be just begin to blush in the sunrise . there have be no rest for she that night . she be still in she pretty ball - dress , she fair hair hang somewhat out of curl on she neck , and the circle round she eye dark with watch . " what a fright I seem , " she say , examine herself in the glass , " and how pale this pink make one look ! " so she divest herself of this pink raiment ; in do which a note fall out from she corsage , which she pick up with a smile , and lock into she dressing - box . and then she put she bouquet of the ball into a glass of water , and go to bed , and sleep very comfortably . the town be quite quiet when she wake up at ten o'clock , and partook of coffee , very requisite and comfort after the exhaustion and grief of the morning 's occurrence . this meal over , she resume honest 's calculation of the night previous , and survey she position . should the worst befall , all thing consider , she be pretty well to do . there be she own trinket and trousseau , in addition to those which she husband have leave behind . 's generosity , when they be first married , have already be describe and laud . besides these , and the little mare , the general , she slave and worshipper , have make she many very handsome present , in the shape of cashmere shawl buy at the auction of a bankrupt french general 's lady , and numerous tribute from the jeweller 's shop , all of which betoken she admirer 's taste and wealth . as for " ticker , " as poor call watch , she apartment be alive with they clicking . for , happen to mention one night that hers , which have give to she , be of English workmanship , and go ill , on the very next morning there come to she a little bijou mark , with a chain and cover charmingly set with turquoise , and another sign Brequet , which be cover with pearl , and yet scarcely bigger than a half - crown . have buy one , and have gallantly present the other . have no watch , though , to do justice , she might have have one for the asking , and the Honourable in have a old instrument of she mother 's that might have serve for the plate - warming pan which talk about . if Messrs . and be to publish a list of the purchaser of all the trinket which they sell , how surprised would some family be : and if all these ornament go to gentleman 's lawful wife and daughter , what a profusion of jewellery there would be exhibit in the genteelest home of ! every calculation make of these valuable find , not without a pungent feeling of triumph and self - satisfaction , that should circumstance occur , she might reckon on six or seven hundred pound at the very least , to begin the world with ; and she pass the morning dispose , order , look out , and lock up she property in the most agreeable manner . among the note in 's pocket - book be a draft for twenty pound on 's banker . this make she think about . " I will go and get the draft cash , " she say , " and pay a visit afterwards to poor little . " if this be a novel without a hero , at least let we lay claim to a heroine . no man in the british army which have march away , not the great himself , could be more cool or collect in the presence of doubt and difficulty , than the indomitable little aide - de-camp 's wife . and there be another of we acquaintance who be also to be leave behind , a non-combatant , and whose emotion and behaviour we have therefore a right to know . this be we friend the ex-collector of , whose rest be break , like other people 's , by the sounding of the bugles in the early morning . be a great sleeper , and fond of he bed , it be possible he would have snooze on until he usual hour of rising in the forenoon , in spite of all the drum , bugles , and bagpipe in the british army , but for a interruption , which do not come from , who share 's quarter with he , and be as usual occupy too much with he own affair or with grief at parting with he wife , to think of take leave of he slumbering brother - in - law -- it be not , we say , who interpose between and sleep , but , who come and rouse he up , insist on shaking hand with he before he departure . " very kind of you , " say , yawn , and wish the at the deuce . " I -- I do not like to go off without say good - bye , you know , " say in a very incoherent manner ; " because you know some of we may not come back again , and I like to see you all well , and -- and that sort of thing ,
, you know . " " what do you mean ? " ask , rub he eye . the do not in the least hear he or look at the stout gentleman in the nightcap , about whom he profess to have such a tender interest . the hypocrite be look and listen with all he might in the direction of 's apartment , strid about the room , upset the chair , beat the tattoo , bite he nail , and show other sign of great inward emotion . have always have rather a mean opinion of the , and now begin to think he courage be somewhat equivocal . " what be it I can do for you , ? " he say , in a sarcastic tone . " I tell you what you can do , " the reply , come up to the bed ; " we march in a quarter of a hour , , and neither nor I may ever come back . mind you , you be not to stir from this town until you ascertain how thing go . you be to stay here and watch over you sister , and comfort she , and see that no harm come to she . if anything happen to , remember she have no one but you in the world to look to . if it go wrong with the army , you will see she safe back to ; and you will promise I on you word that you will never desert she . I know you will not : as far as money go , you be always free enough with that . do you want any ? I mean , have you enough gold to take you back to in case of a misfortune ? " " , " say , majestically , " when I want money , I know where to ask for it . and as for my sister , you need not tell I how I ought to behave to she . " " you speak like a man of spirit , , " the other answer good - naturedly , " and I be glad that can leave she in such good hand . so I may give he you word of honour , may I , that in case of extremity you will stand by she ? " " of course , of course , " answer , whose generosity in money matter estimate quite correctly . " and you will see she safe out of Brussels in the event of a defeat ? " " a defeat ! d ---- it , sir , it be impossible . do not try and frighten I , " the hero cry from he bed ; and 's mind be thus perfectly set at ease now that have speak out so resolutely respecte he conduct to he sister . " at least , " think the , " there will be a retreat secure for she in case the worst should ensue . " if expect to get any personal comfort and satisfaction from have one more view of before the regiment march away , he selfishness be punished just as such odious egotism deserve to be . the door of 's bedroom open into the sitting - room which be common to the family party , and opposite this door be that of 's chamber . the bugles have wake everybody : there be no use in concealment now . 's servant be pack in this room : Osborne come in and out of the contiguous bedroom , flinge to the man such article as he think fit to carry on the campaign . and presently have the opportunity which he heart covet , and he get sight of 's face once more . but what a face it be ! so white , so wild and despair - stricken , that the remembrance of it haunt he afterwards like a crime , and the sight smote he with inexpressible pang of longing and pity . she be wrap in a white morning dress , she hair fal on she shoulders , and she large eye fix and without light . by way of help on the preparation for the departure , and show that she too could be useful at a moment so critical , this poor soul have take up a sash of 's from the drawer whereon it lay , and follow he to and for with the sash in she hand , look on mutely as he packing proceed . she come out and stood , lean at the wall , hold this sash against she bosom , from which the heavy net of crimson drop like a large stain of blood . we gentle - hear feel a guilty shock as he look at she . " , " think he , " and be it grief like this I da to pry into ? " and there be no help : no means to soothe and comfort this helpless , speechless misery . he stand for a moment and look at she , powerless and tear with pity , as a parent regard a infant in pain . at last , take 's hand , and lead she back into the bedroom , from whence he come out alone . the parting have take place in that moment , and he be gone . " thank heaven that be over , " think , bounde down the stair , he sword under he arm , as he run swiftly to the alarm ground , where the regiment be muster , and whither troope man and officer hurrie from they billet ; he pulse be throbb and he cheek flush : the great game of war be go to be play , and he one of the player . what a
a fierce excitement of doubt , hope , and pleasure ! what tremendous hazard of loss or gain ! what be all the game of chance he have ever play compare to this one ? into all contest require athletic skill and courage , the young man , from he boyhood upward , have flng himself with all he might . the champion of he school and he regiment , the bravo of he companion have follow he everywhere ; from the boy 's cricket - match to the garrison - races , he have win a hundred of triumph ; and wherever he go woman and man have admire and envie he . what quality be there for which a man get so speedy a return of applause , as those of bodily superiority , activity , and valour ? time out of mind strength and courage have be the theme of bard and romance ; and from the story of down to to - day , poetry have always choose a soldier for a hero . I wonder be it because man be coward in heart that they admire bravery so much , and place military valour so far beyond every other quality for reward and worship ? so , at the sound of that stirr call to , jump away from the gentle arm in which he have be dally ; not without a feeling of shame ( although he wife 's hold on he have be but feeble ) , that he should have be detain there so long . the same feeling of eagerness and excitement be amongst all those friend of he of whom we have have occasional glimpse , from the stout senior major , who lead the regiment into action , to little , the Ensign , who be to bear its colour on that day . the sun be just rise as the march begin -- it be a gallant sight -- the band lead the column , play the regimental march -- then come the major in command , ride upon , he stout charger -- then march the grenadier , they at they head ; in the centre be the colour , borne by the senior and junior Ensigns -- then come march at the head of he company . he look up , and smile at , and pass on ; and even the sound of the music die away . in of he sister thus all the superior officer be summon on duty elsewhere , be leave in command of the little colony at , with invalide , , he belgian servant , and the bonne , who be maid - of - all - work for the establishment , as a garrison under he . though he be disturb in spirit , and he rest destroy by 's interruption and the occurrence of the morning , nevertheless remain for many hour in bed , wakeful and roll about there until he usual hour of rising have arrive . the sun be high in the heaven , and we gallant friend of the -- th miles on they march , before the civilian appear in he flower dressing - gow at breakfast . 's absence , he brother - in - law be very easy in mind . perhaps be rather pleased in he heart that be gone , for during 's presence , the other have play but a very secondary part in the household , and do not scruple to show he contempt for the stout civilian . but have always be good and attentive to he . it be she who ministere to he comforts , who superintend the dish that he like , who walk or ride with he ( as she have many , too many , opportunity of do , for where be ? ) and who interpose she sweet face between he anger and she husband 's scorn . many timid remonstrance have she utter to in behalf of she brother , but the former in he trenchant way cut these entreaty short . " I be a honest man , " he say , " and if I have a feeling I show it , as a honest man will . how the deuce , my dear , would you have I behave respectfully to such a fool as you brother ? " so be pleased with 's absence . he plain hat , and glove on a sideboard , and the idea that the owner be away , cause I do not know what secret thrill of pleasure . " he will not be troubl I this morning , " think , " with he dandified air and he impudence . " " put the 's hat into the ant - room , " he say to , the servant . " perhaps he will not want it again , " reply the lackey , look knowingly at he master . he hat too , whose insolence towards he be quite of the english sort . " and ask if be come to breakfast , " say with great majesty , asham to enter with a servant upon the subject of he dislike for . the truth be , he have abuse he brother to the valet a score of time before . ! Madame could not come to breakfast , and cut the tartine that like . be a great deal too ill , and have be in a frightful state ever since she husband 's departure , so she bonne say . show he sympathy by pour she out a large cup of tea it be he way of exhibiting kindness : and he improve on this ; he not only send she breakfast , but he bethotch he what delicacies she would most like for dinner . , the valet , have look on very sulkily
sulkily , while 's servant be disposing of he master 's baggage previous to the 's departure : for in the first place he hate , whose conduct to he , and to all inferior , be generally overbearing ( nor do the continental domestic like to be treat with insolence as we own better - tempered servants do ) , and secondly , he be angry that so many valuable should be remove from under he hand , to fall into other people 's possession when the english discomfiture should arrive . of this defeat he and a vast number of other person in and do not make the slightest doubt . the almost universal belief be , that the emperor would divide the Prussian and English armie , annihilate one after the other , and march into before three day be over : when all the movable of he present master , who would be kill , or fugitive , or prisoner , would lawfully become the property of . as he help through he toilsome and complicat daily toilette , this faithful servant would calculate what he should do with the very article with which he be decorate he master 's person . he would make a present of the silver essence - bottle and toilet knicknack to a young lady of whom he be fond ; and keep the english cutlery and the large ruby pin for himself . it would look very smart upon one of the fine frilled shirts , which , with the gold - lace cap and the frogged frock coat , that might easily be cut down to suit he shape , and the 's gold - head cane , and the great double ring with the ruby , which he would have make into a pair of beautiful earring , he calculate would make a perfect Adonis of himself , and render a easy prey . " how those sleeve - buttons will suit I ! " think he , as he fix a pair on the fat pudgy wrist of . " I long for sleeve - button ; and the 's boot with brass spur , in the next room , corbleu ! what a effect they will make in the ! " so while with bodily finger be hold on to he master 's nose , and shave the lower part of 's face , he imagination be rambl along the , dress out in a frogged coat and lace , and in company with ; he be loiter in spirit on the bank , and examine the barge sai slowly under the cool shadow of the tree by the canal , or refresh himself with a mug of at the bench of a beer - house on the road to . but , luckily for he own peace , no more knew what be pass in he domestic 's mind than the respect reader , and I suspect what or , whose wage we pay , think of ourselves . what we servant think of we ! -- do we know what we intimate and dear relation think of we , we should live in a world that we should be glad to quit , and in a frame of mind and a constant terror , that would be perfectly unbearable . so 's man be mark he victim down , as you see one of 's assistant in ornament a unconscious turtle with a placard on which be write , " to - morrow . " 's attendant be much less selfishly dispose . few dependent could come near that kind and gentle creature without pay they usual tribute of loyalty and affection to she sweet and affectionate nature . and it be a fact that , the cook , consol she mistress more than anybody whom she see on this wretched morning ; for when she find how remain for hour , silent , motionless , and haggard , by the window in which she have place herself to watch the last bayonet of the column as it march away , the honest girl take the lady 's hand , and say , , , est -ce qu'il n'est pa aussi a l'armee , mon homme a moi ? with which she burst into tear , and fal into she arm , do likewise , and so each pitie and soothe the other . several time during the forenoon 's go from he lodging into the town , and to the gate of the hotel and lodging - house round about the , where the be congregate , and there mingl with other valets , courier , and lackey , gather such news as be abroad , and bring back bulletin for he master 's information . almost all these gentleman be in heart partisan of the , and have they opinion about the speedy end of the campaign . the emperor 's proclamation from Avesnes have be distribute everywhere plentifully in . " soldier ! " it say , " this be the anniversary of and , by which the destiny of be twice decide . then , as after , as after , we be too generous . we believe in the oath and promise of prince whom we suffer to remain upon they throne . let we march once more to meet they . we and they , be we not still the same man ? soldier ! these same Prussians who be so arrogant to - day , be three to one against you at , and six to one at . those among you who be prisoner in can tell they comrade what frightful torment they suffer on board the english hulk . Madmen ! a moment of prosperity have blind they , and if they enter into it will be to find a grave there ! " but the
the partisan of the prophesy a more speedy extermination of the 's enemy than this ; and it be agree on all hand that and british would never return except as prisoner in the rear of the conquering army . these opinion in the course of the day be bring to operate upon . he be tell that the of have go to try and rally he army , the advance of which have be utterly crush the night before . " crush , psha ! " say , whose heart be pretty stout at breakfast - time . " the have go to beat the emperor as he have beat all he generals before . " " he papers be burn , he effect be remove , and he quarter be be get ready for the of , " 's informant reply . " I have it from he own maitre d' hotel . 's people be pack up everything . he have fle already , and the Duchess be only wait to see the plate pack to join the of at . " " the of be at , fellow , " reply , affect incredulity . " he f last night to , and embark today from . the be take prisoner . those who wish to be safe have better go soon , for the dyke will be open to - morrow , and who can fly when the whole country be under water ? " " Nonsense , sir , we be three to one , sir , against any force Boney can bring into the field , " object ; " the and the be on they march . he must , he shall be crush , " say , slapp he hand on the table . " the be three to one at , and he take they army and kingdom in a week . they be six to one at , and he scatter they like sheep . the Austrian army be come , but with the Empress and the King of at its head ; and the , bah ! the will withdraw . no quarter be to be give to the , on account of they cruelty to we brave on board the infamous pontoon . look here , here it be in black and white . here be the proclamation of he the and , " say the now declare partisan of , and take the document from he pocket , sternly thrust it into he master 's face , and already look upon the frogged coat and valuable as he own spoil . be , if not seriously alarme as yet , at least considerably disturb in mind . " give I my coat and cap , sir , " say he , " and follow I . I will go myself and learn the truth of these report . " be furious as put on the braided frock . " Milor have better not wear that military coat , " say he ; " the have swear not to give quarter to a single british soldier . " " Silence , sirrah ! " say , with a resolute countenance still , and thrust he arm into the sleeve with indomitable resolution , in the performance of which heroic act he be find by , who at this juncture come up to visit , and enter without ring at the antechamber door . be dress very neatly and smartly , as usual : she quiet sleep after 's departure have refresh she , and she pink smile cheek be quite pleasant to look at , in a town and on a day when everybody else 's countenance wear the appearance of the deepest anxiety and gloom . she laugh at the attitude in which be discover , and the struggle and convulsion with which the stout gentleman thrust himself into the braided coat . " be you prepare to join the army , ? " she say . " be there to be nobody leave in to protect we poor woman ? " succeed in plunge into the coat , and come forward blushing and stutter out excuse to he fair visitor . " how be she after the event of the morning -- after the fatigue of the ball the night before ? " disappear into he master 's adjacent bedroom , bear off the flower dressing - gown . " how good of you to ask , " say she , press one of he hand in both she own . " how cool and collect you look when everybody else be frightened ! how be we dear litle ? it must have be a awful , awful parting . " " tremendous , " say . " you man can bear anything , " reply the lady . " Parting or danger be nothing to you . own now that you be go to join the army and leave we to we fate . I know you be -- something tell I you be . I be so frightened , when the thought come into my head ( for I do sometimes think of you when I be alone , ) , that I run off immediately to beg and entreat you not to fly from we . " this speech might be interpret , " my dear sir , should a accident befall the army , and a retreat be necessary , you have a very comfortable carriage , in which I propose to take a seat . " I do not know whether understand the word in this sense . but he be profoundly mortify by the lady 's inattention to he during they stay at . he have never be present to any of 's great acquaintance : he have scarcely be invite to 's party ; for he be too timid
timid to play much , and he presence bore and equally , who neither of they , perhaps , like to have a witness of the amusement in which the pair choose to indulge . " ah ! " think , " now she want I she come to I . when there be nobody else in the way she can think about old ! " but besides these doubts he feel flatter at the idea express of he courage . he blush a good deal , and put on a air of importance . " I should like to see the action , " he say . " every man of any spirit would , you know . I have see a little service in , but nothing on this grand scale . " " you man would sacrifice anything for a pleasure , " answer . " leave I this morning as gay as if he be go to a hunt party . what do he care ? what do any of you care for the agony and torture of a poor forsaken woman ? ( I wonder whether he could really have be go to the troops , this great lazy gourmand ? ) oh ! dear , I have come to you for comfort -- for consolation . I have be on my knee all the morning . I tremble at the frightful danger into which we husband , we friend , we brave troops and ally , be rush . and I come here for shelter , and find another of my friend -- the last remain to I -- bend upon plunge into the dreadful scene ! " " my dear madam , " reply , now begin to be quite soothed , " do not be alarm . I only say I should like to go -- what would not ? but my duty keep I here : I can not leave that poor creature in the next room . " and he point with he finger to the door of the chamber in which be . " good noble brother ! " say , put she handkerchief to she eye , and smell the eau - de - cologne with which it be scent . " I have do you injustice : you have get a heart . I think you have not . " " o , upon my honour ! " say , make a motion as if he would lay he hand upon the spot in question . " you do I injustice , indeed you do --my dear . " " I do , now you heart be true to you sister . but I remember two year ago -- when it be false to I ! " say , fix she eye upon he for a instant , and then turn away into the window . blush violently . that organ which he be accuse by of not possesse to thump tumultuously . he recall the day when he have fle from she , and the passion which have once inflam he -- the day when he have drive she in he curricle : when she have knit the green purse for he : when he have sate enrapture gazing at she white arm and bright eye . " I know you think I ungrateful , " continue , come out of the window , and once more look at he and address he in a low tremulous voice . " you coldness , you avert look , you manner when we have meet of late -- when I come in just now , all prove it to I . but be there no reason why I should avoid you ? let you own heart answer that question . do you think my husband be too much inclin to welcome you ? the only unkind word I have ever have from he ( I will do that justice ) have be about you -- and most cruel , cruel word they be . " " good gracious ! what have I do ? " ask in a flurry of pleasure and perplexity ; " what have I do -- to -- to --? " " be jealousy nothing ? " say . " he make I miserable about you . and whatever it might have be once -- my heart be all he . I be innocent now . be I not , ? " all 's blood tingle with delight , as he survey this victim to he attraction . a few adroit word , one or two know tender glance of the eyes , and he heart be inflam again and he doubt and suspicion forgote . from downward , have not wiser man than he be cajol and befool by woman ? " if the worst come to the worst , " thought , " my retreat be secure ; and I have a right - hand seat in the barouche . " there be no know into what declaration of love and ardour the tumultuous passion of might have lead he , if Isidor the valet have not make he reappearance at this minute , and begin to busy himself about the domestic affair . , who be just go to gasp out a avowal , chok almost with the emotion that he be oblige to restrain . too bethotch she that it be time she should go in and comfort she dearest . " revoir , " she say , kiss she hand to , and tap gently at the door of he sister 's apartment . as she enter and close the door on herself , he sank down in a chair , and gaze and sigh and puff portentously . " that coat be very tight for , " say , still have he eye on the frog ; but he
he master hear he not : he thought be elsewhere : now glow , madden , upon the contemplation of the : anon shrink guiltily before the vision of the jealous , with he curling , fierce mustachio , and he terrible duelling pistol loade and cock . 's appearance struck with terror , and make she shrink back . it recall she to the world and the remembrance of yesterday . in the overpowering fear about to - morrow she have forget -- jealousy -- everything except that she husband be gone and be in danger . until this dauntless worldling come in and break the spell , and lift the latch , we too have forborne to enter into that sad chamber . how long have that poor girl be on she knee ! what hour of speechless prayer and bitter prostration have she pass there ! the war - chronicler who write brilliant story of fight and triumph scarcely tell we of these . these be too mean part of the pageant : and you do not hear widow ' cry or mother ' sob in the midst of the shout and jubilation in the great of . and yet when be the time that such have not cry out : heart - break , humble protestants , unheard in the uproar of the triumph ! after the first movement of terror in 's mind -- when 's green eye lighte upon she , and rust in she fresh silk and brilliant ornament , the latter trip up with extended arm to embrace she -- a feeling of anger succeed , and from be deadly pale before , she face flush up red , and she return 's look after a moment with a steadiness which surprise and somewhat abash she rival . " , you be very unwell , " the visitor say , put forth she hand to take 's . " what be it ? I could not rest until I know how you be . " draw back she hand -- never since she life begin have that gentle soul refuse to believe or to answer any demonstration of good - will or affection . but she draw back she hand , and tremble all over . " why be you here , ? " she say , still look at she solemnly with she large eye . these glance troublead she visitor . " she must have see he give I the letter at the ball , " thought . " do not be agitate , dear , " she say , look down . " I come but to see if I could -- if you be well . " " be you well ? " say . " I dare say you be . you do not love you husband . you would not be here if you do . tell I , , do I ever do you anything but kindness ? " " indeed , , no , " the other say , still hang down she head . " when you be quite poor , who be it that befriend you ? be I not a sister to you ? you see we all in happier day before he marry I . I be all in all then to he ; or would he have give up he fortune , he family , as he nobly do to make I happy ? why do you come between my love and I ? who send you to separate those whom join , and take my darling 's heart from I --my own husband ? do you think you could I love he as I do ? he love be everything to I . you know it , and want to rob I of it . for shame , ; bad and wicked woman -- false friend and false wife . " " , I protest before , I have do my husband no wrong , " say , turn from she . " have you do I no wrong , ? you do not succeed , but you try . ask you heart if you do not . " she know nothing , thought . " he come back to I . I know he would . I know that no falsehood , no flattery , could keep he from I long . I know he would come . I pray so that he should . " the poor girl speak these word with a spirit and volubility which have never before see in she , and before which the latter be quite dumb . " but what have I do to you , " she continue in a more pitiful tone , " that you should try and take he from I ? I have he but for six week . you might have spare I those , . and yet , from the very first day of we wedding , you come and blight it . now he be gone , be you come to see how unhappy I be ? " she continue . " you make I wretch enough for the past fortnight : you might have spare I to - day . " " I -- I never come here , " interpose , with unlucky truth . " no . you do not come . you take he away . be you come to fetch he from I ? " she continue in a wilder tone . " he be here , but he be go now . there on that very sofa he sate . do not touch it . we sate and talk there . I be on he knee , and my arm be round he neck , and we say ' we . ' yes , he be here : and they come and take he away , but
but he promise I to come back . " " he will come back , my dear , " say , touch in spite of herself . " look , " say , " this be he sash -- be not it a pretty colour ? " and she take up the fringe and kiss it . she have tie it round she waist at some part of the day . she have forget she anger , she jealousy , the very presence of she rival seemingly . for she walk silently and almost with a smile on she face , towards the bed , and begin to smooth down 's pillow . walk , too , silently away . " how be ? " ask , who still hold he position in the chair . " there should be somebody with she , " say . " I think she be very unwell " : and she go away with a very grave face , refuse 's entreaty that she would stay and partake of the early dinner which he have order . be of a good - nature and oblige disposition ; and she like rather than otherwise . even she hard word , reproachful as they be , be complimentary -- the groans of a person stinge under defeat . meeting , whom the 's sermon have by no means comforte , and who be walk very disconsolately in the , accost the latter , rather to the surprise of the major 's wife , who be not accustom to such mark of politeness from , and inform she that poor little be in a desperate condition , and almost mad with grief , send off the good - natured straight to see if she could conseal she young favourite . " I have care of my own enough , " . say , gravely , " and I think poor would be little want for company this day . but if she be so bad as you say , and you can not attend to she , who use to be so fond of she , faith I will see if I can be of service . and so good marn to ye , " ; with which speech and a toss of she head , the lady of the repayther take a farewell of . Crawley , whose company she by no means court . watch she march off , with a smile on she lip . she have the keenest sense of humour , and the Parthian look which the retreat Mr . O'Dowd flung over she shoulder almost upset 's gravity . " my service to ye , I fine madam , and I be glad to see ye so cheerful , " think . " it be not you that will cry you eye out with grief , anyway . " and with this she pass on , and speedily find she way to 's lodging . the poor soul be still at the bedside , where have leave she , and stand almost crazy with grief . the major 's wife , a stronger - minded woman , endeavoure she best to comfort she young friend . " you must bear up , , dear , " she say kindly , " for he must not find you ill when he send for you after the victory . it be not you be the only woman that be in the hand of this day . " " I know that . I be very wicked , very weak , " say . she know she own weakness well enough . the presence of the more resolute friend check it , however ; and she be the better of this control and company . they go on till two o'clock ; they heart be with the column as it march farther and farther away . Dreadful doubt and anguish -- prayer and fear and grief unspeakable -- follow the regiment . it be the woman 's tribute to the war . it tax both alike , and take the blood of the man , and the tear of the woman . at half - past two , a event occur of daily importance to : the dinner - hour arrive . Warrior may fight and perish , but he must dine . he come into 's room to see if he could coax she to share that meal . " try , " say he ; " the soup be very good . do try , , " and he kiss she hand . except when she be marry , he have not do so much for year before . " you be very good and kind , , " she say . " everybody be , but , if you please , I will stay in my room to - day . " the savour of the soup , however , be agreeable to 's nostril : and she think she would bear company . so the two sate down to they meal . " bless the meat , " say the major 's wife , solemnly : she be think of she honest Mick , ride at the head of he regiment : " 'Tis but a bad dinner those poor boy will get to - day , " she say , with a sigh , and then , like a philosopher , fall to . 's spirit rise with he meal . he would drink the regiment 's health ; or , indeed , take any other excuse to indulge in a glass of champagne . " we will drink to and the brave -- th , " say he , bow gallantly to he guest . " hey , . ? 's glass , . " but all of a sudden , start , and the major 's wife
wife lay down she knife and fork . the window of the room be open , and look southward , and a dull distant sound come over the sun -lighted roof from that direction . " what be it ? " say . " why do not you pour , you rascal ? " " Cest le feu ! " say , run to the balcony . " defend we ; it be cannon ! " cry , start up , and follow too to the window . a thousand pale and anxious face might have be see look from other casement . and presently it seem as if the whole population of the city rush into the street . in , and the war be Bring to a we of peaceful have never beheld -- and please never shall witness -- such a scene of hurry and alarm , as that which present . crowd rush to the gate , from which direction the noise proceed , and many rode along the level chaussee , to be in advance of any intelligence from the army . each man ask he neighbour for news ; and even great English lord and lady condescende to speak to person whom they do not know . the friend of the go abroad , wild with excitement , and prophesy the triumph of they emperor . the merchants close they shop , and come out to swell the general chorus of alarm and clamour . rush to the churche , and crowd the chapel , and knelt and pray on the flag and step . the dull sound of the cannon go on rolling , roll . presently carriage with traveller begin to leave the town , gallop away by the Ghent barrier . the prophecy of the french partisan begin to pass for fact . " he have cut the armie in two , " it be say . " he be march straight on . he will overpower the , and be here to - night . " " he will overpower the , " shriek to he master , " and will be here to - night . " the man bound in and out from the lodging to the street , always return with some fresh particular of disaster . 's face grow paler and paler . begin to take entire possession of the stout civilian . all the champagne he drank bring no courage to he . before sunset he be work up to such a pitch of nervousness as gratify he friend to behold , who now count surely upon the spoil of the owner of the laced coat . the woman be away all this time . after hear the firing for a moment , the stout major 's wife bethotch she of she friend in the next chamber , and run in to watch , and if possible to conseal , . the idea that she have that helpless and gentle creature to protect , give additional strength to the natural courage of the honest . she pass five hour by she friend 's side , sometimes in remonstrance , sometimes talk cheerfully , oftener in silence and terrify mental supplication . " I never let go she hand once , " say the stout lady afterwards , " until after sunset , when the firing be over . " , the bonne , be on she knee at church hard by , pray for son homme a elle . when the noise of the cannonading be over , . issue out of 's room into the parlour adjoin , where sate with two emptied flask , and courage entirely go . once or twice he have venture into he sister 's bedroom , look very much alarmed , and as if he would say something . but the major 's wife keep she place , and he go away without disburthen himself of he speech . he be asham to tell she that he want to fly . but when she make she appearance in the dining - room , where he sate in the twilight in the cheerless company of he empty champagne bottle , he begin to open he mind to she . " . , " he say , " have not you better get ready ? " " be you go to take she out for a walk ? " say the major 's lady ; " sure she be too weak to stir . " " I -- I have order the carriage , " he say , " and -- and post-horse ; be go for they , " continue . " what do you want with driving to - night ? " answer the lady . " be not she better on she bed ? I have just get she to lie down . " " get she up , " say ; " she must get up , I say " : and he stampe he foot energetically . " I say the horse be order -- yes , the horse be order . it be all over , and -- " " and what ? " ask . " I be off for , " answer . " everybody be go ; there be a place for you ! we shall start in half - a - hour . " the major 's wife look at he with infinite scorn . " I do not move till give I the route , " say she . " you may go if you like , ; but , faith , and I stop here . " " she shall go , " say , with another stamp of he foot . put herself with arm akimbo before the bedroom door . " be it she mother you be go to take she to ? " she say ;
; " or do you want to go to yourself , ? good marning -- a pleasant journey to ye , sir . Bon voyage , as they say , and take my counsel , and shave off they mustachio , or they will bring you into mischief . " " d -- and ! " yell out , wild with fear , rage , and mortification ; and come in at this juncture , swear in he turn . " Pas de chevaux , sacre bleu ! " hiss out the furious domestic . all the horse be gone . be not the only man in seize with panic that day . but 's fear , great and cruel as they be already , be destin to increase to a almost frantic pitch before the night be over . it have be mention how Pauline , the bonne , have son homme a elle also in the rank of the army that have go out to meet the . this lover be a native of , and a belgian hussar . the troops of he nation signalise themselves in this war for anything but courage , and young , 's admirer , be too good a soldier to disobey he Colonel 's order to run away . whilst in garrison at yong ( he have be bear in the revolutionary time ) find he great comfort , and pass almost all he leisure moment , in 's kitchen ; and it be with pocket and holster cramm full of good thing from she larder , that he have take leave of he weeping sweetheart , to proceed upon the campaign a few day before . as far as he regiment be concerned , this campaign be over now . they have form a part of the division under the command of he Sovereign apparent , the of , and as respect length of sword and mustachio , and the richness of uniform and equipment , and he comrade look to be as gallant a body of man as ever trumpet sound for . when dash upon the advance of the ally troops , carry one position after the other , until the arrival of the great body of the british army from change the aspect of the combat of , the squadron among which rode show the greatest activity in retreating before the french , and be dislodge from one post and another which they occupy with perfect alacrity on they part . they movement be only check by the advance of the British in they rear . thus force to hal , the enemy 's cavalry ( whose bloodthirsty obstinacy can not be too severely reprehend ) have at length a opportunity of come to close quarter with the brave before they ; who prefer to encounter the british rather than the french , and at once turn tail rode through the english regiment that be behind they , and scatter in all direction . the regiment in fact do not exist any more . it be nowhere . it have no head - quarter . find himself gallop many mile from the field of action , entirely alone ; and whither should he fly for refuge so naturally as to that kitchen and those faithful arm in which have so often welcome he ? at some ten o'clock the clinking of a sabre might have be hear up the stair of the house where the occupy a story in the continental fashion . a knock might have be hear at the kitchen door ; and poor Pauline , come back from church , faint almost with terror as she open it and see before she she haggard hussar . he look as pale as the midnight dragoon who come to disturb . Pauline would have scream , but that she cry would have call she master , and discover she friend . she stifle she scream , then , and lead she hero into the kitchen , give he beer , and the choice bit from the dinner , which have not have the heart to taste . the hussar show he be no ghost by the prodigious quantity of flesh and beer which he devoure -- and during the mouthful he tell he tale of disaster . he regiment have perform prodigy of courage , and have withstood for a while the onset of the whole french army . but they be overwhelm at last , as be the whole british army by this time . destroy each regiment as it come up . the in vain interpose to prevent the butchery of the . the Brunswicker be route and have fle -- their be kill . it be a general debacle . he seek to dry he sorrow for the defeat in flood of beer . , who have come into the kitchen , hear the conversation and rush out to inform he master . " it be all over , " he shriek to . " be a prisoner ; the of be kill ; the british army be in full flight ; there be only one man escape , and he be in the kitchen now -- come and hear he . " so totter into that apartment where still sate on the kitchen table , and cling fast to he flagon of beer . in the best which he could muster , and which be in sooth of a very ungrammatical sort , besotch the hussar to tell he tale . the disaster deepen as spoke . he be the only man of he regiment not slain on the field . he have see the of fall , the black hussar fly , the pound down by the cannon . " and the -- th ? " gas . " cut in piece , " say the hussar -- upon which cry out
out , " of my mistress , ma bonne petite dame , " go off fairly into hysteric , and fill the house with she scream . wild with terror , know not how or where to seek for safety . he rush from the kitchen back to the sitting - room , and cast a appeal look at 's door , which . have close and lock in he face ; but he remember how scornfully the latter have receive he , and after pause and listen for a brief space at the door , he leave it , and resolve to go into the street , for the first time that day . so , seize a candle , he look about for he gold - lace cap , and find it lie in its usual place , on a console - table , in the anteroom , place before a mirror at which use to coquet , always give he side - lock a twirl , and he cap the proper cock over he eye , before he go forth to make appearance in public . be the force of habit , that even in the midst of he terror he begin mechanically to twiddle with he hair , and arrange the cock of he hat . then he look amaze at the pale face in the glass before he , and especially at he mustachio , which have attaine a rich growth in the course of near seven week , since they have come into the world . they will mistake I for a military man , think he , remember 's warning as to the massacre with which all the defeat british army be threaten ; and stagger back to he bedchamber , he begin wildly pull the bell which summon he valet . answer that summon . have sunk in a chair -- he have tear off he neckcloth , and turn down he collar , and be sit with both he hand lift to he throat . " Coupez-moi , , " shoute he ; " vite ! Coupez -moi ! " think for a moment he have go mad , and that he wish he valet to cut he throat . " L moustach , " gas ; " les moustach -- coupy , rasy , vite ! " -- he be of this sort -- voluble , as we have say , but not remarkable for grammar . sweep off the mustachio in no time with the razor , and hear with inexpressible delight he master 's order that he should fetch a hat and a plain coat . " Ne porty ploo -- habit militair -- bonn -- bonny a voo , prenny dehor " -- be 's word -- the coat and cap be at last he property . this gift be make , select a plain black coat and waistcoat from he stock , and put on a large white neckcloth , and a plain beaver . if he could have get a shovel hat he would have wear it . as it be , you would have fancie he be a flourishing , large parson of the of . " Venny maintenong , " he continue , " sweevy -- ally -- party -- dong la roo . " and so have say , he plunge swiftly down the stair of the house , and pass into the street . although have vow that he be the only man of he regiment or of the ally army , almost , who have escape be cut to piece by , it appear that he statement be incorrect , and that a good number more of the suppose victim have survive the massacre . many score of 's comrade have find they way back to , and all agree that they have run away -- fill the whole town with a idea of the defeat of the ally . the arrival of the be expect hourly ; the panic continue , and preparation for flight go on everywhere . no horse ! think , in terror . he make inquire of score of person , whether they have any to lend or sell , and he heart sank within he , at the negative answer return everywhere . should he take the journey on foot ? even fear could not render that ponderous body so active . almost all the hotel occupy by the in face the , and wander irresolutely about in this quarter , with crowd of other people , oppress as he be by fear and curiosity . some family he see more happy than himself , have discover a team of horse , and ratt through the street in retreat ; other again there be whose case be like he own , and who could not for any bribe or entreaty procure the necessary means of flight . amongst these would - be fugitive , remark the and she daughter , who sate in they carriage in the porte -cochere of they hotel , all they imperial pack , and the only drawback to whose flight be the same want of motive power which keep stationary . occupy apartment in this hotel ; and have before this period have sundry hostile meeting with the ladie of the family . my cut . on the stair when they meet by chance ; and in all place where the latter 's name be mention , speak perseveringly ill of she neighbour . the Countess be shocked at the familiarity of with the aide - de-camp 's wife . the Blanche avoid she as if she have be a infectious disease . only the himself keep up a sly occasional acquaintance with she , when out of the jurisdiction of he lady . have she revenge now upon these insolent enemie . if became know in the hotel that
that 's horse have be leave behind , and when the panic begin , condescende to send she maid to the 's wife with she Ladyship 's compliment , and a desire to know the price of 's horse . return a note with she compliment , and a intimation that it be not she custom to transact bargain with lady ' maid . this curt reply bring the in person to 's apartment ; but he could get no more success than the first ambassador . " send a lady 's maid to I ! " cry in great anger ; " why do not my tell I to go and saddle the horse ! be it she Ladyship that want to escape , or she Ladyship 's femme de chambre ? " and this be all the answer that the bear back to he Countess . what will not necessity do ? the Countess herself actually come to wait upon . on the failure of she second envoy . she entreate she to name she own price ; she even offer to invite to , if the latter would but give she the means of return to that residence . sneer at she . " I do not want to be wait on by bailiff in livery , " she say ; " you will never get back though most probably -- at least not you and you diamonds together . the will have those they will be here in two hour , and I shall be half way to Ghent by that time . I would not sell you my horse , no , not for the two largest diamonds that you Ladyship wore at the ball . " Bareacres tremble with rage and terror . the diamonds be sew into she habit , and secret in my 's padding and boot . " , the diamonds be at the banker 's , and I will have the horse , " she say . laugh in she face . the infuriate Countess go below , and sate in she carriage ; she maid , she courier , and she husband be send once more through the town , each to look for cattle ; and woe betide those who come last ! she Ladyship be resolve on depart the very instant the horse arrive from any quarter -- with she husband or without he . have the pleasure of see she Ladyship in the horseless carriage , and keep she eye fix upon she , and bewail , in the loudest tone of , the Countess 's perplexity . " not to be able to get horse ! " she say , " and to have all those diamonds sew into the carriage cushion ! what a prize it will be for the french when they come !-- the carriage and the diamonds , I mean ; not the lady ! " she give this information to the landlord , to the servants , to the guest , and the innumerable straggler about the courtyard . lady Bareacres could have shoot she from the carriage window . it be while enjoy the humiliation of she enemy that catch sight of , who make towards she directly he perceive she . that alter , frightene , fat face , tell he secret well enough . he too want to fly , and be on the look - out for the means of escape . " he shall buy my horse , " think , " and I will ride the mare . " walk up to he friend , and put the question for the hundredth time during the past hour , " do she know where horse be to be have ? " " what , you fly ? " say , with a laugh . " I think you be the champion of all the lady , . " " I -- I be not a military man , " gas he . " and ?-- who be to protect that poor little sister of yours ? " ask . " you surely would not desert she ? " " what good can I do she , suppose -- suppose the enemy arrive ? " answer . " they will spare the woman ; but my man tell I that they have take a oath to give no quarter to the man -- the dastardly coward . " " ! " cry , enjoy he perplexity . " , I do not want to desert she , " cry the brother . " she not be desert . there be a seat for she in my carriage , and one for you , dear Mrs . , if you will come ; and if we can get horse -- " sigh he -- " I have two to sell , " the lady say . could have fling himself into she arm at the news . " get the carriage , , " he cry ; " we have find they -- we have find they . " " my horse never be in harness , " add the lady . " Bullfinch would kick the carriage to piece , if you put he in the trace . " " but he be quiet to ride ? " ask the civilian . " as quiet as a lamb , and as fast as a hare , " answer . " do you think he be up to my weight ? " say . he be already on he back , in imagination , without ever so much as a thought for poor . what person who love a horse - speculation could resist such a temptation ? in reply , ask he to come into she room , whither he follow she quite breathless to conclude the bargain . seldom spend a half - hour in he
he life which cost he so much money . , measure the value of the goods which she have for sale by 's eagerness to purchase , as well as by the scarcity of the article , put upon she horse a price so prodigious as to make even the civilian draw back . " she would sell both or neither , " she say , resolutely . have order she not to part with they for a price less than that which she specify . below would give she the same money -- and with all she love and regard for the family , she dear must conceive that poor people must live -- nobody , in a word , could be more affectionate , but more firm about the matter of business . end by agree , as might be suppose of he . the sum he have to give she be so large that he be oblige to ask for time ; so large as to be a little fortune to , who rapidly calculate that with this sum , and the sale of the residue of 's effect , and she pension as a widow should he fall , she would now be absolutely independent of the world , and might look she weed steadily in the face . once or twice in the day she certainly have herself think about fly . but she reason give she better counsel . " suppose the french do come , " think , " what can they do to a poor officer 's widow ? Bah ! the time of sack and siege be over . we shall be let to go home quietly , or I may live pleasantly abroad with a snug little income . " and go off to the stable to inspect the newly purchase cattle . bade he man saddle the horse at once . he would ride away that very night , that very hour . and he leave the valet busy in get the horse ready , and go homewards himself to prepare for he departure . it must be secret . he would go to he chamber by the back entrance . he do not care to face . and , and own to they that he be about to run . by the time 's bargain with be complete , and he horse have be visit and examine , it be almost morning once more . but though midnight be long pass , there be no rest for the city ; the people be up , the light in the house flam , crowd be still about the door , and the street be busy . rumours of various nature go still from mouth to mouth : one report averr that the have be utterly defeat ; another that it be the english who have be attack and conquer : a third that the latter have hold they ground . this last rumour gradually get strength . no Frenchman have make they appearance . Straggler have come in from the army bring report more and more favourable : at last a aide - de - camp actually reach Brussels with despatch for the of the place , who placard presently through the town a official announcement of the success of the ally at , and the entire repulse of the under after a six hour ' battle . the aide - de - camp must have arrive sometime while and be make they bargain together , or the latter be inspect he purchase . when he reach he own hotel , he find a score of its numerous inhabitant on the threshold discoursing of the news ; there be no doubt as to its truth . and he go up to communicate it to the ladie under he charge . he do not think it be necessary to tell they how he have intend to take leave of they , how he have buy horse , and what a price he have pay for they . but success or defeat be a minor matter to they , who have only thought for the safety of those they love . , at the news of the victory , become still more agitated even than before . she be for go that moment to the army . she besotch she brother with tear to conduct she thither . she doubt and terrors reach they paroxysm ; and the poor girl , who for many hour have be plunge into stupor , rave and run hither and thither in hysteric insanity -- a piteous sight . no man writh in pain on the hard - fight field fifteen mile off , where lay , after they struggle , so many of the brave -- no man suffer more keenly than this poor harmless victim of the war . Jos could not bear the sight of she pain . he leave he sister in the charge of she stouter female companion , and descende once more to the threshold of the hotel , where everybody still linger , and talk , and wait for more news . it grow to be broad daylight as they stand here , and fresh news begin to arrive from the war , bring by man who have be actor in the scene . Wagon and long country cart laden with wounded come rolling into the town ; ghastly groan come from within they , and haggard face look up sadly from out of the straw . be look at one of these carriage with a painful curiosity -- the moan of the people within be frightful -- the wearied horse could hardly pull the cart . " stop ! stop ! " a feeble voice cry from the straw , and the carriage stop opposite 's hotel . " it be , I know it be ! "
" cry , rush in a moment to the balcony , with a pallid face and loose flow hair . it be not , however , but it be the next best thing : it be news of he . it be poor , who have march out of so gallantly twenty - four hour before , bear the colour of the regiment , which he have defend very gallantly upon the field . a french lancer have spear the young ensign in the leg , who fall , still bravely hold to he flag . at the conclusion of the engagement , a place have be find for the poor boy in a cart , and he have be bring back to . " , ! " cry the boy , faintly , and come up almost frightened at the appeal . he have not at first distinguished who it be that call he . hold out he hot and feeble hand . " I be to be take in here , " he say . " -- and -- and say I be ; and you be to give the man two napoleon : my mother will pay you . " this young fellow 's thought , during the long feverish hour pass in the cart , have be wander to he father 's parsonage which he have quit only a few month before , and he have sometimes forget he pain in that delirium . the hotel be large , and the people kind , and all the inmate of the cart be take in and place on various couch . the young ensign be convey upstairs to 's quarter . and the major 's wife have rush down to he , when the latter have recognise he from the balcony . you may fancy the feeling of these woman when they be tell that the day be over , and both they husband be safe ; in what mute rapture fall on she good friend 's neck , and embrace she ; in what a grateful passion of prayer she fall on she knee , and thanke the power which have save she husband . we young lady , in she fevered and nervous condition , could have have no more salutary medicine prescribe for she by any physician than that which chance put in she way . she and . watch incessantly by the wounded lad , whose pain be very severe , and in the duty thus force upon she , have not time to brand over she personal anxiety , or to give herself up to she own fear and foreboding after she wont . the young patient tell in he simple fashion the event of the day , and the action of we friend of the gallant -- th . they have suffer severely . they have lose very many officer and man . the major 's horse have be shoot under he as the regiment charge , and they all think that be gone , and that have get he majority , until on they return from the charge to they old ground , the major be discover seat on 's carcase , refresh he - self from a case - bottle . it be that cut down the french lancer who have spear the ensign . turn so pale at the notion , that . stop the young ensign in this story . and it be who at the end of the day , though wound himself , take up the lad in he arm and carry he to the surgeon , and thence to the cart which be to bring he back to . and it be he who promise the driver two louis if he would make he way to 's hotel in the city ; and tell that the action be over , and that she husband be unhurt and well . " indeed , but he have a good heart that , " say , " though he be always laugh at I . " yong vow there be not such another officer in the army , and never cease he praise of the senior captain , he modesty , he kindness , and he admirable coolness in the field . to these part of the conversation , lent a very distracted attention : it be only when be speak of that she listen , and when he be not mention , she think about he . in tend she patient , and in thinking of the wonderful escape of the day before , she second day pass away not too slowly with . there be only one man in the army for she : and as long as he be well , it must be own that its movement interest she little . all the report which brotch from the street fall very vaguly on she ear ; though they be sufficient to give that timorous gentleman , and many other people then in , every disquiet . the french have be repulse certainly , but it be after a severe and doubtful struggle , and with only a division of the french army . the emperor , with the main body , be away at , where he have utterly annihilate the , and be now free to bring he whole force to bear upon the ally . the of be retreat upon the capital , and a great battle must be fight under its wall probably , of which the chance be more than doubtful . the of have but twenty thousand british troops on whom he could rely , for the be raw militia , the disaffect , and with this handful he have to resist a hundred and fifty thousand man that have break into under . under ! what warrior be there , however famous and skilful , that could fight
fight at odd with he ? thought of all these thing , and tremble . so do all the rest of -- where people feel that the fight of the day before be but the prelude to the greater combat which be imminent . one of the armie oppose to the emperor be scatter to the wind already . the few that could be bring to resist he would perish at they post , and the conqueror would pass over they body into the city . be to those whom he find there ! address be prepared , public functionary assemble and debate secretly , apartment be get ready , and tricoloured banner and triumphal emblem manufactur , to welcome the arrival of he the and . the emigration still continue , and wherever family could find means of departure , they fle . when , on the afternoon of the of , go to 's hotel , he find that the great Bareacre ' carriage have at length roll away from the porte -cochere . the have procure a pair of horse somehow , in spite of , and be roll on the road to . the be get ready he portmanteau in that city , too . it seem as if be never tired of worry into motion that unwieldy exile . feel that the delay of yesterday have be only a respite , and that he dearly buy horse must of a surety be put into requisition . he agony be very severe all this day . as long as there be a english army between Brussels and , there be no need of immediate flight ; but he have he horse bring from they distant stable , to the stable in the court - yard of the hotel where he liv ; so that they might be under he own eye , and beyond the risk of violent abduction . watch the stable - door constantly , and have the horse saddle , to be ready for the start . he long intensely for that event . after the reception of the previous day , do not care to come near she dear . she clip the bouquet which have bring she , and give fresh water to the flower , and read over the letter which he have send she . " poor wretch , " she say , twirl round the little bit of paper in she finger , " how I could crush she with this !-- and it be for a thing like this that she must break she heart , forsooth -- for a man who be stupid -- a coxcomb -- and who do not care for she . my poor good be worth ten of this creature . " and then she fall to think what she should do if -- if anything happen to poor good , and what a great piece of luck it be that he have leave he horse behind . in the course of this day too , . , who see not without anger the party drive off , bethotch she of the precaution which the Countess have take , and do a little needlework for she own advantage ; she stitch away the major part of she trinket , bill , and bank - note about she person , and so prepare , be ready for any event -- to fly if she think fit , or to stay and welcome the conqueror , be he or . and I be not sure that she do not dream that night of become a duchess and , while wrap in he cloak , and make he bivouac under the rain at , be think , with all the force of he heart , about the little wife whom he have leave behind he . the next day be a . and have the satisfaction of see both she patient refresh in health and spirit by some rest which they have take during the night . she herself have sleep on a great chair in 's room , ready to wait upon she poor friend or the ensign , should either need she nursing . when morning come , this robust woman go back to the house where she and she major have they billet ; and here perform a elaborate and splendid toilette , befitt the day . and it be very possible that whilst alone in that chamber , which she husband have inhabit , and where he cap still lay on the pillow , and he cane stood in the corner , one prayer at least be send up to for the welfare of the brave soldier , . when she return she bring she prayer - book with she , and she uncle the 's famous book of sermon , out of which she never fail to read every Sabbath ; not understand all , haply , not pronounce many of the word aright , which be long and abstruse -- for the be a learn man , and love long latin word -- but with great gravity , vast emphasis , and with tolerable correctness in the main . how often have my listen to these sermon , she think , and I read in the cabin of a calm ! she propose to resume this exercise on the present day , with and the wounded ensign for a congregation . the same service be read on that day in twenty thousand church at the same hour ; and million of british man and woman , on they knee , implor protection of the father of all . they do not hear the noise which disturb we little congregation at . much louder than that which have interrupt they two day previously , as . be read the service in she best voice , the cannon of begin to roar
roar . when hear that dreadful sound , he make up he mind that he would bear this perpetual recurrence of terror no longer , and would fly at once . he rush into the sick man 's room , where we three friend have pause in they prayer , and further interrupt they by a passionate appeal to . " I can not stand it any more , , " he say ; " I will not stand it ; and you must come with I . I have buy a horse for you -- never mind at what price -- and you must dress and come with I , and ride behind . " " forgive I , , but you be no better than a coward , " say , lay down the book . " I say come , , " the civilian go on ; " never mind what she say ; why be we to stop here and be butchere by the ? " " you forget the -- th , my boy , " say the little , the wounded hero , from he bed -- " and and you will not leave I , will you , ? " " no , my dear fellow , " say she , go up and kiss the boy . " no harm shall come to you while I stand by . I do not budge till I get the word from . a pretty figure I would be , would not I , stuck behind that chap on a pillion ? " this image cause the young patient to burst out laugh in he bed , and even make smile . " I do not ask she , " shoute out -- " I do not ask that -- that , but you ; once for all , will you come ? " " without my husband , ? " say , with a look of , and give she hand to the major 's wife . 's patience be exhaust . " good - bye , then , " he say , shak he fist in a rage , and slam the door by which he retreate . and this time he really give he order for march : and mount in the court - yard . hear the clattering hoof of the horse as they issue from the gate ; and look on , make many scornful remark on poor as he ride down the street with after he in the laced cap . the horse , which have not be exercise for some day , were lively , and spring about the street . , a clumsy and timid horseman , do not look to advantage in the saddle . " look at he , dear , drive into the parlour window . such a bull in a china - shop I never see . " and presently the pair of rider disappear at a canter down the street lead in the direction of the road , . pursue they with a fire of sarcasm so long as they be in sight . all that day from morning until past sunset , the cannon never cease to roar . it be dark when the cannonading stop all of a sudden . all of we have read of what occur during that interval . the tale be in every 's mouth ; and you and I , who be child when the great battle be win and lose , be never tired of hear and recount the history of that famous action . it be remembrance rankle still in the bosom of million of the countryman of those brave man who lose the day . they pant for a opportunity of revenge that humiliation ; and if a contest , end in a victory on they part , should ensue , elat they in they turn , and leave its cursed legacy of hatred and rage behind to we , there be no end to the so - call glory and shame , and to the alternation of successful and unsuccessful murder , in which two high - spirited nation might engage . century hence , we and might be boast and kill each other still , carry out bravely the 's code of honour . all we friend take they share and fight like man in the great field . all day long , whilst the woman be pray ten mile away , the line of the dauntless English infantry be receive and repell the furious charge of the french horseman . gund which be hear at Brussels be plough up they rank , and comrade fall , and the resolute survivor close in . towards evening , the attack of the french , repeat and resist so bravely , slacken in its fury . they have other foe besides the british to engage , or be prepare for a final onset . it come at last : the column of the march up the hill of , at length and at once to sweep the from the height which they have maintain all day , and spite of all : unscared by the thunder of the artillery , which hurl death from the english line -- the dark rolling column press on and up the hill . it seem almost to crest the eminence , when it begin to wave and falter . then it stop , still face the shot . then at last the english troops rush from the post from which no enemy have be able to dislodge they , and the turn and fle . no more firing be hear at -- the pursuit roll mile away . come down on the field and city : and be pray for , who be lie on he face , dead , with a bullet through he heart .
. in 's relation be very anxious the kind reader must please to remember -- while the army be march from Flanders , and , after its heroic action there , be advancing to take the fortification on the frontier of , previous to a occupation of that country -- that there be a number of person live peaceably in who have to do with the history at present in hand , and must come in for they share of the chronicle . during the time of these battle and danger , old be live at , very moderately move by the great event that be go on . the great event render the newspaper rather interesting , to be sure , and read out the , in which 's gallantry be mention with honour , and he promotion be presently record . " what a pity that young man have take such a irretrievable step in the world ! " he aunt say ; " with he rank and distinction he might have marry a brewer 's daughter with a quarter of a million -- like ; or have look to ally himself with the best family in . he would have have my money some day or other ; or he child would -- for I be not in a hurry to go , , although you may be in a hurry to be rid of I ; and instead of that , he be a doomed pauper , with a dancing - girl for a wife . " " will my dear not cast a eye of compassion upon the heroic soldier , whose name be inscribe in the annal of he country 's glory ? " say , who be greatly excit by the proceedings , and love speak romantically when there be a occasion . " have not the -- or the as I may now style he -- do deed which make the name of illustrious ? " " Brigg , you be a fool , " say : " have drag the name of through the mud , . marry a drawing - master 's daughter , indeed !--marry a dame de compagnies -- for she be no better , Briggs ; no , she be just what you be -- only younger , and a great deal prettier and cleverer . be you a accomplice of that abandon wretch , I wonder , of whose vile art he become a victim , and of whom you use to be such a admirer ? yes , I daresay you be a accomplice . but you will find yourself disappointed in my will , I can tell you : and you will have the goodness to write to , and say that I desire to see he immediately . " be now in the habit of write to she solicitor almost every day in the week , for she arrangement respect she property be all revoke , and she perplexity be great as to the future disposition of she money . the spinster have , however , rally considerably ; as be prove by the increase vigour and frequency of she sarcasm upon , all which attack the poor companion bear with meekness , with cowardice , with a resignation that be half generous and half hypocritical -- with the slavish submission , in a word , that woman of she disposition and station be compelle to show . who have not see how woman bully woman ? what torture have man to endure , comparable to those dailly repeat shaft of scorn and cruelty with which poor woman be riddle by the tyrants of they sex ? poor victim ! but we be start from we proposition , which be , that be always particularly annoying and savage when she be rally from illness -- as they say wound tingle most when they be about to heal . while thus approach , as all hope , to convalescence , be the only victim admit into the presence of the invalid ; yet 's relative afar off do not forget they beloved kinswoman , and by a number of token , present , and kind affectionate message , strove to keep themselves alive in she recollection . in the first place , let we mention she nephew , . a few week after the famous fight of , and after the have make known to she the promotion and gallantry of that distinguished officer , the packet bring over to at , a box containing present , and a dutiful letter , from the she nephew . in the box be a pair of french epaulet , a of the of , and the hilt of a sword -- relic from the field of battle : and the letter describe with a good deal of humour how the latter belong to a command officer of the , who have swear that " the die , but never surrendere , " be take prisoner the next minute by a private soldier , who break the 's sword with the butt of he musket , when make himself master of the shattered weapon . as for the cross and epaulet , they come from a Colonel of french cavalry , who have fall under the aide -de-camp 's arm in the battle : and do not know what better to do with the spoil than to send they to he kindest and most affectionate old friend . should he continue to write to she from , whither the army be march ? he might be able to give she interesting news from that capital , and of some of 's old friend of the emigration , to whom she have show so much kindness during they distress . the spinster cause to write back to the a gracious and complimentary letter , encourage he to continue he
he correspondence . he first letter be so excessively lively and amuse that she should look with pleasure for its successor .-- " of course , I know , " she explain to , " that could not write such a good letter any more than you could , my poor Briggs , and that it be that clever little wretch of a , who dictate every word to he ; but that be no reason why my nephew should not amuse I ; and so I wish to let he understand that I be in high good humour . " I wonder whether she know that it be not only who write the letter , but that . actually take and send home the trophy which she buy for a few franc , from one of the innumerable pedlar who immediately begin to deal in relic of the war . the novelist , who know everything , know this also . be this , however , as it may , 's gracious reply greatly encourage we young friend , and he lady , who hope for the best from they aunt 's evidently pacify humour : and they take care to entertain she with many delightful letter from , whither , as say , they have the good luck to go in the track of the conquering army . to the rector 's lady , who go off to tend she husband 's break collar - bone at the Rectory at 's , the spinster 's communication be by no means so gracious . , that brisk , manage , lively , imperious woman , have commit the most fatal of all error with regard to she sister - in - law . she have not merely oppress she and she household -- she have bore ; and if poor have be a woman of any spirit , she might have be make happy by the commission which she principal give she to write a letter to , say that 's health be greatly improve since . have leave she , and begge the latter on no account to put herself to trouble , or quit she family for 's sake . this triumph over a lady who have be very haughty and cruel in she behaviour to , would have rejoice most woman ; but the truth be , be a woman of no spirit at all , and the moment she enemy be discomfit , she begin to feel compassion in she favour . " how silly I be , " . think , and with reason , " ever to hind that I be come , as I do , in that foolish letter when we send the guinea - fowl . I ought to have go without a word to the poor dear do old creature , and take she out of the hand of that ninny Briggs , and that harpy of a femme de chambre . oh ! , Bute , why do you break you collar - bone ? " why , indeed ? we have see how , have the game in she hand , have really play she card too well . she have rule over 's household utterly and completely , to be utterly and completely route when a favourable opportunity for rebellion come . she and she household , however , consider that she have be the victim of horrible selfishness and treason , and that she sacrifice in 's behalf have meet with the most savage ingratitude . 's promotion , and the honourable mention make of he name in the , fill this good lady also with alarm . would he aunt relent towards he now that he be a - and a C.b.? and would that odious once more get into favour ? the rector 's wife write a sermon for she husband about the vanity of military glory and the prosperity of the wicked , which the worthy parson read in he best voice and without understanding one syllable of it . he have for one of he auditor -- , who have come with he two half - sister to church , which the old Baronet could now by no means be bring to frequent . since the departure of , that old wretch have give himself up entirely to he bad course , to the great scandal of the county and the mute horror of he son . the ribbon in 's cap become more splendid than ever . the polite family fle the hall and its owner in terror . go about tippling at he tenant 's house ; and drank rum -and - water with the farmer at and the neighbour place on market - day . he drive the family coach - and - four to with inside : and the county people expect , every week , as he son do in speechless agony , that he marriage with she would be announce in the provincial paper . it be indeed a rude for to bear . he eloquence be palsy at the missionary meeting , and other religious assemblie in the neighbourhood , where he have be in the habit of presiding , and of speaking for hour ; for he feel , when he rise , that the audience say , " that be the son of the old reprobate , who be very likely drink at the public house at this very moment . " and once when he be speak of the benight condition of the king of , and the number of he wife who be likewise in darkness , some gipsy miscreant from the crowd ask , " how many be there at 's , yong ? " to the surprise of the platform , and the ruin of 's speech . and the two daughter of the house of 's would have
have be allow to run utterly wild ( for swore that no governess should ever enter into he door again ) , have not , by threaten the old gentleman , force the latter to send they to school . meanwhile , as we have say , whatever individual difference there might be between they all , 's dear nephew and niece be unanimous in love she and send she token of affection . thus send guinea-fowl , and some remarkably fine cauliflower , and a pretty purse or pincushion work by she darling girl , who beg to keep a little place in the recollection of they dear aunt , while send peach and grape and venison from the Hall . the coach use to carry these token of affection to at : it use sometimes to convey thither too : for he difference with cause to absent himself a good deal from home now : and besides , he have a attraction at in the person of the , whose engagement to have be formerly mention in this history . she Ladyship and she sister live at with they mamma , the , that strong - minded woman so favourably know in the serious world . a few word ought to be say regard she Ladyship and she noble family , who be bound by tie of present and future relationship to the house of . respecte the chief of the family , , of , little need be tell , except that he Lordship come into parliament ( as ) under the auspices of , and for a time be a credit to he political sponsor , and decidedly a serious young man . but word can not describe the feeling of he admirable mother , when she learn , very shortly after she noble husband 's demise , that she son be a member of several worldly club , have lose largely at play at 's and the ; that he have raise money on post-obit , and encumber the family estate ; that he drive four -in - hand , and patronise the ring ; and that he actually have a opera - box , where he entertaine the most dangerous bachelor company . he name be only mention with groan in the dowager 's circle . the be she brother 's senior by many year ; and take considerable rank in the serious world as author of some of the delightful tract before mention , and of many hymn and spiritual piece . a mature spinster , and have but faint idea of marriage , she love for the blacks occupy almost all she feeling . it be to she , I believe , we owe that beautiful poem . lead we to some sunny isle , Yonder in the western deep ; where the sky for ever smile , and the blacks for ever weep , &c . she have correspondence with clerical gentleman in most of we and possession ; and be secretly attach to the , who be tattoo in the . as for the , on whom , as it have be say , 's affection have be place , she be gentle , blushing , silent , and timid . in spite of he fall away , she weep for she brother , and be quite asham of love he still . even yet she use to send he little hurrie smuggle note , and pop they into the post in private . the one dreadful secret which weigh upon she life be , that she and the old housekeeper have be to pay Southdown a furtive visit at he chamber in the ; and find he -- of the naughty dear abandon wretch !--smok a cigar with a bottle of before he . she admire she sister , she adore she mother , she think the most delightful and accomplish of man , after , that fall angel : and she mamma and sister , who be lady of the most superior sort , manage everything for she , and regard she with that amiable pity , of which you really superior woman always have such a share to give away . she mamma order she dress , she book , she bonnet , and she idea for she . she be make to take pony -riding , or piano - exercise , or any other sort of bodily medicament , accord as my see meet ; and she ladyship would have keep she daughter in pinafore up to she present age of six - and - twenty , but that they be throw off when be present to . when these lady first come to they house at , it be to they alone that pay he personal visit , contente himself by leave a card at he aunt 's house , and make a modest inquiry of or he assistant footman , with respect to the health of the invalid . when he meet come home from the library with a cargo of novel under she arm , blush in a manner quite unusual to he , as he step forward and shook 's companion by the hand . he introduce to the lady with whom he happen to be walk , the , say , " , permit I to introduce to you my aunt 's kindest friend and most affectionate companion , , whom you know under another title , as authoress of the delightful ' lyric of the , ' of which you be so fond . " blush too as she hold out a kind little hand to , and say something very civil and incoherent about mamma , and propose to call on , and be glad to be make known to the friend and relative of ; and with soft dove - like eye salute as they separate , while treat
treat she to a profound courtly bow , such as he have use to the of , when he be attaco at that court . the artful diplomatist and disciple of the ! it be he who have give that copy of poor 's early poem , which he remember to have see at 's , with a dedication from the poetess to he father 's late wife ; and he bring the volume with he to , read it in the coach and mark it with he own pencil , before he present it to the gentle . it be he , too , who lay before the great advantage which might occur from a intimacy between she family and -- advantage both worldly and spiritual , he say : for be now quite alone ; the monstrous dissipation and alliance of he brother have estrange she affections from that reprobate young man ; the greedy tyranny and avarice of have cause the old lady to revolt against the exorbitant pretension of that part of the family ; and though he himself have hold off all he life from cultivating 's friendship , with perhaps a improper pride , he think now that every become means should be take , both to save she soul from perdition , and to secure she fortune to himself as the head of the house of . the strong - minded quite agree in both proposal of she son - in - law , and be for converting off - hand . at she own home , both at and at , this tall and awful missionary of the truth ride about the country in she barouche with outrider , launch packet of tract among the cottager and tenant , and would order to be convert , as she would order to take a 's powder , without appeal , resistance , or benefit of clergy . my , she late husband , a epileptic and simple - minded nobleman , be in the habit of approve off everything which he do and think . so that whatever change she own belief might undergo ( and it accommodate itself to a prodigious variety of opinion , take from all sort of doctor among the Dissenter ) she have not the least scruple in ordering all she tenant and inferior to follow and believe after she . thus whether she receive the , the divine ; or the , the mild ; or the , the illuminated Cobbler , who dub himself as crown himself -- the household , child , tenantry of my be expect to go down on they knee with she Ladyship , and say Amen to the prayer of either . during these exercise old , on account of he invalid condition , be allow to sit in he own room , and have negus and the paper read to he . be the old 's favourite daughter , and tend he and love he sincerely : as for , the authoress of the " of , " she denunciation of future punishment ( at this period , for she opinion modify afterwards ) be so awful that they use to frighten the timid old gentleman she father , and the physician declare he fit always occur after one of she Ladyship 's sermon . " I will certainly call , " say then , in reply to the exhortation of she daughter 's pretendu , -- " who be 's medical man ? " mention the name of . " a most dangerous and ignorant practitioner , my dear . I have providentially be the means of remove he from several house : though in one or two instance I do not arrive in time . I could not save poor dear General Glanders , who be die under the hand of that ignorant man -- die . he rally a little under the Podger 's pill which I administer to he ; but alas ! it be too late . he death be delightful , however ; and he change be only for the better ; , my dear , must leave you aunt . " express he perfect acquiescence . he , too , have be carry along by the energy of he noble kinswoman , and future mother - in - law . he have be make to accept , Waters , Giles Jowls , Podger ' Pill , Rodger ' , 's , every one of she Ladyship 's remedy spiritual or temporal . he never leave she house without carry respectfully away with he pile of she quack theology and medicine . o , my dear breth and fellow - sojourner in , which among you do not know and suffer under such benevolent despot ? it be in vain you say to they , " dear madam , I take ' specific at you order last year , and believe in it . why , why be I to recant and accept the Rodger 's article now ? " there be no help for it ; the faithful proselytizer , if she can not convince by argument , burst into tear , and the refusant find himself , at the end of the contest , take down the bolus , and say , " well , well , ' be it . " " and as for she spiritual state , " continue the , " that of course must be look to immediately : with about she , she may go off any day : and in what a condition , my dear , in what a dreadful condition ! I will send the to she instantly . , write a line to the , in the third person , and say that I desire the pleasure of he company this evening at tea at half - past six . he be a
a awakening man ; he ought to see before she rest this night . and Emily , my love , get ready a packet of book for . put up ' a voice from the Flames ,' ' a Trumpet - warn to , ' and the ' ; or , the . ' " " and the ' of , ' , " say . " it be as well to begin soothingly at first . " " stop , my dear lady , " say , the diplomatist . " with every deference to the opinion of my beloved and respecte , I think it would be quite unadvisable to commence so early upon serious topics with . remember she delicate condition , and how little , how very little accustom she have hithertoo be to consideration connect with she immortal welfare . " " can we then begin too early , ? " say Emily , rise with six little book already in she hand . " if you begin abruptly , you will frighten she altogether . I know my aunt 's worldly nature so well as to be sure that any abrupt attempt at conversion will be the very worst means that can be employ for the welfare of that unfortunate lady . you will only frighe and annoy she . she will very likely fl the book away , and refuse all acquaintance with the giver . " " you be as worldly as , , " say Emily , toss out of the room , she book in she hand . " and I need not tell you , my dear , " continue , in a low voice , and without heed the interruption , " how fatal a little want of gentleness and caution may be to any hope which we may entertain with regard to the worldly possession of my aunt . remember she have seventy thousand pound ; think of she age , and she highly nervous and delicate condition ; I know that she have destroy the will which be make in my brother 's ( 's ) favour : it be by soothing that wounded spirit that we must lead it into the right path , and not by frightene it ; and so I think you will agree with I that -- that -- ' " of course , of course , " remark . " , my love , you need not send that note to . if she health be such that discussion fatigue she , we will wait she amendment . I will call upon tomorrow . " " and if I might suggest , my sweet lady , " say in a bland tone , " it would be as well not to take we precious Emily , who be too enthusiastic ; but rather that you should be accompany by we sweet and dear . " " most certainly , Emily would ruin everything , " say ; and this time agree to forego she usual practice , which be , as we have say , before she bear down personally upon any individual whom she propose to subjugate , to fire in a quantity of tract upon the menace party ( as a charge of the be always proceed by a furious cannonade ) . , we say , for the sake of the invalid 's health , or for the sake of she soul 's ultimate welfare , or for the sake of she money , agree to temporise . the next day , the great female family carriage , with the 's coronet and the lozenge ( upon which the three lamb trottant argent upon the field vert of the , be quarter with sable on a bend or , three snuff -mull gule , the cognizance of the house of ) , drive up in state to 's door , and the tall serious footman hand in to she Ladyship 's card for , and one likewise for . by way of compromise , send in a packet in the evening for the latter lady , contain copy of the " , " and other mild and favourite tract for . own perusal ; and a few for the servants ' hall , viz . : " Crumb from the Pantry , " " the and the fire , " and " the of , " of a much stronger kind . 's put out the amiable behaviour of , and 's kind reception of she , highly flatter , who be enable to speak a good word for the latter , after the card of the family have be present to . a Countess 's card leave personally too for she , , be not a little pleasing to the poor friendless companion . " what could mean by leave a card upon you , I wonder , ? " say the ; upon which the companion meekly say " that she hope there could be no harm in a lady of rank take notice of a poor gentlewoman , " and she put away this card in she work - box amongst she most cherish personal treasure . furthermore , explain how she have meet walk with he cousin and long affiance bride the day before : and she tell how kind and gentle - look the lady be , and what a plain , not to say common , dress she have , all the article of which , from the bonnet down to the boot , she describe and estimate with female accuracy . allow to prattle on without interrupt she too much . as she get well , she be pin for society . , she medical man , would not hear of she return to she old haunt and dissipation in . the old spinster be too glad to find any companionship
companionship at , and not only be the card acknowledge the very next day , but be graciously invite to come and see he aunt . he come , bring with he and she daughter . the dowager do not say a word about the state of 's soul ; but talk with much discretion about the weather : about the war and the downfall of the monster Bonaparte : and above all , about doctor , quacks , and the particular merit of , whom she then patronise . during they interview make a great stroke , and one which show that , have he diplomatic career not be blight by early neglect , he might have risen to a high rank in he profession . when the Countess Dowager of fell foul of the upstart , as the fashion be in those day , and show that he be a monster stain with every conceivable crime , a coward and a tyrant not fit to live , one whose fall be predict , &c. , suddenly take up the cudgel in favour of the man of . he describe the First Consul as he see he at at the peace of ; when he , , have the gratification of make the acquaintance of the great and good , a statesman whom , however much he might differ with he , it be impossible not to admire fervently -- a statesman who have always have the highest opinion of the . and he speak in term of the strongest indignation of the faithless conduct of the ally towards this dethroned monarch , who , after give himself generously up to they mercy , be consign to a ignoble and cruel banishment , while a bigoted Popish rabble be tyrannise over in he stead . this orthodox horror of save in 's opinion , whilst he admiration for and raise he immeasurably in 's eye . she friendship with that defunct british statesman be mention when we first introduce she in this history . a true , have be in opposition all through the war , and though , to be sure , the downfall of the do not very much agitate the old lady , or he ill - treatment tend to shorten she life or natural rest , yet speak to she heart when he laud both she idol ; and by that single speech make immense progress in she favour . " and what do you think , my dear ? " say to the young lady , for whom she have take a liking at first sight , as she always do for pretty and modest young people ; though it must be own she affections cool as rapidly as they rise . blush very much , and say " that she do not understand politics , which she leave to wiser head than hers ; but though be , no doubt , correct , have speak beautifully . " and when the lady be retire at the conclusion of they visit , hope " would be so kind as to send she sometimes , if she could be spare to come down and conseal a poor sick lonely old woman . " this promise be graciously accord , and they separate upon great term of amity . " do not let come again , , " say the old lady . " she be stupid and pompous , like all you mother 's family , whom I never could endure . but bring that nice good - nature little as often as ever you please . " promise that he would do so . he do not tell the Countess of what opinion he aunt have form of she Ladyship , who , on the contrary , think that she have make a most delightful and majestic impression on . and so , nothing loth to comfort a sick lady , and perhaps not sorry in she heart to be free now and again from the dreary spouting of the , and the serious toady who gather round the footstool of the pompous Countess , she mamma , become a pretty constant visitor to , accompany she in she drive , and solace many of she evening . she be so naturally good and soft , that even be not jealous of she ; and the gentle think she friend be less cruel to she when kind be by . towards she Ladyship 's manners be charme . the old spinster tell she a thousand anecdote about she youth , talk to she in a very different strain from that in which she have be accustom to converse with the godless little ; for there be that in 's innocence which render light talk impertinence before she , and be too much of a gentlewoman to offend such purity . the young lady herself have never receive kindness except from this old spinster , and she brother and father : and she repay 's engoument by artless sweetness and friendship . in the autumn evening ( when be flaunt at , the gayest among the gay conqueror there , and we , we dear wounded , ah ! where be she ? ) would be sit in 's drawing - room singe sweetly to she , in the twilight , she little simple song and hymn , while the sun be set and the sea be roar on the beach . the old spinster use to wake up when these ditty cease , and ask for more . as for , and the quantity of tear of happiness which she now shed as she pretend to knit , and look out at the splendid ocean darkling before the window , and the lamps of heaven begin more brightly to shine -- who , I say can measure the happiness and sensibility of ? meanwhile in
in the dining - room , with a pamphlet on the or a by he side , take that kind of recreation which suit romantic and unromantic man after dinner . he sip : build castle in the air : think himself a fine fellow : feel himself much more in love with than he have be any time these seven year , during which they liaison have last without the slightest impatience on 's part -- and sleep a good deal . when the time for coffee come , use to enter in a noisy manner , and summon , who would be find in the dark very busy with he pamphlet . " I wish , my love , I could get somebody to play piquet with I , " say one night when this functionary make he appearance with the candle and the coffee . " poor Brigg can no more play than a owl , she be so stupid " ( the spinster always take a opportunity of abuse before the servants ) ; " and I think I should sleep better if I have my game . " at this blush to the tip of she little ears , and down to the end of she pretty finger ; and when have quit the room , and the door be quite shut , she say : " , I can play a little . I use to -- to play a little with poor dear papa . " " come and kiss I . come and kiss I this instant , you dear good little soul , " cry in a ecstasy : and in this picturesque and friendly occupation find the old lady and the young one , when he come upstairs with he pamphlet in he hand . how she do blush all the evening , that poor ! it must not be imagine that 's artifice escape the attention of he dear relation at the Rectory at 's . and lie very close together , and . have friend in the latter county who take care to inform she of all , and a great deal more than all , that pass at 's house at . be there more and more . he do not come for month together to the hall , where he abominable old father abandon himself completely to rum -and - water , and the odious society of the family . 's success render the rector 's family furious , and . regrett more ( though she confess less ) than ever she monstrous fault in so insulting , and in be so haughty and parsimonious to and , that she have not a single person leave in 's household to give she information of what take place there . " it be all 's collar - bone , " she persist in say ; " if that have not break , I never would have leave she . I be a martyr to duty and to you odious unclerical habit of hunting , . " " hunt ; nonsense ! it be you that frighten she , , " the divine interpose . " you be a clever woman , but you have get a devil of a temper ; and you be a screw with you money , . " " you would have be screw in gaol , , if I have not keep you money . " " I know I would , my dear , " say the rector , good - naturedly . " you be a clever woman , but you manage too well , you know " : and the pious man consol himself with a big glass of port . " what the deuce can she find in that spooney of a ? " he continue . " the fellow have not pluck enough to say Bo to a goose . I remember when , who be a man , and be hang to he , use to flog he round the stable as if he be a whipping - top : and would go how home to he ma -- ha , ha ! why , either of my boy would whop he with one hand . say he be remember at as still -- the spooney . " I say , , " he reverence continue , after a pause . " what ? " say , who be bite she nail , and drumm the table . " I say , why not send over to to see if he can do anything with the old lady . he be very near get he degree , you know . he be only be pluck twice -- so be I -- but he be have the advantages of and a university education . he know some of the best chap there . he pull stroke in the . he be a handsome feller . d ---- it , ma 'am , let 's put he on the old woman , hey , and tell he to thrash if he say anything . , ha , ha ! " might go down and see she , certainly , " the housewife say ; add with a sigh , " if we could but get one of the girl into the house ; but she could never endure they , because they be not pretty ! " those unfortunate and well - educated woman make themselves hear from the neighbouring draw - room , where they be thrumm away , with hard finger , a elaborate music - piece on the piano - forte , as they mother speak ; and indeed , they be at music , or at backboard , or at geography , or at history , the whole day long . but what avail all these accomplishment , in , to girl who be short
short , poor , plain , and have a bad complexion ? could think of nobody but the curate to take one of they off she hand ; and come in from the stable at this minute , through the parlour window , with a short pipe stuck in he oilskin cap , he and he father fall to talk about odd on the , and the colloquy between the rector and he wife end . do not augur much good to the cause from the sending of she son as a ambassador , and see he depart in rather a despairing mood . do the young fellow himself , when tell what he mission be to be , expect much pleasure or benefit from it ; but he be console by the thought that possibly the old lady would give he some handsome remembrance of she , which would pay a few of he most press bill at the commencement of the ensue term , and so take he place by the coach from , and be safely land at on the same evening ? with he portmanteau , he favourite bull - dog Towzer , and a immense basket of farm and garden produce , from the dear Rectory folk to the dear . consider it be too late to disturb the invalid lady on the first night of he arrival , he put up at a inn , and do not wait upon until a late hour in the noon of next day . , when he aunt have last beheld he , be a gawky lad , at that uncomfortable age when the voice varies between a unearthly treble and a preternatural bass ; when the face not uncommonly bloom out with appearance for which 's be say to act as a cure ; when boy be see to shave furtively with they sister 's scissors , and the sight of other young woman produce intolerable sensation of terror in they ; when the great hand and ankle protrude a long way from garment which have grow too tight for they ; when they presence after dinner be at once frightful to the ladie , who be whisper in the twilight in the drawing - room , and inexpressibly odious to the gentleman over the mahogany , who be restrain from freedom of intercourse and delightful interchange of wit by the presence of that gawky innocence ; when , at the conclusion of the second glass , papa say , " Jack , my boy , go out and see if the evening hold up , " and the youth , will to be free , yet hurt at not be yet a man , quit the incomplete banquet . , then a hobbadehoy , be now become a young man , have have the benefit of a university education , and acquire the inestimable polish which be gain by live in a fast set at a small college , and contract debt , and be rusticate , and be pluck . he be a handsome lad , however , when he come to present himself to he aunt at , and good look be always a title to the fickle old lady 's favour . do he blush and awkwardness take away from it : she be pleased with these healthy token of the young gentleman 's ingenuousness . he say " he have come down for a couple of day to see a man of he college , and -- and to pay my respects to you , ma 'am , and my father 's and mother 's , who hope you be well . " be in the room with when the lad be announce , and look very blank when he name be mention . the old lady have plenty of humour , and enjoy she correct nephew 's perplexity . she ask after all the people at the Rectory with great interest ; and say she be think of pay they a visit . she praise the lad to he face , and say he be well - grow and very much improve , and that it be a pity he sister have not some of he good look ; and find , on inquiry , that he have take up he quarter at a hotel , would not hear of he stopping there , but bay send for 's thing instantly ; " and hark ye , bowls , " she add , with great graciousness , " you will have the goodness to pay 's bill . " she fling a look of arch triumph , which cause that diplomatist almost to choke with envy . much as he have ingratiate himself with he aunt , she have never yet invite he to stay under she roof , and here be a young whipper - snapper , who at first sight be make welcome there . " I beg you pardon , sir , " say bowls , advanc with a profound bow ; " what ' otel , sir , shall fetch the luggage from ? " " o , dam , " say young , start up , as if in some alarm , " I will go . " " what ! " say . " the 's Arms , " say , blush deeply . burst out laugh at this title . give one abrupt guffaw , as a confidential servant of the family , but chok the rest of the volley ; the diplomatist only smile . " I -- I do not know any better , " say , look down . " I have never be here before ; it be the coachman tell I . " the young story - teller ! the fact be , that on the coach , the day previous , have meet the , who be come
come to to make a match with the ; and enchant by the conversation , have pass the evening in company with that scientific man and he friend , at the inn in question . " I -- I would best go and settle the score , " continue . " could not think of ask you , ma 'am , " he add , generously . this delicacy make he aunt laugh the more . " go and settle the bill , bowls , " she say , with a wave of she hand , " and bring it to I . " poor lady , she do not know what she have do ! " there -- there be a little dawg , " say , look frightfully guilty . " I would best go for he . he bite footman 's calve . " all the party cry out with laughing at this description ; even and , who be sit mute during the interview between and she nephew : and , without a word , quit the room . still , by way of punishe she elder nephew , persist in be gracious to the young . there be no limit to she kindness or she compliment when they once begin . she tell he might come to dinner , and insist that should accompany she in she drive , and parade he solemnly up and down the cliff , on the back seat of the barouche . during all this excursion , she condescende to say civil thing to he : she quote italian and french poetry to the poor bewilder lad , and persist that he be a fine scholar , and be perfectly sure he would gain a gold medal , and be a senior Wrangler . " Haw , haw , " laugh , encourage by these compliment ; " , indeed ; that be at the other shop . " " what be the other shop , my dear child ? " say the lady . " senior Wrangler at , not , " say the scholar , with a know air ; and would probably have be more confidential , but that suddenly there appear on the cliff in a tax - cart , draw by a bang - up pony , dress in white flannel coat , with mother - of - pearl button , he friend the and the , with three other gentleman of they acquaintance , who all salute poor there in the carriage as he sate . this incident dam the ingenuous youth 's spirit , and no word of yea or nay could he be induce to utter during the rest of the drive . on he return he find he room prepare , and he portmanteau ready , and might have remark that 's countenance , when the latter conduct he to he apartment , wear a look of gravity , wonder , and compassion . but the thought of do not enter he head . he be deplor the dreadful predicament in which he find himself , in a house full of old woman , jabber French and italian , and talk poetry to he . " Reglarly up a tree , by jingo ! " exclaim the modest boy , who could not face the gentlest of she sex -- not even -- when she begin to talk to he ; whereas , put he at , and he could out - slang the boldest bargeman . at dinner , appear chok in a white neckcloth , and have the honour of handing my downstair , while and follow afterwards , conduct the old lady , with she apparatus of bundle , and shawl , and cushion . half of 's time at dinner be spend in superintend the invalid 's comfort , and in cutting up chicken for she fat spaniel . do not talk much , but he make a point of ask all the lady to drink wine , and accept 's challenge , and consum the greater part of a bottle of champagne which be order to produce in he honour . the lady have withdrawn , and the two cousin be leave together , , the ex-diplomatist , he come very communicative and friendly . he ask after 's career at college -- what he prospects in life be -- hope heartily he would get on ; and , in a word , be frank and amiable . 's tongue unloose with the port , and he tell he cousin he life , he prospect , he debt , he trouble at the little - go , and he row with the proctor , fill rapidly from the bottle before he , and fly from to with joyous activity . " the chief pleasure which my aunt have , " say , fill he glass , " be that people should do as they like in she house . this be , , and you can not do a greater kindness than to do as you please , and ask for what you will . I know you have all sneer at I in the country for be a Tory . be liberal enough to suit any fancy . she be a in principle , and despise everything like rank or title . " " why be you go to marry a 's daughter ? " say . " my dear friend , remember it be not poor 's fault that she be well bear , " reply , with a courtly air . " she can not help be a lady . besides , I be a Tory , you know . " " oh , as for that , " say , " there be nothing like old blood ; no , dammy , nothing like it . I be none of you radicals .
. I know what it be to be a gentleman , dammy . see the chap in a boat - race ; look at the feller in a fight ; aye , look at a dawg kill rat -- which be it win ? the good - blooded one . get some more port , bowl , old boy , whilst I buzz this bottle - here . what be I asay ? " " I think you be speak of dog kill rat , " remark mildly , hand he cousin the decanter to " buzz . " " killing rats be I ? well , , be you a sport man ? do you want to see a dawg as can kill a rat ? if you do , come down with I to 's , in , and I will show you such a bull - terrier as -- ! gammon , " cry , burst out laugh at he own absurdity -- " you do not care about a dawg or rat ; it be all nonsense . I be blest if I think you know the difference between a dog and a duck . " " no ; by the way , " continue with increase blandness , " it be about blood you be talk , and the personal advantage which people derive from patrician birth . here be the fresh bottle . " " be the word , " say , gulp the ruby fluid down . " nothing like blood , sir , in hoss , dawg , and man . why , only last term , just before I be rusticate , that be , I mean just before I have the measle , ha , ha -- there be I and of , , 's son , have we beer at the at , when the bargeman offer to fight either of we for a bowl of punch . I could not . my arm be in a sling ; could not even take the drag down -- a brute of a mare of mine have fall with I only two day before , out with the Abingdon , and I think my arm be break . well , sir , I could not finish he , but have he coat off at once -- he stand up to the man for three minute , and polish he off in four round easy . , how he do drop , sir , and what be it ? Blood , sir , all blood . " " you do not drink , , " the ex-attache continue . " in my time at , the man pass round the bottle a little quicker than you young fellow seem to do . " " come , come , " say , put he hand to he nose and wink at he cousin with a pair of vinous eye , " no joke , old boy ; no try it on on I . you want to trot I out , but it be no go . in vino veritas , old boy . , , virorum , hey ? I wish my aunt would send down some of this to the governor ; it be a precious good tap . " " you have better ask she , " continue , " or make the best of you time now . what say the bard ? ' Nunc vino pellite cura , ingen iterabimus aequor , ' " and the Bacchanalian , quote the above with a of air , toss off nearly a thimbleful of wine with a immense flourish of he glass . at the Rectory , when the bottle of port wine be open after dinner , the young lady have each a glass from a bottle of currant wine . . take one glass of port , honest have a couple commonly , but as he father grow very sulky if he make further inroad on the bottle , the good lad generally refrain from try for more , and subsid either into the currant wine , or to some private gin - and - water in the stable , which he enjoy in the company of the coachman and he pipe . at , the quantity of wine be unlimited , but the quality be inferior : but when quantity and quality unit as at he aunt 's house , show that he could appreciate they indeed ; and hardly need any of he cousin 's encouragement in drain off the second bottle supply by . when the time for coffee come , however , and for a return to the ladie , of whom he stand in awe , the young gentleman 's agreeable frankness leave he , and he relapse into he usual surly timidity ; contente himself by say yes and no , by scowling at , and by upsetting one cup of coffee during the evening . if he do not speak he yawn in a pitiable manner , and he presence throw a damp upon the modest proceeding of the evening , for and at they piquet , and at she work , feel that he eye be wildly fix on they , and be uneasy under that maudlin look . " he seem a very silent , awkward , bashful lad , " say to . " he be more communicative in man 's society than with lady , " dryly reply : perhaps rather disappointed that the port wine have not make speak more . he have spend the early part of the next morning in writing home to he mother a most flourishing account of he reception by . but ah ! he little know what evils the day be bring for he , and how short he reign of favou be destin to be . a circumstance which have
have forget -- a trivial but fatal circumstance -- have take place at the 's arm on the night before he have come to he aunt 's house . it be no other than this -- , who be always of a generous disposition , and when in he cup especially hospitable , have in the course of the night treat the champion and the man , and they friend , twice or thrice to the refreshment of gin - and - water -- so that no less than eighteen glassis of that fluid at eightpence per glass be charge in 's bill . it be not the amount of eightpence , but the quantity of gin which tell fatally against poor 's character , when he aunt 's butler , , go down at he mistress 's request to pay the young gentleman 's bill . the landlord , fear lest the account should be refuse altogether , swore solemnly that the young gent have consum personally every farthing 's worth of the liquor : and pay the bill finally , and show it on he return home to , who be shocked at the frightful prodigality of gin ; and take the bill to as accountant-general ; who think it she duty to mention the circumstance to she principal , . have he drink a dozen bottle of claret , the old spinster could have pardon he . and drank claret . gentleman drank claret . but eighteen glassis of gin consume among boxer in a ignoble pot -house -- it be a odious crime and not to be pardon readily . everything go against the lad : he come home perfume from the stable , whither he have be to pay he dog Towzer a visit -- and whence he be go to take he friend out for a airing , when he meet and she wheezy spaniel , which would have eat up have not the fle squeal to the protection of , while the atrocious master of the bull - dog stood laugh at the horrible persecution . this day too the unlucky boy 's modesty have likewise forsake he . he be lively and facetious at dinner . during the repast he levell one or two joke against : he drank as much wine as upon the previous day ; and go quite unsuspiciously to the drawing - room , begin to entertain the lady there with some choice Oxford story . he describe the different pugilistic quality of and , offer playfully to give the odd upon the against the man , or take they , as she Ladyship choose : and crown the pleasantry by propose to back himself against he cousin , either with or without the glove . " and that be a fair offer , my buck , " he say , with a loud laugh , slapp on the shoulder , " and my father tell I to make it too , and he will go halve in the bet , ha , ha ! " so say , the engage youth nod knowingly at poor , and point he thumb over he shoulder at in a jocular and exult manner . be not please altogether perhaps , but still not unhappy in the main . poor have he laugh out : and stagger across the room with he aunt 's candle , when the old lady move to retire , and offer to salute she with the blandest tipsy smile : and he take he own leave and go upstairs to he bedroom perfectly satisfied with himself , and with a pleased notion that he aunt 's money would be leave to he in preference to he father and all the rest of the family . once up in the bedroom , one would have think he could not make matter worse ; and yet this unlucky boy do . the moon be shin very pleasantly out on the sea , and , attract to the window by the romantic appearance of the ocean and the heaven , think he would further enjoy they while smoke . nobody would smell the tobacco , he think , if he cunningly open the window and keep he head and pipe in the fresh air . this he do : but be in a excited state , poor have forget that he door be open all this time , so that the breeze blow inwards and a fine thorough dratch be establish , the clouds of tobacco be carry downstairs , and arrive with quite undiminished fragrance to and . the pipe of tobacco finish the business : and the - never know how many thousand pound it cost they . rush downstairs to who be read out the " and the " to he aide - de -camp in a loud and ghostly voice . the dreadful secret be tell to he by with so frightene a look , that for the first moment and he young man think that robber be in the house , the leg of whom have probably be discover by the woman under 's bed . when make aware of the fact , however -- to rush upstairs at three step at a time to enter the unconscious 's apartment , call out , " , " in a voice stifle with alarm , and to cry , " for 's sake , sir , stop that ' ere pipe , " be the work of a minute with . " o , , what ' Ave you do ! " he say in a voice of the deepest patho , as he throw the implement out of the window . " what ' ave you do , sy ! Missis can not abide th'ey . " " Missis need not smoke , " say with a frantic misplace laugh , and think the whole
whole matter a excellent joke . but he feeling be very different in the morning , when 's young man , who operate upon 's boot , and bring he he hot water to shave that beard which he be so anxiously expect , hand a note in to in bed , in the handwriting of . " dear sir , " it say , " have pass a exceedingly disturbed night , owe to the shocking manner in which the house have be pollute by tobacco ; bid I say she regret that she be too unwell to see you before you go -- and above all that she ever induce you to remove from the ale - house , where she be sure you will be much more comfortable during the rest of you stay at . " and herewith honest 's career as a candidate for he aunt 's favour end . he have in fact , and without know it , do what he menace to do . he have fight he cousin with the glove . where meanwhile be he who have be once first favourite for this race for money ? and , as we have see , be come together after , and be pass the winter of 1815 at in great splendour and gaiety . be a good economist , and the price poor have pay for she two horse be in itself sufficient to keep they little establishment afloat for a year , at the least ; there be no occasion to turn into money " my pistol , the same which I shoot , " or the gold dressing - case , or the cloak line with sable . have it make into a pelisse for herself , in which she ride in the to the admiration of all : and you should have see the scene between she and she delighte husband , whom she rejoin after the army have enter , and when she unsew herself , and let out of she dress all those watch , knick - knack , bank - note , cheque , and valuable , which she have secret in the wadding , previous to she meditate flight from Brussels ! be charme , and roar with delighted laughter , and swore that she be better than any play he ever see , by . and the way in which she jockey , and which she describe with infinite fun , carry up he delight to a pitch of quite insane enthusiasm . he believe in he wife as much as the french soldier in . she success in be remarkable . all the french lady vote she charming . she speak they language admirably . she adopt at once they grace , they liveliness , they manner . she husband be stupid certainly -- all be stupid -- and , besides , a dull husband at be always a point in a lady 's favour . he be the heir of the rich and spirituelle , whose house have be open to so many of the french noblesse during the emigration . they receive the colonel 's wife in they own hotel -- " why , " write a great lady to , who have buy she lace and trinket at the Duchess 's own price , and give she many a dinner during the pinching time after the Revolution -- " why do not we dear miss come to she nephew and niece , and she attach friend in ? all the world raffole of the and she espiegle beauty . yes , we see in she the grace , the charm , the wit of we dear friend ! the take notice of she yesterday at the , and we be all jealous of the attention which pay she . if you could have see the spite of a certain stupid ( whose eagle - beak and toque and feather may be see pee over the head of all assemblie ) when , the Duchess of , the august daughter and companion of king , desire especially to be present to , as you dear daughter and protegee , and thanke she in the name of , for all you benevolence towards we unfortunate during they exile ! she be of all the society , of all the ball -- of the ball -- yes -- of the dance , no ; and yet how interesting and pretty this fair creature look surround by the homage of the man , and so soon to be a mother ! to hear she speak of you , she protectress , she mother , would bring tear to the eyes of ogre . how she love you ! how we all love we admirable , we respectable ! " it be to be fear that this letter of the parisian great lady do not by any means advance 's interest with she admirable , she respectable , relative . on the contrary , the fury of the old spinster be beyond bound , when she find what be 's situation , and how audaciously she have make use of 's name , to get a entree into parisian society . too much shaken in mind and body to compose a letter in the french language in reply to that of she correspondent , she dictate to a furious answer in she own native tongue , repudiat altogether , and warn the public to beware of she as a most artful and dangerous person . but as Madame the Duchess of -- have only be twenty year in , she do not understand a single word of the language , and contente herself by inform at they next meeting , that she have receive a charming letter from that chere Mees , and that it be full of benevolent thing for . , who begin
begin seriously to have hope that the spinster would relent . meanwhile , she be the gayest and most admired of : and have a little european congress on she reception - night . Prussians and Cossacks , spanish and English -- all the world be at during this famous winter : to have see the stars and cordon in 's humble saloon would have make all pale with envy . famous warrior rode by she carriage in the , or crowd she modest little box at the . be in the highest spirit . there be no dun in as yet : there be party every day at 's or ' ; play be plentiful and he luck good . perhaps be sulky . have come over to at she own invitation , and besides this contretemp , there be a score of general now round 's chair , and she might take she choice of a dozen bouquet when she go to the play . lady Bareacres and the chief of the society , stupid and irreproachable female , writh with anguish at the success of the little upstart , whose poisone joke quiver and rank in they chaste breast . but she have all the man on she side . she fight the woman with indomitable courage , and they could not talk scandal in any tongue but they own . so in fete , pleasur , and prosperity , the winter of 1815 - 16 pass away with , who accommodate herself to polite life as if she ancestor have be people of fashion for centurie past -- and who from she wit , talent , and energy , indeed merit a place of honour in . in the early spring of 1816 , 's contain the follow announcement in a interesting corner of the paper : " on the 26th of -- the of - , of the -- of a son and heir . " this event be copy into the papers , out of which read the statement to , at breakfast , at . the intelligence , expect as it might have be , cause a crisis in the affair of the family . the spinster 's rage rise to its height , and send instantly for , she nephew , and for the , from , she request a immediate celebration of the marriage which have be so long pend between the two family . and she announce that it be she intention to allow the young couple a thousand a year during she lifetime , at the expiration of which the bulk of she property would be settle upon she nephew and she dear niece , . come down to ratify the deed -- give away he sister -- she be marry by a Bishop , and not by the -- to the disappointment of the irregular prelate . when they be married , would have like to take a hymeneal tour with he bride , as become people of they condition . but the affection of the old lady towards have grow so strong , that she fairly own she could not part with she favourite . and he wife come therefore and live with : and ( greatly to the annoyance of poor , who conceive himself a most injured character -- be subject to the humours of he aunt on one side , and of he mother - in - law on the other ) , from she neighbour house , reign over the whole family -- , , , , , , and all . she pitilessly dos they with she tract and she medicine , she dismiss , she install Rodgers , and soon stripp of even the semblance of authority . the poor soul grow so timid that she actually leave off bully Briggs any more , and cling to she niece , more fond and terrify every day . peace to thee , kind and selfish , vain and generous old heathan !-- we shall see thee no more . let we hope that support she kindly , and lead she with gentle hand out of the busy struggle of . and mother the news of the great fight of and reach at the same time . the first publish the result of the two battle ; at which glorious intelligence all thrill with triumph and fear . Particular then follow ; and after the announcement of the victory come the list of the wounded and the slain . who can tell the dread with which that catalogue be open and read ! fancy , at every village and homestead almost through the three kingdom , the great news come of the battle in Flanders , and the feeling of exultation and gratitude , bereavement and sickening dismay , when the list of the regimental loss be go through , and it become know whether the dear friend and relative have escape or fall . anybody who will take the trouble of look back to a file of the newspaper of the time , must , even now , feel at second - hand this breathless pause of expectation . the list of casualty be carry on from day to day : you stop in the midst as in a story which be to be continue in we next . think what the feeling must have be as those papers follow each other fresh from the press ; and if such a interest could be feel in we country , and about a battle where but twenty thousand of we people be engage , think of the condition of for twenty year before , where people be fight , not by thousand , but by million ; each one of whom as he strike he enemy woun horribly some other innocent heart far away . the news which that famous Gazette bring to the
the give a dreadful shock to the family and its chief . the girl indulge unrestrained in they grief . the gloom - stricken old father be still more borne down by he fate and sorrow . he strove to think that a judgment be on the boy for he disobedience . he da not own that the severity of the sentence frightene he , and that its fulfilment have come too soon upon he curse . sometimes a shuddering terror struck he , as if he have be the author of the doom which he have call down on he son . there be a chance before of reconciliation . the boy 's wife might have die ; or he might have come back and say , I have sinn . but there be no hope now . he stand on the other side of the gulf impassable , haunt he parent with sad eye . he remembe they once before so in a fever , when every one think the lad be die , and he lay on he bed speechless , and gaze with a dreadful gloom . ! how the father cling to the doctor then , and with what a sickening anxiety he follow he : what a weight of grief be off he mind when , after the crisis of the fever , the lad recover , and look at he father once more with eye that recognise he . but now there be no help or cure , or chance of reconcilement : above all , there be no humble word to soothe vanity outraged and furious , or bring to its natural flow the poisoned , angry blood . and it be hard to say which pang it be that tore the proud father 's heart most keenly -- that he son should have go out of the reach of he forgiveness , or that the apology which he own pride expect should have escape he . whatever he sensation might have be , however , the stem old man would have no confident . he never mention he son 's name to he daughter ; but order the elder to place all the female of the establishment in mourning ; and desire that the male servants should be similarly attire in deep black . all party and entertainment , of course , be to be put off . no communications be make to he future son - in - law , whose marriage - day have be fix : but there be enough in 's appearance to prevent from make any inquiry , or in any way presse forward that ceremony . he and the lady whisper about it under they voice in the drawing - room sometimes , whither the father never come . he remain constantly in he own study ; the whole front part of the house be close until some time after the completion of the general mourning . about three week after the 18th of , 's acquaintance , , call at 's house in , with a very pale and agitate face , and insist upon see that gentleman . Usher into he room , and after a few word , which neither the speaker nor the host understood , the former produce from a inclosure a letter seal with a large red seal . " my son , major , " the say , with some hesitation , " despatch I a letter by a officer of the -- th , who arrive in town to - day . my son 's letter contain one for you , . " the place the letter on the table , and star at he for a moment or two in silence . he look frighten the ambassador , who after look guiltily for a little time at the grief - stricken man , hurrie away without another word . the letter be in 's well - know bold handwriting . it be that one which he have write before daybreak on the 16th of , and just before he take leave of . the great red seal be emblazon with the sham coat of arm which Osborne have assume from the Peerage , with " Pax in bello " for a motto ; that of the ducal house with which the vain old man try to fancy himself connect . the hand that sign it would never hold pen or sword more . the very seal that seal it have be rob from 's dead body as it lay on the field of battle . the father know nothing of this , but sit and look at the letter in terrified vacancy . he almost fall when he go to open it . have you ever have a difference with a dear friend ? how he letter , write in the period of love and confidence , sicken and rebuke you ! what a dreary mourn it be to dwell upon those vehement protest of dead affection ! what lie epitaph they make over the corpse of love ! what dark , cruel comment upon Life and Vanities ! most of we have get or write drawer full of they . they be closet - skeleton which we keep and shun . tremble long before the letter from he dead son . the poor boy 's letter do not say much . he have be too proud to acknowledge the tenderness which he heart feel . he only say , that on the eve of a great battle , he wish to bid he father farewell , and solemnly to implore he good office for the wife -- it might be for the child -- whom he leave behind he . he own with contrition that he irregularity and he extravagance have already waste a large part of he mother 's little fortune . he thank he
he father for he former generous conduct ; and he promise he that if he fall on the field or survive it , he would act in a manner worthy of the name of . he English habit , pride , awkwardness perhaps , have prevent he from say more . he father could not see the kiss have place on the superscription of he letter . drop it with the bitterest , deadliest pang of balked affection and revenge . he son be still beloved and unforgiven . about two month afterwards , however , as the young lady of the family go to church with they father , they remark how he take a different seat from that which he usually occupy when he choose to attend divine worship ; and that from he cushion opposite , he look up at the wall over they head . this cause the young woman likewise to gaze in the direction towards which they father 's gloomy eye point : and they see a elaborate monument upon the wall , where be represent weepe over a urn , and a broken sword and a couchant lion indicate that the piece of sculpture have be erect in honour of a decease warrior . the sculptor of those day have stock of such funereal emblem in hand ; as you may see still on the wall of 's , which be cover with hundred of these braggart heathan allegory . there be a constant demand for they during the first fifteen year of the present century . under the memorial in question be emblazon the well - know and pompous arm ; and the inscription say , that the monument be " Sac to the memory of , , , late a captain in he Majesty 's -- th regiment of foot , who fall on the 18th of , 1815 , a 28 year , while fight for he king and country in the glorious victory of . et decorum est pro patria mori . " the sight of that stone agitate the nerve of the sister so much , that be compelle to leave the church . the congregation make way respectfully for those sobbing girl clothed in deep black , and pitie the stern old father seate opposite the memorial of the dead soldier . " will he forgive ? " the girl say to themselves as soon as they ebullition of grief be over . much conversation pass too among the acquaintance of the family , who know of the rupture between the son and father cause by the former 's marriage , as to the chance of a reconciliation with the young widow . there be bet among the gentleman both about and in the City . if the sister have any anxiety regard the possible recognition of as a daughter of the family , it be increase presently , and towards the end of the autumn , by they father 's announcement that he be go abroad . he do not say whither , but they know at once that he step would be turn towards , and be aware that 's widow be still in . they have pretty accurate news indeed of poor from and she daughter . we honest have be promote in consequence of the death of the second major of the regiment on the field ; and the brave , who have distinguished himself greatly here as upon all occasion where he have a chance to show he coolness and valour , be a Colonel and companion of the Bath . very many of the brave -- th , who have suffer severely upon both day of action , be still at in the autumn , recovere of they wound . the city be a vast military hospital for month after the great battle ; and as man and officer begin to rally from they hurt , the garden and place of public resort swarm with maim warrior , old and young , who , just rescue out of death , fall to gambl , and gaiety , and love - make , as people of will do . find out some of the -- th easily . he know they uniform quite well , and have be use to follow all the promotions and exchange in the regiment , and love to talk about it and its officer as if he have be one of the number . on the day after he arrival at , and as he issue from he hotel , which face the park , he see a soldier in the well - know facing , repose on a stone bench in the garden , and go and sate down trembl by the wounded convalescent man . " be you in 's company ? " he say , and add , after a pause , " he be my son , sir . " the man be not of the 's company , but he lift up he unwounded arm and touch - he cap sadly and respectfully to the haggard break - spirite gentleman who question he . " the whole army do not contain a finer or a better officer , " the soldier say . " the of the 's company ( have it now ) , be in town , though , and be just well of a shot in the shoulder . he honou might see he if he like , who could tell he anything he want to know about -- about the -- th 's action . but he honour have see Major Dobbin , no doubt , the brave 's great friend ; and , who be here too , and have be very bad , he hear everybody say . they say she be out of she mind like for six week or more . but you honour know
know all about that -- and ask you pardon " -- the man add . put a guinea into the soldier 's hand , and tell he he should have another if he would bring the to the ; a promise which very soon bring the desire officer to 's presence . and the first soldier go away ; and after tell a comrade or two how 's father be arrive , and what a free - hand generous gentleman he be , they go and make good cheer with drink and feasting , as long as the guinea last which have come from the proud purse of the mourning old father . in the 's company , who be also just convalescent , Osborne make the journey of and , a journey which thousand of he countryman be then take . he take the sergeant with he in he carriage , and go through both field under he guidance . he see the point of the road where the regiment march into action on the 16th , and the slope down which they drive the french cavalry who be press on the retreat . there be the spot where the noble cut down the french officer who be grapple with the young Ensign for the colour , the colour- have be shoot down . along this road they retreat on the next day , and here be the bank at which the regiment bivouack under the rain of the night of the seventeenth . further on be the position which they take and hold during the day , form time after time to receive the charge of the enemy 's horseman and lie down under the shelter of the bank from the furious french cannonade . and it be at this declivity when at evening the whole line receive the order to advance , as the enemy fall back after he last charge , that the captain , hurray and rush down the hill waive he sword , receive a shot and fall dead . " it be major who take back the 's body to , " the say , in a low voice , " and have he bury , as you honour know . " the peasant and relic - hunter about the place be scream round the pair , as the soldier tell he story , offer for sale all sort of mementoe of the fight , cross , and epaulet , and shatte cuirass , and eagle . give a sumptuous reward to the sergeant when he part with he , after have visit the scene of he son 's last exploit . he burial - place he have already see . indeed , he have drive thither immediately after he arrival at Brussels . 's body lay in the pretty burial - ground of , near the city ; in which place , have once visit it on a party of pleasure , he have lightly express a wish to have he grave make . and there the young officer be lay by he friend , in the unconsecrated corner of the garden , separate by a little hedge from the temples and towers and plantation of flower and shrub , under which the dead repose . it seem a humiliation to old to think that he son , a english gentleman , a captain in the famious british army , should not be find worthy to lie in ground where mere foreigner be bury . which of we be there can tell how much vanity lurk in we warmest regard for other , and how selfish we love be ? do not speculate much upon the mingled nature of he feeling , and how he instinct and selfishness be combat together . he firmly believe that everything he do be right , that he ought on all occasion to have he own way -- and like the sting of a wasp or serpent he hatre rush out armed and poisonous against anything like opposition . he be proud of he hatre as of everything else . always to be right , always to trample forward , and never to doubt , be not these the great quality with which dullness take the lead in the world ? as after the drive to , 's carriage be near the gate of the city at sunset , they meet another open barouche , in which be a couple of lady and a gentleman , and by the side of which a officer be ride . give a start back , and the , seat with he , cast a look of surprise at he neighbour , as he touch he cap to the officer , who mechanically return he salute . it be , with the lame young by she side , and opposite to she she faithful friend . it be , but how change from the fresh and comely girl know . she face be white and thin . she pretty brown hair be part under a widow 's cap -- the poor child . she eye be fix , and look nowhere . they star blank in the face of , as the carriage cross each other , but she do not know he ; nor do he recognise she , until look up , he see ride by she : and then he know who it be . he hat she . he do not know how much until he see she there . when she carriage have pass on , he turn and star at the , with a curse and defiance in he eye cast at he companion , who could not help look at he -- as much as to say " how dare you look at I ? you ! I do hate she . it be she who have tumble my hope and all my pride
pride down . " " tell the scoundrel to drive on quick , " he shoute with a oath , to the lackey on the box . a minute afterwards , a horse come clattering over the pavement behind 's carriage , and ride up . he thought have be elsewhere as the carriage pass each other , and it be not until he have ride some pace forward , that he remember it be who have just pass he . then he turn to examine if the sight of she father - in - law have make any impression on , but the poor girl do not know who have pass . then , who daily use to accompany she in he drive , take out he watch , make some excuse about a engagement which he suddenly recollect , and so ride off . she do not remark that either : but sate look before she , over the homely landscape towards the wood in the distance , by which march away . " , ! " cry , as he ride up and hold out he hand . Osborne make no motion to take it , but shoute out once more and with another curse to he servant to drive on . lay he hand on the carriage side . " I will see you , sir , " he say . " I have a message for you . " " from that woman ? " say , fiercely . " no , " reply the other , " from you son " ; at which fall back into the corner of he carriage , and allow it to pass on , rode close behind it , and so through the town until they reach 's hotel , and without a word . there he follow up to he apartment . have often be in the room ; they be the lodging which the Crawley have occupy during they stay in . " pray , have you any command for I , , or , I beg you pardon , I should say , since better man than you be dead , and you step into they shoe ? " say , in that sarcastic tone which he sometimes be pleased to assume . " better man be dead , " reply . " I want to speak to you about one . " " make it short , sir , " say the other with a oath , scowl at he visitor . " I be here as he closest friend , " the major resume , " and the executor of he will . he make it before he go into action . be you aware how small he mean are , and of the straiten circumstance of he widow ? " " I do not know he widow , sir , " Osborne say . " let she go back to she father . " but the gentleman whom he address be determined to remain in good temper , and go on without heed the interruption . " do you know , sir , 's condition ? she life and she reason almost have be shake by the blow which have fall on she . it be very doubtful whether she will rally . there be a chance leave for she , however , and it be about this I come to speak to you . she will be a mother soon . will you visit the parent 's offence upon the child 's head ? or will you forgive the child for poor 's sake ? " Osborne break out into a rhapsody of self - praise and imprecation ; -- by the first , excuse himself to he own conscience for he conduct ; by the second , exaggerat the undutifulness of . no father in all could have behave more generously to a son , who have rebel against he wickedly . he have die without even so much as confess he be wrong . let he take the consequence of he undutifulness and folly . as for himself , , he be a man of he word . he have swear never to speak to that woman , or to recognize she as he son 's wife . " and that be what you may tell she , " he conclude with a oath ; " and that be what I will stick to to the last day of my life . " there be no hope from that quarter then . the widow must live on she slender pittance , or on such aid as could give she . " I might tell she , and she would not heed it , " think , sadly : for the poor girl 's thought be not here at all since she catastrophe , and , stupefy under the pressure of she sorrow , good and evil be alike indifferent to she . so , indeed , be even friendship and kindness . she receive they both uncomplainingly , and have accept they , relapse into she grief . suppose some twelve month after the above conversation take place to have pass in the life of we poor . she have spend the first portion of that time in a sorrow so profound and pitiable , that we who have be watch and describe some of the emotion of that weak and tender heart , must draw back in the presence of the cruel grief under which it be bleed . Tread silently round the hapless couch of the poor prostrate soul . shut gently the door of the dark chamber wherein she suffer , as those kind people do who nurse she through the first month of she pain , and never leave she until heaven have send she consolation . a day come -- of almost terrified delight and
and wonder -- when the poor widowed girl press a child upon she breast -- a child , with the eyes of who be go -- a little boy , as beautiful as a cherub . what a miracle it be to hear its first cry ! how she laugh and weep over it -- how love , and hope , and prayer woke again in she bosom as the baby nestle there . she be safe . the doctor who attend she , and have fear for she life or for she brain , have wait anxiously for this crisis before they could pronounce that either be secure . it be worth the long month of doubt and dread which the person who have constantly be with she have pass , to see she eye once more beam tenderly upon they . we friend be one of they . it be he who bring she back to and to she mother 's house ; when . , receive a peremptory summon from she , have be force to quit she patient . to see hold the infant , and to hear 's laugh of triumph as she watch he , would have do any man good who have a sense of humour . be the godfather of the child , and exert he ingenuity in the purchase of cup , spoon , pap - boat , and coral for this little . how he mother nurse he , and dress he , and live upon he ; how she drive away all nurse , and would scarce allow any hand but she own to touch he ; how she consider that the greatest favour she could confer upon he godfather , major Dobbin , be to allow the major occasionally to dandle he , need not be tell here . this child be she being . she existence be a maternal caress . she envelo the feeble and unconscious creature with love and worship . it be she life which the baby drank in from she bosom . of night , and when alone , she have stealthy and intense rapture of motherly love , such as 's marvellous care have award to the female instinct -- joy how far higher and lower than reason -- blind beautiful devotion which only woman 's heart know . it be 's task to muse upon these movement of 's , and to watch she heart ; and if he love make he divine almost all the feeling which agitate it , alas ! he could see with a fatal perspicuity that there be no place there for he . and so , gently , he bear he fate , know it , and content to bear it . I suppose 's father and mother see through the intention of the major , and be not ill - dispose to encourage he ; for visit they house daily , and stay for hour with they , or with , or with the honest landlord , , and he family . he bring , on one pretext or another , present to everybody , and almost every day ; and go , with the landlord 's little girl , who be rather a favourite with , by the name of major Sugarplums . it be this little child who commonly act as mistress of the ceremony to introduce he to . she laugh one day when major 's cab drive up to , and he descende from it , bring out a wooden horse , a drum , a trumpet , and other warlike toy , for little , who be scarcely six month old , and for whom the article in question be entirely premature . the child be asleep . " Hush , " say , annoye , perhaps , at the creaking of the major 's boot ; and she hold out she hand ; smile because could not take it until he have ry himself of he cargo of toy . " go downstairs , little , " say he presently to the child , " I want to speak to . " she look up rather astonished , and lay down the infant on its bed . " I be come to say good - bye , , " say he , take she slender little white hand gently . " good - bye ? and where be you go ? " she say , with a smile . " send the letter to the agent , " he say ; " they will forward they ; for you will write to I , will not you ? I shall be away a long time . " " I will write to you about , " she say . " , how good you have be to he and to I . look at he . be not he like a angel ? " the little pink hand of the child close mechanically round the honest soldier 's finger , and look up in he face with bright maternal pleasure . the cruellest look could not have wound he more than that glance of hopeless kindness . he bend over the child and mother . he could not speak for a moment . and it be only with all he strength that he could force himself to say a bless you . " bless you , " say , and hold up she face and kiss he . " Hush ! do not wake ! " she add , as go to the door with heavy step . she do not hear the noise of he cab - wheel as he drive away : she be look at the child , who be laugh in he sleep . how to on nothing a I suppose there be no man in this Vanity fair of ours so little observant as
as not to think sometimes about the worldly affair of he acquaintance , or so extremely charitable as not to wonder how he neighbour , or he neighbour , can make both end meet at the end of the year . with the utmost regard for the family , for instance ( for I dine with they twice or thrice in the season ) , I can not but own that the appearance of the in the park , in the large barouche with the grenadier- footman , will surprise and mystify I to my dying day : for though I know the equipage be only job , and all the people be on board wage , yet those three man and the carriage must represent a expense of six hundred a year at the very least -- and then there be the splendid dinner , the two boy at , the prize governess and master for the girl , the trip abroad , or to or , in the autumn , the annual ball with a supper from 's ( who , by the way , supply most of the first - rate dinner which give , as I know very well , have be invite to one of they to fill a vacant place , when I see at once that these repast be very superior to the common run of entertainment for which the humbler sort of 's acquaintance get card ) -- who , I say , with the most good - natured feeling in the world , can help wonder how the make out matter ? what be ? we all know -- commissioner of the and , with 1200 pound a year for a salary . have he wife a private fortune ? Flint -- one of eleven child of a small squire in . all she ever get from she family be a turkey at , in exchange for which she have to board two or three of she sister in the off season , and lodge and feed she brothers when they come to town . how do balance he income ? I say , as every friend of he must say , how be it that he have not be outlaw long since , and that he ever come back ( as he do to the surprise of everybody ) last year from ? " I " be here introduce to personify the world in general -- the Mrs . Grundy of each respect reader 's private circle -- every one of whom can point to some family of he acquaintance who live nobody know how . many a glass of wine have we all of we drunk , I have very little doubt , hob - and - nobb with the hospitable giver and wonder how the deuce he pay for it . some three or four year after he stay in , when and he wife be establish in a very small comfortable house in , , there be scarcely one of the numerous friend whom they entertaine at dinner that do not ask the above question regard they . the novelist , it have be say before , know everything , and as I be in a situation to be able to tell the public how and he wife live without any income , may I entreat the public newspapers which be in the habit of extracting portion of the various periodical work now publish not to reprint the follow exact narrative and calculation -- of which i ought , as the discoverer ( and at some expense , too ) , to have the benefit ? my son , I would say , be I bless with a child -- you may by deep inquiry and constant intercourse with he learn how a man life comfortably on nothing a year . but it be best not to be intimate with gentleman of this profession and to take the calculation at second hand , as you do logarithm , for to work they yourself , depend upon it , will cost you something considerable . on nothing per annum then , and during a course of some two or three year , of which we can afford to give but a very brief history , and he wife liv very happily and comfortably at . it be in this period that he quit the Guard and sell out of the army . when we find he again , he mustachio and the title of on he card be the only relic of he military profession . it have be mention that , soon after she arrival in , take a very smart and lead position in the society of that capital , and be welcome at some of the most distinguished house of the restore French nobility . the english man of fashion in court she , too , to the disgust of the ladie they wife , who could not bear the parvenue . for some months the salon of the , in which she place be secure , and the splendour of the new , where she be receive with much distinction , delighted and perhaps a little intoxicated . , who may have be dispose during this period of elation to slight the people -- honest young military man mostly -- who form she husband 's chief society . but the yawn sadly among the Duchess and great lady of the court . the old woman who play ecarte make such a noise about a five - franc piece that it be not worth 's while to sit down at a card - table . the wit of they conversation he could not appreciate , be ignorant of they language . and what good could he wife get , he urge , by make curtsy every night to a whole circle of Princess ? he leave
leave presently to frequent these party alone , resum he own simple pursuits and amusement amongst the amiable friend of he own choice . the truth be , when we say of a gentleman that he live elegantly on nothing a year , we use the word " nothing " to signify something unknown ; mean , simply , that we do not know how the gentleman in question defray the expense of he establishment . now , we friend the have a great aptitude for all game of chance : and exercise himself , as he continually do , with the card , the dice - box , or the cue , it be natural to suppose that he attaine a much greater skill in the use of these article than man can possess who only occasionally handle they . to use a cue at billiards well be like use a pencil , or a german flute , or a small - sword -- you can not master any one of these implement at first , and it be only by repeat study and perseverance , join to a natural taste , that a man can excel in the handling of either . now , from be only a brilliant amateur , have grow to be a consummate master of billiards . like a great General , he genius use to rise with the danger , and when the luck have be unfavourable to he for a whole game , and the bet be consequently against he , he would , with consummate skill and boldness , make some prodigious hit which would restore the battle , and come in a victor at the end , to the astonishment of everybody -- of everybody , that be , who be a stranger to he play . those who be accustom to see it be cautious how they stak they money against a man of such sudden resource and brilliant and overpowering skill . at game of card he be equally skilful ; for though he would constantly lose money at the commencement of a evening , play so carelessly and make such blunder , that newcomer be often inclin to think meanly of he talent ; yet when rouse to action and awaken to caution by repeat small loss , it be remark that 's play become quite different , and that he be pretty sure of beat he enemy thoroughly before the night be over . indeed , very few man could say that they ever have the better of he . he success be so repeat that no wonder the envious and the vanquish spoke sometimes with bitterness regard they . and as the french say of the of , who never suffer a defeat , that only a astonishing series of lucky accident enable he to be a invariable winner ; yet even they allow that he cheat at , and be enable to win the last great trick : so it be hint at headquarters in that some foul play must have take place in order to account for the continuous success of . though 's and the salon be open at that time in , the mania for play be so widely spread that the public gambling - room do not suffice for the general ardour , and gambling go on in private house as much as if there have be no public means for gratify the passion . at 's charme little reunion of a evening this fatal amusement commonly be practise -- much to good - nature little 's annoyance . she speak about she husband 's passion for dice with the deepest grief ; she bewail it to everybody who come to she house . she besotch the young fellow never , never to touch a box ; and when young Green , of the rifle , lose a very considerable sum of money , pass a whole night in tear , as the servant tell the unfortunate young gentleman , and actually go on she knee to she husband to beseech he to remit the debt , and burn the acknowledgement . how could he ? he have lose just as much himself to Blackstone of the Hussar , and of the . green might have any decent time ; but pay ? -- of course he must pay ; to talk of burn 's be child 's play . other officer , chiefly young -- for the young fellow gather round -- come from she party with long face , have drop more or less money at she fatal card - table . she house begin to have a unfortunate reputation . the old hand warn the less experienced of they danger . , of the -- th regiment , one of those occupy in , warn of that corps . a loud and violent fraca take place between the infantry Colonel and he lady , who be dine at the , and and ; who be also take they meal there . the lady engage on both side . snap she finger in 's face and call she husband " no betther than a black - leg . " challenge , . the - in - hearing of the dispute send for , who be get ready the same pistol " which he shoot , " and have such a conversation with he that no duel take place . if have not go on she knee to , would have be send back to ; and he do not play , except with civilian , for some week after . but , in spite of 's undoubted skill and constant success , it become evident to , consider these thing , that they position be but a precarious one , and that , even although they pay scarcely anybody , they little capital would end one day by dwindling
dwindling into zero . " gambl , " she would say , " dear , be good to help you income , but not as a income itself . some day people may be tired of play , and then where be we ? " acquiesce in the justice of she opinion ; and in truth he have remark that after a few night of he little supper , & c. , gentleman be tired of play with he , and , in spite of 's charms , do not present themselves very eagerly . easy and pleasant as they life at , it be after all only a idle dalliance and amiable trifl ; and see that she must push 's fortune in they own country . she must get he a place or appointment at home or in the colony , and she determined to make a move upon as soon as the way could be clear for she . as a first step she have make sell out of the Guard and go on half - pay . he function as aide - de -camp to have cease previously . laugh in all company at that officer , at he toupee ( which he mount on come to ) , at he waistband , at he false tooth , at he pretension to be a lady - killer above all , and he absurd vanity in fancie every woman whom he come near be in love with he . it be to , the beetle - browed wife of , to whom the general transfer he attention now -- he bouquet , he dinner at the restaurateur ' , he opera - box , and he knick - knack . poor be no more happy than before , and have still to pass long evenings alone with she daughter , know that she be go off scent and curl to stand behind 's chair at the play . have a dozen admirer in he place , to be sure , and could cut she rival to piece with she wit . but , as we have say , she be grow tired of this idle social life : opera - box and restaurateur dinner pal upon she : nosegay could not be lay by as a provision for future year : and she could not live upon knick - knack , lace handkerchief , and kid glove . she feel the frivolity of pleasure and longe for more substantial benefit . at this juncture news arrive which be spread among the many creditor of the at , and which cause they great satisfaction . , the rich aunt from whom he expect he immense inheritance , be die ; the Colonel must haste to she bedside . and she child would remain behind until he come to reclaim they . he depart for , and have reach that place in safety , it might have be suppose that he go to ; but instead he take the diligence to , and thence travel to , for which place he have a former predilection . the fact be , he owed more money at than at ; and he prefer the quiet little belgian city to either of the more noisy capital . she aunt be dead . order the most intense mourning for herself and little . the be busy arrange the affair of the inheritance . they could take the premier now , instead of the little entresol of the hotel which they occupi . and the landlord have a consultation about the new hanging , a amicable wrangle about the carpet , and a final adjustment of everything except the bill . she go off in one of he carriage ; she french bonne with she ; the child by she side ; the admirable landlord and landlady smile farewell to she from the gate . be furious when he hear she be go , and . furious with he for be furious ; be cut to the heart ; and the landlord get ready he best apartment previous to the return of the fascinating little woman and she husband . he _serred_ the trunk which she leave in he charge with the greatest care . they have be especially recommend to he by . they be not , however , find to be particularly valuable when open some time after . but before she go to join she husband in the capital , . make a expedition into , leave behind she she little son upon the continent , under the care of she french maid . the parting between and the little do not cause either party much pain . she have not , to say truth , see much of the young gentleman since he birth . after the amiable fashion of french mother , she have place he out at nurse in a village in the neighbourhood of , where little pass the first month of he life , not unhappily , with a numerous family of foster - brother in wooden shoe . he father would ride over many a time to see he here , and the elder 's paternal heart glow to see he rosy and dirty , shout lustily , and happy in the making of mud -py under the superintendence of the gardener 's wife , he nurse . do not care much to go and see the son and heir . once he spoilead a new dove - colou pelisse of hers . he prefer he nurse 's caress to he mamma 's , and when finally he quit that jolly nurse and almost parent , he cry loudly for hour . he be only consol by he mother 's promise that he should return to he nurse the next day ; indeed the nurse herself , who probably would have be pain at the parting
parting too , be tell that the child would immediately be restore to she , and for some time await quite anxiously he return . in fact , we friend may be say to have be among the first of that brood of hardy English adventurer who have subsequently invade the continent and swindle in all the capital of . the respect in those happy day of 1817 - 18 be very great for the wealth and honour of Britons . they have not then learn , as I be tell , to haggle for bargain with the pertinacity which now distinguish they . the great city of have not be as yet open to the enterprise of we rascal . and whereas there be now hardly a town of or in which you shall not see some noble countryman of we own , with that happy swagger and insolence of demeanour which we carry everywhere , swindl inn - landlord , pass fictitious cheque upon credulous banker , rob coach - maker of they carriage , goldsmith of they trinket , easy traveller of they money at card , even public library of they book -- thirty year ago you need but to be a , travel in a private carriage , and credit be at you hand wherever you choose to seek it , and gentleman , instead of cheating , be cheat . it be not for some week after the 's departure that the landlord of the hotel which they occupy during they residence at find out the loss which he have sustain : not until , the milliner , make repeat visit with she little bill for article supply to ; not until from in the have ask half a dozen time whether cette charmante who have buy watch and bracelet of he be retour . it be a fact that even the poor gardener 's wife , who have nurse madame 's child , be never pay after the first six month for that supply of the milk of human kindness with which she have furnish the lusty and healthy little . no , not even the nurse be pay -- the be in too great a hurry to remember they trifling debt to she . as for the landlord of the hotel , he curse against the nation be violent for the rest of he natural life . he ask all traveller whether they know a certain -- avec sa femme une petite dame , tr spirituelle . " ah , ! " he would add -- " il m'o not affreusement vole . " it be melancholy to hear he accent as he speak of that catastrophe . 's object in she journey to be to effect a kind of compromise with she husband 's numerous creditor , and by offer they a dividend of ninepence or a shilling in the pound , to secure a return for he into he own country . it do not become we to trace the step which she take in the conduct of this most difficult negotiation ; but , have show they to they satisfaction that the sum which she be empower to offer be all she husband 's available capital , and have convince they that would prefer a perpetual retirement on the continent to a residence in this country with he debt unsettled ; have prove to they that there be no possibility of money accrue to he from other quarter , and no earthly chance of they get a larger dividend than that which she be empower to offer , she bring the 's creditor unanimously to accept she proposal , and purchase with fifteen hundred pound of ready money more than ten time that amount of debt . employ no lawyer in the transaction . the matter be so simple , to have or to leave , as she justly observe , that she make the lawyer of the creditor themselves do the business . and represent , of , and act for of ( chief creditor of the 's ) , compliment he lady upon the brilliant way in which she do business , and declare that there be no professional man who could beat she . receive they congratulation with perfect modesty ; order a bottle of sherry and a bread cake to the little dingy lodging where she dwelt , while conduct the business , to treat the enemy 's lawyer : shook hand with they at parting , in excellent good humour , and return straightway to the , to rejoin she husband and son and acquaint the former with the glad news of he entire liberation . as for the latter , he have be considerably neglect during he mother 's absence by , she french maid ; for that young woman , contract a attachment for a soldier in the garrison of , forget she charge in the society of this militaire , and little very narrowly escape drown on sand at this period , where the absent have leave and lose he . and so , and come to : and it be at they house in , , that they really show the skill which must be possess by those who would live on the resource above name . the in the first place , and as a matter of the greatest necessity , we be bound to describe how a house may be get for nothing a year . these mansion be to be have either unfurnished , where , if you have credit with Messrs . Gillows or Bantings , you can get they splendidly montee and decorate entirely accord to you own fancy ; or they be to be let furnish , a less troublesome and complicated arrangement to most party . it be so that and he wife prefer to hire they house . before come to preside over
over 's house and cellar in , that lady have have for a butler a , who be bear on the family estate of 's , and indeed be a younger son of a gardener there . by good conduct , a handsome person and calve , and a grave demeanour , rise from the knife - board to the footboard of the carriage ; from the footboard to the butler 's pantry . when he have be a certain number of year at the head of 's establishment , where he have have good wage , fat perquisite , and plenty of opportunity of saving , he announce that he be about to contract a matrimonial alliance with a late cook of 's , who have subsist in a honourable manner by the exercise of a mangle , and the keeping of a small greengrocer 's shop in the neighbourhood . the truth be , that the ceremony have be clandestinely perform some year back ; although the news of 's marriage be first bring to by a little boy and girl of seven and eight year of age , whose continual presence in the kitchen have attract the attention of . then retir and personally undertake the superintendence of the small shop and the greens . he add milk and cream , egg and country - feed pork to he store , contente himself whilst other retired butler be vend spirit in public house , by deal in the simplest country produce . and have a good connection amongst the butler in the neighbourhood , and a snug back parlour where he and . Raggles receive they , he milk , cream , and egg get to be adopt by many of the fraternity , and he profit increase every year . year after year he quietly and modestly amass money , and when at length that snug and complete bachelor 's residence at no. 201 , , , lately the residence of the , go abroad , with its rich and appropriate furniture by the first maker , be bring to the hammer , who should go in and purchase the lease and furniture of the house but Charles Raggles ? a part of the money he borrow , it be true , and at rather a high interest , from a brother butler , but the chief part he pay down , and it be with no small pride that . Raggles find herself sleep in a bed of carve mahogany , with silk curtain , with a prodigious cheval glass opposite to she , and a wardrobe which would contain she , and Raggles , and all the family . of course , they do not intend to occupy permanently a apartment so splendid . it be in order to let the house again that Raggles purchase it . as soon as a tenant be find , he subsid into the greengrocer 's shop once more ; but a happy thing it be for he to walk out of that tenement and into , and there survey he house -- he own house -- with geranium in the window and a carve bronze knocker . the footman occasionally lounge at the area railing , treat he with respect ; the cook take she green stuff at he house and call he , and there be not one th the tenant do , or one dish which they have for dinner , that Raggles might not know of , if he like . he be a good man ; good and happy . the house bring he in so handsome a yearly income that he be determined to send he child to good school , and accordingly , regardless of expense , Charles be send to board at 's , - , and little to 's , , . Raggles love and adore the family as the author of all he prosperity in life . he have a silhouette of he mistress in he back shop , and a drawing of the 's at 's , do by that spinster herself in ink -- and the only addition he make to the decoration of the be a print of 's in , the seat of , , who be represent in a gild car draw by six white horse , and pass by a lake cover with swan , and barge contain lady in hoops , and musician with flag and penwig . indeed think there be no such palace in all the world , and no such august family . as luck would have it , Raggles ' house in be to let when and he wife return to . the know it and its owner quite well ; the latter 's connection with the family have be keep up constantly , for Raggles help whenever receive friend . and the old man not only let he house to the Colonel but officiate as he butler whenever he have company ; Mrs . Raggles operating in the kitchen below and send up dinner of which old herself might have approve . this be the way , then , get he house for nothing ; for though Raggles have to pay tax and rate , and the interest of the mortgage to the brother butler ; and the insurance of he life ; and the charge for he child at school ; and the value of the meat and drink which he own family -- and for a time that of too --consumed ; and though the poor wretch be utterly ruin by the transaction , he child be fling on the street , and himself drive into the : yet somebody must pay even for gentleman who live for nothing a year -- and so it be this unlucky Raggles be make the representative of 's defective capital . I wonder how many family be drive
drive to roguery and to ruin by great practitioner in Crawlers way ?--how many great nobleman rob they petty tradesman , condescmend to swindle they poor retainer out of wretch little sum and cheat for a few shilling ? when we read that a noble nobleman have leave for the continent , or that another noble nobleman have a execution in he house -- and that one or other owe six or seven million , the defeat seem glorious even , and we respect the victim in the vastness of he ruin . but who pity a poor barber who can not get he money for powder the footman 's head ; or a poor carpenter who have ruin himself by fix up ornament and pavilion for my lady 's dejeuner ; or the poor devil of a tailor whom the steward patronize , and who have pledge all he be worth , and more , to get the livery ready , which my lord have do he the honour to bespeak ? when the great house tumble down , these miserable wretch fall under it unnoticed : as they say in the old legend , before a man go to the devil himself , he send plenty of other soul thither . and he wife generously give they patronage to all such of 's tradesman and purveyor as choose to serve they . some be willing enough , especially the poor one . it be wonderful to see the pertinacity with which the washerwoman from bring the cart every , and she bill week after week . Raggles himself have to supply the greengrocery . the bill for servant 's porter at the of public house be a curiosity in the chronicle of beer . every servant also be owe the greater part of he wage , and thus keep up perforce a interest in the house . nobody in fact be pay . not the blacksmith who open the lock ; nor the glazier who mende the pane ; nor the jobber who let the carriage ; nor the groom who drive it ; nor the butcher who provide the leg of mutton ; nor the coal which roast it ; nor the cook who bast it ; nor the servants who eat it : and this I be give to understand be not unfrequently the way in which people live elegantly on nothing a year . in a little town such thing can not be do without remark . we know there the quantity of milk we neighbou take and espy the joint or the fowl which be go in for he dinner . so , probably , 200 and 202 in might know what be go on in the house between they , the servants communicate through the area -railing ; but and he wife and he friend do not know 200 and 202 . when you come to 201 there be a hearty welcome , a kind smile , a good dinner , and a jolly shake of the hand from the host and hostess there , just for all the world as if they have be undispu master of three or four thousand a year -- and so they be , not in money , but in produce and labour -- if they do not pay for the mutton , they have it : if they do not give bullion in exchange for they wine , how should we know ? never be better claret at any man 's table than at honest 's ; dinner more gay and neatly serve . he draw - room be the prettiest , little , modest salon conceivable : they be decorate with the greatest taste , and a thousand knick - knack from , by : and when she sit at she piano trilling song with a lightsome heart , the stranger vote himself in a little paradise of domestic comfort and agree that , if the husband be rather stupid , the wife be charme , and the dinner the pleasantest in the world . 's wit , cleverness , and flippancy make she speedily the vogue in among a certain class . you see demure chariot at she door , out of which step very great people . you beheld she carriage in the park , surround by dandy of note . the little box in the third tier of the opera be crowd with head constantly change ; but it must be confess that the lady hold aloon from she , and that they door be shut to we little adventurer . with regard to the world of female fashion and its custom , the present writer of course can only speak at second hand . a man can no more penetrate or under - stand those mystery than he can know what the lady talk about when they go upstairs after dinner . it be only by inquiry and perseverance that one sometimes get hints of those secret ; and by a similar diligence every person who tread the pavement and frequent the club of this metropolis know , either through he own experience or through some acquaintance with whom he play at billiards or share the joint , something about the genteel world of , and how , as there be man ( such as , whose position we mention before ) who cut a good figure to the eyes of the ignorant world and to the apprentice in the park , who behold they consort with the most notorious dandy there , so there be lady , who may be call man 's woman , be welcome entirely by all the gentleman and cut or slighte by all they wife . be of this sort ; the lady with the beautiful fair ringlet whom you see every day in , surround by the greatest and most famous dandy of this empire
empire . be another , whose party be announce laboriously in the fashionable newspapers and with whom you see that all sort of ambassador and great nobleman dine ; and many more might be mention have they to do with the history at present in hand . but while simple folk who be out of the world , or country people with a taste for the genteel , behold these lady in they see glory in public place , or envy they from afar off , person who be better instruct could inform they that these envied lady have no more chance of establish themselves in " society , " than the benighted squire 's wife in who read of they doings in the . live about be aware of these awful truths . you hear how pitilessly many lady of see rank and wealth be exclude from this " society . " the frantic effort which they make to enter this circle , the meanness to which they submit , the insult which they undergo , be matter of wonder to those who take human or womankind for a study ; and the pursuit of fashion under difficulty would be a fine theme for any very great person who have the wit , the leisure , and the knowledge of the language necessary for the compiling of such a history . now the few female acquaintance whom . have know abroad not only decline to visit she when she come to this side of the , but cut she severely when they meet in public place . it be curious to see how the great lady forgot she , and no doubt not altogether a pleasant study to . when meet she in the waiting - room at the opera , she gather she daughter about she as if they would be contaminate by a touch of , and retreat a step or two , place herself in front of they , and star at she little enemy . to stare out of countenance require a severer glance than even the frigid old Bareacres could shoot out of she dismal eye . when la , who have ride a score of time by 's side at , meet 's open carriage in , she Ladyship be quite blind , and could not in the least recognize she former friend . even , the banker 's wife , cut she at church . go regularly to church now ; it be edifying to see she enter there with by she side , carry a couple of large gilt prayer - book , and afterwards go through the ceremony with the gravest resignation . Rawdon at first feel very acutely the slights which be pass upon he wife , and be inclin to be gloomy and savage . he talk of call out the husband or brother of every one of the insolent woman who do not pay a proper respect to he wife ; and it be only by the strongest command and entreaty on she part that he be bring into keep a decent behaviour . " you can not shoot I into society , " she say good - naturedly . " remember , my dear , that I be but a governess , and you , you poor silly old man , have the worst reputation for debt , and dice , and all sort of wickedness . we shall get quite as many friend as we want by and by , and in the meanwhile you must be a good boy and obey you schoolmistress in everything she tell you to do . when we hear that you aunt have leave almost everything to and he wife , do you remember what a rage you be in ? you would have tell all , if I have not make you keep you temper , and where would you have be now ?-- in prison at . Pelagie for debt , and not establish in in a handsome house , with every comfort about you -- you be in such a fury you be ready to murder you brother , you wick Cain you , and what good would have come of remain angry ? all the rage in the world will not get we you aunt 's money ; and it be much better that we should be friend with you brother 's family than enemy , as those foolish Bute be . when you father die , 's will be a pleasant house for you and I to pass the winter in . if we be ruin , you can carve and take charge of the stable , and I can be a governess to 's child . ruin ! fiddlede -dee ! I will get you a good place before that ; or and he little boy will die , and we will be and my lady . while there be life , there be hope , my dear , and I intend to make a man of you yet . who sell you horse for you ? who pay you debt for you ? " be oblige to confess that he owe all these benefit to he wife , and to trust himself to she guidance for the future . indeed , when quit the world , and that money for which all she relative have be fight so eagerly be finally leave to , , who find that only five thousand pound have be leave to he instead of the twenty upon which he calculate , be in such a fury at he disappointment that he vent it in savage abuse upon he nephew ; and the quarrel always rank between they end in a utter breach of intercourse . 's conduct , on the other hand , who get but a hundred pound , be such as to astonish he brother and
and delight he sister - in - law , who be dispose to look kindly upon all the member of she husband 's family . he write to he brother a very frank , manly , good - humoured letter from . he be aware , he say , that by he own marriage he have forfeit he aunt 's favour ; and though he do not disguise he disappointment that she should have be so entirely relentless towards he , he be glad that the money be still keep in they branch of the family , and heartily congratulate he brother on he good fortune . he send he affectionate remembrance to he sister , and hope to have she good - will for ; and the letter conclude with a postscript to in the latter lady 's own handwriting . she , too , beg to join in she husband 's congratulation . she should ever remember 's kindness to she in early day when she be a friendless orphan , the instructress of he little sister , in whose welfare she still take the tenderest interest . she wish he every happiness in he married life , and , ask he permission to offer she remembrance to ( of whose goodness all the world inform she ) , she hope that one day she might be allow to present she little boy to he uncle and aunt , and beg to bespeak for he they good - will and protection . receive this communication very graciously -- more graciously than have receive some of 's previous composition in 's handwriting ; and as for , she be so charme with the letter that she expect she husband would instantly divide he aunt 's legacy into two equal portion and send off one - half to he brother at . to she Ladyship 's surprise , however , decline to accommodate he brother with a cheque for thirty thousand pound . but he make a handsome offer of he hand whenever the latter should come to and choose to take it ; and , thank for she good opinion of himself and , he graciously pronounce he willingness to take any opportunity to serve she little boy . thus a almost reconciliation be bring about between the brother . when come to town and he wife be not in . many a time she drive by the old door in to see whether they have take possession of 's house there . but the new family do not make it be appearance ; it be only through Raggles that she hear of they movement -- how 's domestic have be dismiss with decent gratuity , and how have only once make he appearance in , when he stop for a few day at the house , do business with he lawyer there , and sell off all 's french novel to a bookseller out of . have reason of she own which cause she to long for the arrival of she new relation . " when come , " think she , " she shall be my sponsor in society ; and as for the woman ! bah ! the woman will ask I when they find the man want to see I . " a article as necessary to a lady in this position as she brougham or she bouquet be she companion . I have always admire the way in which the tender creature , who can not exist without sympathy , hire a exceedingly plain friend of they own sex from whom they be almost inseparable . the sight of that inevitable woman in she faded gown seat behind she dear friend in the opera - box , or occupy the back seat of the barouche , be always a wholesome and moral one to I , as jolly a reminder as that of the 's - head which figure in the repast of egyptian bon-vivant , a strange sardonic memorial of . what ? even batter , brazen , beautiful , conscienceless , heartless , , whose father die of she shame : even lovely , da , who will ride at any fence which any man in will take , and who drive she grey in the park , while she mother keep a huckster 's stall in still -- even those who be so bold , one might fancy they could face anything dare not face the world without a female friend . they must have somebody to cling to , the affectionate creature ! and you will hardly see they in any public place without a shabby companion in a dyed silk , sit somewhere in the shade close behind they . " , " say , very late one night , as a party of gentleman be seat round she crackling draw - room fire ( for the man come to she house to finish the night ; and she have ice and coffee for they , the best in ) : " I must have a sheep - dog . " " a what ? " say , look up from a ecarte table . " a sheep - dog ! " say young . " my dear , what a fancy ! why not have a Danish dog ? I know of one as big as a camel - leopard , by . it would almost pull you brougham . or a greyhound , eh ? ( I propose , if you please ) ; or a little pug that would go into one of 's snuff - boxe ? there be a man at get one with such a nose that you might -- I mark the king and play -- that you might hang you hat on it . " " I mark the trick , " gravely say . he attend to he game commonly and
and do not much meddle with the conversation , except when it be about horse and bett . " what can you want with a shepherd 's dog ? " the lively little continue . " I mean a moral shepherd 's dog , " say , laugh and look up at . " what the be that ? " say he Lordship . " a dog to keep the wolf off I , " continue . " a companion . " " dear little innocent lamb , you want one , " say the marquis ; and he jaw thrust out , and he begin to grin hideously , he little eye leer towards . the great of be stand by the fire sipp coffee . the fire crack and blaze pleasantly there be a score of candle sparkl round the mantel piece , in all sort of quaint sconce , of gilt and bronze and porcelain . they lighte up 's figure to admiration , as she sit on a sofa cover with a pattern of gaudy flowers . she be in a pink dress that look as fresh as a rose ; she dazzl white arm and shoulders be half - cover with a thin hazy scarf through which they sparkle ; she hair hang in curl round she neck ; one of she little foot pee out from the fresh crisp fold of the silk : the prettiest little foot in the prettiest little sandal in the finest silk stock in the world . the candle lighte up 's shining bald head , which be fringe with red hair . he have thick bushy eyebrow , with little twinkling bloodshot eye , surround by a thousand wrinkle . he jaw be underhung , and when he laugh , two white buck - tooth protrude themselves and glisten savagely in the midst of the grin . he have be dine with personage , and wear he garter and ribbon . a short man be he Lordship , broad - chest and bow - leg , but proud of the fineness of he foot and ankle , and always caresse he garter - knee . " and so the shepherd be not enough , " say he , " to defend he lambkin ? " " the shepherd be too fond of play at card and go to he club , " answer , laugh . " ' , what a debauch ! " say my lord --" what a mouth for a pipe ! " " I take you three to two , " here say , at the card - table . " at , " snarl the noble marquis ; " he be pastorally occupy too : he be shear a Southdown . what a innocent mutton , hey ? , what a snowy fleece ! " 's eye shoot out gleam of scornful humour . " my lord , " she say , " you be a knight of the order . " he have the collar round he neck , indeed -- a gift of the restore prince of . Steyne in early life have be notorious for he daring and he success at play . he have sit up two day and two night with at hazard . he have win money of the most august personage of the realm : he have win he marquisate , it be say , at the gaming - table ; but he do not like a allusion to those bygone fredaine . see the scowl gather over he heavy brow . she rise up from she sofa and go and take he coffee cup out of he hand with a little curtsey . " yes , " she say , " I must get a watchdog . but he will not bark at you . " and , go into the other drawing - room , she sit down to the piano and begin to s little french song in such a charming , thrill voice that the mollified nobleman speedily follow she into that chamber , and might be see nodd he head and bow time over she . and he friend meanwhile play ecarte until they have enough . the win ; but , say that he win ever so much and often , night like these , which occur many time in the week -- he wife have all the talk and all the admiration , and he sit silent without the circle , not comprehend a word of the joke , the allusion , the mystical language within -- must have be rather wearisome to the ex-dragoon . " how be 's husband ? " use to say to he by way of a good day when they meet ; and indeed that be now he avocation in life . he be no more . he be 's husband . about the little , if nothing have be say all this while , it be because he be hide upstairs in a garret somewhere , or have crawl below into the kitchen for companionship . he mother scarcely ever take notice of he . he pass the day with he french bonne as long as that domestic remain in 's family , and when the go away , the little fellow , how in the loneliness of the night , have compassion take on he by a housemaid , who take he out of he solitary nursery into she bed in the garret hard by and comforte he . , my , and one or two more be in the drawing - room take tea after the opera , when this shouting be hear overhead . " it be my cherub cry for he nurse , " she say . she do not offer to move to go and see the child . " do not agitate you feeling by go to
to look for he , " say sardonically . " ! " reply the other , with a sort of blush , " he will cry himself to sleep " ; and they fall to talk about the opera . have steal off though , to look after he son and heir ; and come back to the company when he find that honest be consol the child . the 's dressing - room be in those upper region . he use to see the boy there in private . they have interview together every morning when he shave ; sit on a box by he father 's side and watch the operation with never - cease pleasure . he and the sire be great friend . the father would bring he sweetmeat from the dessert and hide they in a certain old epaulet box , where the child go to seek they , and laugh with joy on discover the treasure ; laugh , but not too loud : for be below asleep and must not be disturb . she do not go to rest till very late and seldom rise till after noon . buy the boy plenty of picture - book and cramm he nursery with toy . it be walls be cover with picture paste up by the father 's own hand and purchase by he for ready money . when he be off duty with in the park , he would sit up here , pass hour with the boy ; who ride on he chest , who pull he great mustachio as if they be drive - rein , and spend day with he in indefatigable gambol . the room be a low room , and once , when the child be not five year old , he father , who be toss he wildly up in he arm , hit the poor little chap 's skull so violently against the ceiling that he almost drop the child , so terrified be he at the disaster . have make up he face for a tremendous howl -- the severity of the blow indeed authorize that indulgence ; but just as he be go to begin , the father interpose . " for 's sake , , do not wake , " he cry . and the child , look in a very hard and piteous way at he father , bit he lip , clench he hand , and do not cry a bit . tell that story at the club , at the mess , to everybody in town . " by , sir , " he explain to the public in general , " what a good pluck one that boy of mine be -- what a trump he be ! I half - send he head through the ceiling , by , and he would not cry for fear of disturb he mother . " sometimes -- once or twice in a week -- that lady visit the upper region in which the child liv . she come like a vivified figure out of the -- blandly smiling in the most beautiful new clothes and little glove and boot . wonderful scarf , lace , and jewel glitter about she . she have always a new bonnet on , and flower bloom perpetually in it , or else magnificent curl ostrich feather , soft and snowy as camellias . she nod twice or thrice patronizingly to the little boy , who look up from he dinner or from the picture of soldier he be pain . when she leave the room , a odour of rose , or some other magical fragrance , linger about the nursery . she be a unearthly be in he eyes , superior to he father -- to all the world : to be worship and admire at a distance . to drive with that lady in the carriage be a awful rite : he sit up in the back seat and do not dare to speak : he gaze with all he eye at the beautifully dress princess opposite to he . on splendid prancing horse come up and smile and talk with she . how she eye beam upon all of they ! she hand use to quiver and wave gracefully as they pass . when he go out with she he have he new red dress on . he old brown holland be good enough when he stay at home . sometimes , when she be away , and Dolly he maid be make he bed , he come into he mother 's room . it be as the abode of a fairy to he - - a mystic chamber of splendour and delight . there in the wardrobe hng those wonderful rob -- pink and blue and many - tinted . there be the jewel - case , silver - clasp , and the wondrous bronze hand on the dressing - table , glisten all over with a hundred ring . there be the cheval - glass , that miracle of art , in which he could just see he own wonder head and the reflection of ( queerly distort , and as if up in the ceiling ) , plump and pat the pillow of the bed . oh , thou poor lonely little benighted boy ! mother be the name for in the lip and heart of little child ; and here be one who be worship a stone ! now , rascal as the Colonel be , have certain manly tendency of affection in he heart and could love a child and a woman still . for minor he have a great secret tenderness then , which do not escape , though she do not talk about it to she husband . it do not annoy she : she be too good - natured . it only increase she scorn
scorn for he . he feel somehow asham of this paternal softness and hide it from he wife -- only indulge in it when alone with the boy . he use to take he out of morning when they would go to the stable together and to the park . , the best - natured of man , who would make you a present of the hat from he head , and whose main occupation in life be to buy knick - knack that he might give they away afterwards , buy the little chap a pony not much bigger than a large rat , the donor say , and on this little black Shetland pygmy yong 's great father be pleased to mount the boy , and to walk by he side in the park . it please he to see he old quarter , and he old fellow - guardsman at : he have begin to think of he bachelorhood with something like regret . the old trooper be glad to recognize they ancient officer and dandle the little colonel . find dining at mess and with he brother- officer very pleasant . " hang it , I be not clever enough for she -- I know it . she will not miss I , " he use to say : and he be right , he wife do not miss he . be fond of she husband . she be always perfectly good - humour and kind to he . she do not even show she scorn much for he ; perhaps she like he the better for be a fool . he be she upper servant and maitre d'hotel . he go on she errand ; obey she order without question ; drive in the carriage in the ring with she without repin ; take she to the opera - box , solace himself at he club during the performance , and come punctually back to fetch she when due . he would have like she to be a little fonder of the boy , but even to that he reconcile himself . " hang it , you know she be so clever , " he say , " and I be not literary and that , you know . " for , as we have say before , it require no great wisdom to be able to win at card and billiards , and make no pretension to any other sort of skill . when the companion come , he domestic duty become very light . he wife encourage he to dine abroad : she would let he off duty at the opera . " do not stay and stupefy yourself at home to - night , my dear , " she would say . " some man be come who will only bear you . I would not ask they , but you know it be for you good , and now I have a sheep - dog , I need not be afraid to be alone . " " a sheep - dog -- a companion ! with a companion ! be not it good fun ? " think to herself . the notion tick hugely she sense of humour . one morning , as , he little son , and the pony be take they accustom walk in the park , they pass by a old acquaintance of the 's , , of the regiment , who be in conversation with a friend , a old gentleman , who hold a boy in he arm about the age of little . this other youngster have seize hold of the medal which the Corporal wore , and be examine it with delight . " good morning , you , " say , in reply to the " how do , ? " of the Colonel . " this ere young gentleman be about the little 's age , sir , " continue the corporal . " he father be a man , too , " say the old gentleman , who carry the boy . " be not he , ? " " yes , " say . he and the little chap on the pony be look at each other with all they might -- solemnly scan each other as child do . " in a line regiment , " say with a patronizing air . " he be a captain in the -- th regiment , " say the old gentleman rather pompously . " , sir -- perhaps you know he . he die the death of a hero , sir , fight against the Corsican tyrant . " blush quite red . " I know he very well , sir , " he say , " and he wife , he dear little wife , sir -- how be she ? " " she be my daughter , sir , " say the old gentleman , put down the boy and take out a card with great solemnity , which he hand to the Colonel . on it write -- " , for the and , 's , , and - , . " go up and look at the pony . " should you like to have a ride ? " say minor from the saddle . " yes , " say . the , who have be look at he with some interest , take up the child and put he on the pony behind . " take hold of he , , " he say -- " take my little boy round the waist -- he name be . " and both the child begin to laugh . " you will not see a prettier pair I think , this summer 's day , sir , " say the good - nature ; and the , the , and old with he umbrella , walk by the
the side of the child . a family in a very Small we must suppose little have ride from towards , and will stop and make inquirie at that village regard some friend whom we have leave there . how be after the storm of ? be she live and thrive ? what have come of major Dobbin , whose cab be always hanker about she premise ? and be there any news of the Collector of ? the fact concern the latter be briefly these : we worthy fat friend return to not long after he escape from . either he furlough be up , or he dread to meet any witness of he flight . however it might be , he go back to he duty in very soon after have take up he residence at , where see the ex-Emperor . to hear talk on board ship you would have suppose that it be not the first time he and the have meet , and that the civilian have beard the at . he have a thousand anecdote about the famious battle ; he know the position of every regiment and the loss which each have incur . he do not deny that he have be concerned in those victory -- that he have be with the army and carry despatch for the of . and he describe what the do and say on every conceivable moment of the day of , with such a accurate knowledge of he 's sentiment and proceedings that it be clear he must have be by the conqueror 's side throughout the day ; though , as a non-combatant , he name be not mention in the public document relative to the battle . perhaps he actually work himself up to believe that he have be engage with the army ; certain it be that he make a prodigious sensation for some time at , and be call during the whole of he subsequent stay in . the bills which have give for the purchase of those unlucky horse be pay without question by he and he agent . he never be hear to allude to the bargain , and nobody know for a certainty what become of the horse , or how he get rid of they , or of , he belgian servant , who sell a grey horse , very like the one which rode , at sometime during the autumn of 1815 . 's agent have order to pay one hundred and twenty pound yearly to he parent at . it be the chief support of the old couple ; for 's speculation in life subsequent to he bankruptcy do not by any means retrieve the broken old gentleman 's fortune . he try to be a wine - merchant , a coal - merchant , a commission lottery agent , & c. , &c . he send round prospectuse to he friend whenever he take a new trade , and order a new brass plate for the door , and talk pompously about make he fortune still . but never come back to the feeble and stricken old man . one by one he friend drop off , and be weary of buy dear coal and bad wine from he ; and there be only he wife in all the world who fancie , when he totter off to the City of a morning , that he be still do any business there . at evening he crawl slowly back ; and he use to go of nights to a little club at a tavern , where he dispose of the finances of the nation . it be wonderful to hear he talk about million , and agio , and discount , and what be do , and . he talk of such vast sum that the gentleman of the club ( the apothecary , the undertaker , the great carpenter and builder , the parish clerk , who be allow to come stealthily , and , we old acquaintance , ) respect the old gentleman . " I be better off once , sir , " he do not fail to tell everybody who " use the room . " " my son , sir , be at this minute chief magistrate of in the Presidency of , and touch he four thousand rupee per mensem . my daughter might be a 's lady if she like . I might draw upon my son , the first magistrate , sir , for two thousand pound to - morrow , and would cash my bill , down sir , down on the counter , sir . but the be always a proud family . " you and I , my dear reader , may drop into this condition one day : for have not many of we friend attaine it ? we luck may fail : we power forsake we : we place on the board be take by better and younger mime -- the chance of life roll away and leave we shatte and strand . then man will walk across the road when they meet you -- or , worse still , hold you out a couple of finger and patronize you in a pitying way -- then you will know , as soon as you back be turn , that you friend begin with a " poor devil , what imprudence he have commit , what chance that chap have throw away ! " well , well - - a carriage and three thousand a year be not the summit of the reward nor the end of 's judgament of man . if quack prosper as often as they go to the wall -- if zany succeed and knave arrive at fortune , and , vice versa , share ill luck and prosperity for all the world like the ablest and most honest amongst
amongst we -- I say , brother , the gift and pleasur of Vanity fair can not be hold of any great account , and that it be probable . . . but we be wander out of the domain of the story . have be a woman of energy , she would have exert it after she husband 's ruin and , occupy a large house , would have take in boarder . the broken would have act well as the boarding - house landlady 's husband ; the Munoz of private life ; the titular lord and master : the carver , house - steward , and humble husband of the occupier of the dingy throne . I have see man of good brain and breed , and of good hope and vigour once , who feast squire and keep hunter in they youth , meekly cut up leg of mutton for rancorous old harridan and pretend to preside over they dreary table -- but , we say , have not spirit enough to bustle about for " a few select inmate to join a cheerful musical family , " such as one reads of in the . she be content to lie on the shore where fortune have strand she -- and you could see that the career of this old couple be over . I do not think they be unhappy . perhaps they be a little prouder in they downfall than in they prosperity . be always a great person for she landlady , , when she descend and pass many hour with she in the basement or ornament kitchen . the irish maid 's bonnet and ribbon , she sauciness , she idleness , she reckless prodigality of kitchen candles , she consumption of tea and sugar , and so forth occupy and amuse the old lady almost as much as the doings of she former household , when she have and the coachman , and a groom , and a footboy , and a housekeeper with a regiment of female domestic -- she former household , about which the good lady talk a hundred time a day . and besides , have all the maid - of - all - work in the street to superintend . she know how each tenant of the cottage pay or owed he little rent . she step aside when not the actress pass with she dubious family . she fling up she head when , the apothecary 's lady , drive by in she husband 's professional one - horse chaise . she have colloquy with the greengrocer about the pennorth of turnip which love ; she keep a eye upon the milkman and the baker 's boy ; and make visitation to the butcher , who sell hundred of oxen very likely with less ado than be make about 's loin of mutton : and she count the potatoe under the joint on , on which day , dress in she best , she go to church twice and read 's Sermons in the evening . on that day , for " business " prevent he on weekday from take such a pleasure , it be old 's delight to take out he little grandson Georgy to the neighbour park or , to see the soldier or to feed the duck . love the redcoat , and he grandpapa tell he how he father have be a famous soldier , and introduce he to many sergeant and other with medal on they breast , to whom the old grandfather pompously present the child as the son of of the -- th , who die gloriously on the glorious eighteenth . he have be know to treat some of these non-commissioned gentleman to a glass of porter , and , indeed , in they first walk be dispose to spoil little , sadly gorge the boy with apple and parliament , to the detriment of he health -- until declare that should never go out with he grandpapa unless the latter promise solemnly , and on he honour , not to give the child any cake , lollipops , or stall produce whatever . between and she daughter there be a sort of coolness about this boy , and a secret jealousy -- for one evening in 's very early day , , who have be seat at work in they little parlour scarcely remark that the old lady have quit the room , run upstairs instinctively to the nursery at the cry of the child , who have be asleep until that moment -- and there find in the act of surreptitiously administer 's to the infant . , the gentlest and sweetest of every day mortal , when she find this meddling with she maternal authority , thrill and tremble all over with anger . she cheek , ordinarily pale , now flush up , until they be as red as they use to be when she be a child of twelve year old . she seize the baby out of she mother 's arm and then grasp at the bottle , leave the old lady gap at she , furious , and hold the guilty tea - spoon . fling the bottle crash into the fire - place . " I will not have baby poisoned , , " cry , rock the infant about violently with both she arm round he and turn with flashing eye at she mother . " Poison , ! " say the old lady ; " this language to I ? " " he shall not have any medicine but that which send for hi not . he tell I that 's be poison . " " very good : you think I be a murderess then , " reply . " this be the language you use to you mother . I have meet with misfortune :
: I have sink low in life : I have keep my carriage , and now walk on foot : but I do not know I be a murderess before , and thank you for the News . " " , " say the poor girl , who be always ready for tear --" you should not be hard upon I . I -- I do not mean -- I mean , I do not wish to say you would to any wrong to this dear child , only -- " " oh , no , my love , -- only that I be a murderess ; in which case I have better go to the . though I do not poison you , when you be a child , but give you the best of education and the most expensive master money could procure . yes ; I have nurse five child and bury three ; and the one I love the best of all , and ten through croup , and teethe , and measle , and hoope - cough , and bring up with foreign master , regardless of expense , and with accomplishment at -- which I never have when I be a girl -- when I be too glad to honour my father and mother , that I might live long in the land , and to be useful , and not to mope all day in my room and act the fine lady -- say I be a murderess . ah , ! may you never nourish a viper in you bosom , that be my prayer . " " , ! " cry the bewilder girl ; and the child in she arm set up a frantic chorus of shout . " a murderess , indeed ! go down on you knee and pray to to cleanse you wick ungrateful heart , , and may he forgive you as I do . " and toss out of the room , hiss out the word poison once more , and so end she charitable benediction . till the termination of she natural life , this breach between and she daughter be never thoroughly mende . the quarrel give the elder lady numberless advantage which she do not fail to turn to account with female ingenuity and perseverance . for instance , she scarcely speak to for many week afterwards . she warn the domestic not to touch the child , as Osborne might be offende . she ask she daughter to see and satisfy herself that there be no poison prepare in the little daily mess that be concoct for . when neighbours ask after the boy 's health , she refer they pointedly to . she never venture to ask whether the baby be well or not . she would not touch the child although he be she grandson , and own precious darling , for she be not use to child , and might kill it . and whenever come upon he healing inquisition , she receive the doctor with such a sarcastic and scornful demeanour , as make the surgeon declare that not herself , whom he have the honour of attending professionally , could give herself greater air than old , from whom he never take a fee . and very likely be jealous too , upon she own part , as what mother be not , of those who would manage she child for she , or become candidate for the first place in they affections . it be certain that when anybody nurse the child , she be uneasy , and that she would no more allow or the domestic to dress or tend he than she would have let they wash she husband 's miniature which hang up over she little bed -- the same little bed from which the poor girl have go to he ; and to which she retire now for many long , silent , tearful , but happy year . in this room be all 's heart and treasure . here it be that she ten she boy and watch he through the many ill of childhood , with a constant passion of love . the elder return in he somehow , only improve , and as if come back from heaven . in a hundred little tone , look , and movement , the child be so like he father that the widow 's heart thrill as she hold he to it ; and he would often ask the cause of she tear . it be because of he likeness to he father , she do not scruple to tell he . she talk constantly to he about this dead father , and speak of she love for to the innocent and wonder child ; much more than she ever have do to himself , or to any confidante of she youth . to she parent she never talk about this matter , shrink from ba she heart to they . very likely could understand no better than they , but into he ear she pour she sentimental secret unreservedly , and into he only . the very joy of this woman be a sort of grief , or so tender , at least , that its expression be tear . she sensibility be so weak and tremulous that perhaps they ought not to be talk about in a book . I be tell by ( now a most flourishing lady 's physician , with a sumptuous dark green carriage , a prospect of speedy knighthood , and a house in ) that she grief at wean the child be a sight that would have unman a Herod . he be very soft - hear many year ago , and he wife be mortally jealous of , then and long afterwards . perhaps the doctor 's lady have good reason for she
she jealousy : most woman share it , of those who form the small circle of 's acquaintance , and be quite angry at the enthusiasm with which the other sex regard she . for almost all man who come near she love she ; though no doubt they would be at a loss to tell you why . she be not brilliant , nor witty , nor wise over much , nor extraordinarily handsome . but wherever she go she touch and charme every one of the male sex , as invariably as she awaken the scorn and incredulity of she own sisterhood . I think it be she weakness which be she principal charm -- a kind of sweet submission and softness , which seem to appeal to each man she meet for he sympathy and protection . we have see how in the regiment , though she speak but to few of 's comrade there , all the sword of the young fellow at the mess - table would have leapt from they scabbard to fight round she ; and so it be in the little narrow lodging - house and circle at , she interest and pleas everybody . if she have be herself , of the great house of , , and , Crutched Friars , and the magnificent proprietress of the , , who give summer dejeuner frequent by Dukes and Earls , and drive about the parish with magnificent yellow livery and bay horse , such as the royal stable at themselves could not turn out -- I say have she be herself , or she son 's wife , ( daughter of the of , who condescende to marry the head of the firm ) , the tradesman of the neighbourhood could not pay she more honour than they invariably show to the gentle young widow , when she pass by they door , or make she humble purchase at they shops . thus it be not only , the medical man , but the young assistant , who doctore the servant maid and small tradesman , and might be see any day read the in the surgery , who openly declare himself the slave of . he be a personable young gentleman , more welcome at 's lodging than he principal ; and if anything go wrong with , he would drop in twice or thrice in the day to see the little chap , and without so much as the thought of a fee . he would abstract lozenge , tamarind , and other produce from the surgery - drawer for little 's benefit , and compound draught and mixture for he of miraculous sweetness , so that it be quite a pleasure to the child to be ail . he and , he chief , sit up two whole night by the boy in that momentous and awful week when have the measle ; and when you would have think , from the mother 's terror , that there have never be measle in the world before . would they have do as much for other people ? do they sit up for the folk at the , when , and , and have the same juvenile complaint ? do they sit up for little , the landlord 's daughter , who actually catch the disease of little ? compels one to say , no . they sleep quite undisturbed , at least as far as she be concerned -- pronounce hers to be a slight case , which would almost cure itself , send she in a dratch or two , and throw in bark when the child rally , with perfect indifference , and just for form 's sake . again , there be the little french chevalier opposite , who give lesson in he native tongue at various school in the neighbourhood , and who might be hear in he apartment of night play tremulous old gavotte and minuet on a wheezy old fiddle . whenever this powder and courteous old man , who never miss a at the convent chapel at , and who be in all respects , thought , conduct , and bear utterly unlike the bearded savage of he nation , who curse perfidious , and scowl at you from over they cigar , in the Quadrant arcade at the present day -- whenever the old spoke of , he would first finish he pinch of snuff , flick away the remaining particle of dust with a graceful wave of he hand , gather up he finger again into a bunch , and , bring they up to he mouth , blow they open with a kiss , exclaim , ! la divine creature ! he vow and protest that when walk in the flower grow in profusion under she foot . he call little , and ask he news of , he mamma ; and tell the astonished that she be one of the Graces , and the favourite attendent of the . instance might be multiplied of this easily gain and unconscious popularity . do not , the mild and genteel curate of the district chapel , which the family attend , call assiduously upon the widow , dandle the little boy on he knee , and offer to teach he , to the anger of the elderly virgin , he sister , who keep house for he ? " there be nothing in she , , " the latter lady would say . " when she come to tea here she do not speak a word during the whole evening . she be but a poor lackadaisical creature , and it be my belief have no heart at all . it be only she pretty face which all you gentleman admire so . , who have five thousand pound , and expectation beside , have twice as much character ,
, and be a thousand time more agreeable to my taste ; and if she be good - look I know that you would think she perfection . " very likely be right to a great extent . it be the pretty face which create sympathy in the heart of man , those wicked rogue . a woman may possess the wisdom and chastity of , and we give no heed to she , if she have a plain face . what folly will not a pair of bright eye make pardonable ? what dulness may not red lip and sweet accent render pleasant ? and so , with they usual sense of justice , lady argue that because a woman be handsome , therefore she be a fool . of lady , lady ! there be some of you who be neither handsome nor wise . these be but trivial incidents to recound in the life of we heroine . she tale do not deal in wonder , as the gentle reader have already no doubt perceive ; and if a journal have be keep of she proceeding during the seven year after the birth of she son , there would be find few incidents more remarkable in it than that of the measle , record in the foregoing page . yes , one day , and greatly to she wonder , the , just mention , ask she to change she name of for he own ; when , with deep blush and tear in she eye and voice , she thank he for he regard for she , express gratitude for he attention to she and to she poor little boy , but say that she never , never could think of any but -- but the husband whom she have lose . on the twenty - fifth of , and the eighteenth of , the day of marriage and widowhood , she keep she room entirely , consecrat they ( and we do not know how many hour of solitary night - think , she little boy sleep in he crib by she bedside ) to the memory of that depart friend . during the day she be more active . she have to teach to read and to write and a little to draw . she read book , in order that she might tell he story from they . as he eye open and he mind expand under the influence of the outward nature round about he , she teach the child , to the best of she humble power , to acknowledge the maker of all , and every night and every morning he and she --( in that awful and touch communion which I think must bring a thrill to the heart of every man who witness or who remember it ) -- the mother and the little boy -- pray to we father together , the mother plead with all she gentle heart , the child lispe after she as she speak . and each time they pray to to bless dear , as if he be alive and in the room with they . to wash and dress this young gentleman -- to take he for a run of the morning , before breakfast , and the retreat of grandpapa for " business " -- to make for he the most wonderful and ingenious dress , for which end the thrifty widow cut up and alte every available little bit of finery which she possess out of she wardrobe during she marriage -- for herself ( greatly to she mother 's vexation , who prefer fine clothes , especially since she misfortune ) always wear a black gown and a straw bonnet with a black ribbon -- occupy she many hour of the day . other she have to spare , at the service of she mother and she old father . she have take the pain to learn , and use to play cribbage with this gentleman on the night when he do not go to he club . she sang for he when he be so minded , and it be a good sign , for he invariably fall into a comfortable sleep during the music . she write out he numerous memorial , letter , prospectuse , and project . it be in she handwrit that most of the old gentleman 's former acquaintance be inform that he have become a agent for the and and could supply he friend and the public with the best coal at -- 's . per chaldron . all he do be to sign the circular with he flourish and signature , and direct they in a shaky , clerklike hand . one of these papers be send to major ,-- , care of Messrs . and ; but the major be in at the time , have no particular call for coal . he know , though , the hand which have write the prospectus . ! what would he not have give to hold it in he own ! a second prospectus come out , inform the major that and , have establish agency at , , and 's , be enable to offer to they friend and the public generally the finest and most celebrate growth of port , sherry , and claret wine at reasonable price and under extraordinary advantages . act upon this hint , furiously canvass the governor , the commander - in - chief , the judge , the regiment , and everybody whom he know in the Presidency , and send home to and order for wine which perfectly astonished and , who be the in the business . but no more order come after that first burst of good fortune , on which poor old be about to build a house in the City , a regiment of clerk , a dock to
to himself , and correspondent all over the world . the old gentleman 's former taste in wine have go : the curse of the mess - room assail major for the vile drink he have be the means of introduce there ; and he buy back a great quantity of the wine and sell it at public outcry , at a enormous loss to himself . as for , who be by this time promote to a seat at the at , he be wild with rage when the post bring he out a bundle of these Bacchanalian prospectuse , with a private note from he father , tell Jos that he senior count upon he in this enterprise , and have consign a quantity of select wine to he , as per invoice , draw bill upon he for the amount of the same . , who would no more have it suppose that he father , 's father , of the board of , be a wine merchant ask for order , than that he be , refuse the bill with scorn , write back contumeliously to the old gentleman , bid he to mind he own affair ; and the protest paper come back , and . have to take it up , with the profit which they have make out of the venture , and with a little portion of 's savings . besides she pension of fifty pound a year , there have be five hundred pound , as she husband 's executor state , leave in the agent 's hand at the time of 's demise , which sum , as 's guardian , propose to put out at 8 per cent in a indian house of agency . , who think the major have some roguish intention of he own about the money , be strongly against this plan ; and he go to the agent to protest personally against the employment of the money in question , when he learn , to he surprise , that there have be no such sum in they hand , that all the late 's asset do not amount to a hundred pound , and that the five hundred pound in question must be a separate sum , of which kknow the particular . more than ever convince that there be some roguery , old pursue the major . as he daughter 's nearest friend , he demand with a high hand a statement of the late 's account . 's stammering , blush , and awkwardness add to the other 's conviction that he have a rogue to deal with , and in a majestic tone he tell that officer a piece of he mind , as he call it , simply state he belief that the major be unlawfully detain he late son - in - law 's money . Dobbin at this lose all patience , and if he accuser have not be so old and so break , a quarrel might have ensue between they at the 's coffee - house , in a box of which place of entertainment the gentleman have they colloquy . " come upstairs , sir , " lisp out the major . " I insist on you come up the stair , and I will show which be the injured party , poor or I " ; and , drag the old gentleman up to he bedroom , he produce from he desk 's account , and a bundle of 's which the latter have give , who , to do he justice , be always ready to give a Iou . " he pay he bill in , " add , " but he have not a hundred pound in the world when he fall . I and one or two of he brother officer make up the little sum , which be all that we could spare , and you dare tell we that we be try to cheat the widow and the orphan . " be very contrite and humble , though the fact be that have tell a great falsehood to the old gentleman ; have himself give every shilling of the money , have bury he friend , and pay all the fee and charge incident upon the calamity and removal of poor . about these expensis old have never give himself any trouble to think , nor any other relative of , nor herself , indeed . she trust to major as a accountant , take he somewhat confuse calculation for grant , and never once suspect how much she be in he debt . twice or thrice in the year , accord to she promise , she write he letter to , letter all about little . how he treasure these papers ! whenever write he answer , and not until then . but he send over endless remembrance of himself to he godson and to she . he order and send a box of scarf and a grand ivory set of chess -man from . the pawn be little green and white man , with real sword and shield ; the knights be on horseback , the castle be on the back of elephant . " . 's own set at the be not so fine , " remarke . these chess -man be the delight of 's life , who print he first letter in acknowledgement of this gift of he godpapa . he send over preserve and pickle , which latter the young gentleman try surreptitiously in the sideboard and half - kill himself with eating . he think it be a judgement upon he for stealing , they be so hot . write a comical little account of this mishap to the major : it please he to think that she spirit be rally and that she could be merry sometimes now . he send
send over a pair of shawl , a white one for she and a black one with palm - leave for she mother , and a pair of red scarf , as winter wrapper , for old and . the shawl be worth fifty guinea apiece at the very least , as know . she wear hers in state at church at , and be congratulate by she female friend upon the splendid acquisition . 's , too , become prettily she modest black gown . " what a pity it be she will not think of he ! " remark to and to all she friend of . " never send we such present , I be sure , and grudge we everything . it be evident that the major be over head and ears in love with she ; and yet , whenever I so much as hind it , she turn red and begin to cry and go and sit upstairs with she miniature . I be sick of that miniature . I wish we have never see those odious purse - proud Osborne . " Amidst such humble scene and associate 's early youth be pass , and the boy grow up delicate , sensitive , imperious , woman - breed --domineer the gentle mother whom he love with passionate affection . he rule all the rest of the little world round about he . as he grow , the elder be amaze at he haughty manner and he constant likeness to he father . he ask question about everything , as inquire youth will do . the profundity of he remark and interrogatory astonish he old grandfather , who perfectly bor the club at the tavern with story about the little lad 's learning and genius . he suffer he grandmother with a good - humoured indifference . the small circle round about he believe that the equal of the boy do not exist upon the earth . inherit he father 's pride , and perhaps think they be not wrong . when he grow to be about six year old , begin to write to he very much . the major want to hear that be go to a school and hope he would acquit himself with credit there : or would he have a good tutor at home ? it be time that he should begin to learn ; and he godfather and guardian hint that he hope to be allow to defray the charge of the boy 's education , which would fall heavily upon he mother 's straiten income . the major , in a word , be always think about and she little boy , and by order to he agent keep the latter provide with picture - book , paint - box , desk , and all conceivable implement of amusement and instruction . three day before 's sixth birthday a gentleman in a gig , accompany by a servant , drive up to 's house and ask to see : it be , military tailor , of , who come at the major 's order to measure the young gentleman for a suit of clothes . he have have the honour of make for the , the young gentleman 's father . sometimes , too , and by the major 's desire no doubt , he sister , the , would call in the family carriage to take and the little boy to drive if they be so inclined . the patronage and kindness of these ladie be very uncomfortable to , but she bear it meekly enough , for she nature be to yield ; and , besides , the carriage and its splendour give little immense pleasure . the lady beg occasionally that the child might pass a day with they , and he be always glad to go to that fine garden - house at , where they live , and where there be such fine grape in the hot - house and peach on the wall . one day they kindly come over to with news which they be sure would delight she -- something very interesting about they dear . " what be it : be he come home ? " she ask with pleasure beame in she eye . " oh , no -- not the least -- but they have very good reason to believe that dear be about to be marry -- and to a relation of a very dear friend of 's - - to , 's sister , who have go out to join at -- a very beautiful and accomplished girl , everybody say . " say " oh ! " be very very happy indeed . but she suppose could not be like she old acquaintance , who be most kind -- but -- but she be very happy indeed . and by some impulse of which I can not explain the meaning , she take in she arm and kiss he with a extraordinary tenderness . she eye be quite moist when she put the child down ; and she scarcely speak a word during the whole of the drive -- though she be so very happy indeed . we duty now take we back for a brief space to some old acquaintance of ours , whose hope respect the disposal of they rich kinswoman 's property be so woefully disappoint . after count upon thirty thousand pound from he sister , it be a heavy blow to to receive but five ; out of which sum , when he have pay he own debt and those of , he son at college , a very small fragment remain to portion off he four plain daughter . never know , or at least never acknowledge , how far she own tyrannous behaviour have tend to ruin she husband . all that woman could do , she
she vow and protest she have do . be it she fault if she do not possess those sycophantic art which she hypocritical nephew , , practise ? she wish he all the happiness which he merit out of he ill - get gains . " at least the money will remain in the family , " she say charitably . " will never spend it , my dear , that be quite certain ; for a greater miser do not exist in , and he be as odious , though in a different way , as he spendthrift brother , the abandoned . " so , after the first shock of rage and disappointment , begin to accommodate herself as best she could to she altered fortune and to save and retrench with all she might . she instruct she daughter how to bear poverty cheerfully , and invent a thousand notable method to conceal or evade it . she take they about to ball and public place in the neighbourhood , with praiseworthy energy ; nay , she entertaine she friend in a hospitable comfortable manner at the Rectory , and much more frequently than before dear 's legacy have fall in . from she outward bearing nobody would have suppose that the family have be disappoint in they expectation , or have guess from she frequent appearance in public how she pinch and starve at home . she girl have more milliner ' furniture than they have ever enjoy before . they appear perseveringly at the and assemblie ; they penetrat to Cowe for the race - ball and regatta - gaiety there ; and they carriage , with the horse take from the plough , be at work perpetually , until it begin almost to be believe that the four sister have have fortune leave they by they aunt , whose name the family never mention in public but with the most tender gratitude and regard . I know no sort of lie which be more frequent in than this , and it may be remark how people who practise it take credit to themselves for they hypocrisy , and fancy that they be exceedingly virtuous and praiseworthy , because they be able to deceive the world with regard to the extent of they means . . certainly think herself one of the most virtuous woman in , and the sight of she happy family be a edifying one to strangers . they be so cheerful , so loving , so well - educated , so simple ! paint flower exquisitely and furnish half the charity bazaar in the county . be a regular , and she verse in the Telegraph be the glory of its 's . and sang duet together , play the piano , and the other two sister sit with they arm round each other 's waists and listen affectionately . nobody see the poor girl drumm at the duet in private . no one see dril they rigidly hour after hour . in a word , put a good face against fortune and keep up appearances in the most virtuous manner . everything that a good and respectable mother could do do . she get over yachting man from , parson from the at , and officer from the barrack there . she try to inveigle the young barrister at assize and encourage to bring home friend with whom he go out hunt with the h . h . what will not a mother do for the benefit of she beloved one ? between such a woman and she brother - in - law , the odious Baronet at the , it be manifest that there could be very little in common . the rupture between and he brother be complete ; indeed , between and the whole county , to which the old man be a scandal . he dislike for respectable society increase with age , and the lodge - gate have not open to a gentleman 's carriage - wheel since and come to pay they visit of duty after they marriage . that be a awful and unfortunate visit , never to be think of by the family without horror . beg he wife , with a ghastly countenance , never to speak of it , and it be only through . Bute herself , who still know everything which take place at the hall , that the circumstance of 's reception of he son and daughter - in - law be ever know at all . as they drive up the avenue of the park in they neat and well - appoint carriage , remark with dismay and wrath great gap among the tree -- he tree -- which the old be felle entirely without license . the park wear a aspect of utter dreariness and ruin . the drive be ill keep , and the neat carriage splash and flounder in muddy pool along the road . the great sweep in front of the terrace and entrance stair be black and cove with moss ; the once trim flower - bed rank and weedy . Shutter be up along almost the whole line of the house ; the great hall - door be unbar after much ringing of the bell ; a individual in ribbon be see flitt up the black oak stair , as Horrock at length admit the heir of 's and he bride into the hall of they father . he lead the way into 's " , " as it be call , the fume of tobacco grow stronger as and approach that apartment , " be not very well , " remark apologetically and hint that he master be afflict with lumbago . the library look out on the front walk and park . have open one of the window , and be bawl out thence to the postilion and 's
's servant , who seem to be about to take the baggage down . " do not move none of they trunk , " he cry , point with a pipe which he hold in he hand . " it be only a morning visit , , you fool . , what crack that off hoss has in he heel ! be not there no one at the 's to rub them a little ? how do , ? how do , my dear ? come to see the old man , hay ? ' Gad -- you have a pretty face , too . you be not like that old horse - godmother , you mother . come and give old a kiss , like a good little gal . " the embrace disconcert the daughter - in - law somewhat , as the caress of the old gentleman , unshorn and perfume with tobacco , might well do . but she remember that she brother have mustachio , and smoke cigar , and submit to the Baronet with a tolerable grace . " have get vat , " say the , after this mark of affection . " do he read ee very long zermon , my dear ? , , ? go and get a glass of and a cake for my , Horrocks , you great big booby , and do not stand stear there like a fat pig . I will not ask you to stop , my dear ; you will find it too stoopid , and so should I too along a . I be a old man now , and like my own way , and my pipe and backgammon of a night . " " I can play at backgammon , sir , " say , laugh . " I use to play with and , do not I , ? " " can play , sir , at the game to which you state that you be so partial , " say haughtily . " but she wee not stop for all that . Naw , naw , go back to and give a benefit ; or drive down to the Rectory and ask for a dinner . he will be charme to see you , you know ; he be so much oblige to you for gettin ' the old woman 's money . , ha ! some of it will do to patch up the hall when I be gone . " " I perceive , sir , " say with a heighten voice , " that you people will cut down the timber . " " Yee , yee , very fine weather , and seasonable for the time of year , " answer , who have suddenly grow deaf . " but I be gittin ' old , , now . law bless you , you be not far from fifty yourself . but he wear well , my pretty , do not he ? it be all godliness , sobriety , and a moral life . look at I , I be not very fur from fowr - score -- he , he " ; and he laugh , and take snuff , and leer at she and pinch she hand . once more bring the conversation back to the timber , but the Baronet be deaf again in a instant . " I be gittin ' very old , and have be cruel bad this year with the lumbago . I sha not be here now for long ; but I be glad ee have come , daughter - in - law . I like you face , : it be get none of the damned high - boned look in it ; and I will give ee something pretty , my dear , to go to in . " and he shuffle across the room to a cupboard , from which he take a little old case contain jewel of some value . " take that , " say he , " my dear ; it belong to my mother , and afterwards to the first . pretty pearl -- never give th'ey the ironmonger 's daughter . no , no . take th'ey and put th'ey up quick , " say he , thrust the case into he daughter 's hand , and clapp the door of the cabinet to , as Horrocks enter with a salver and refreshment . " what have you a been and give Pitt's wife ? " say the individual in ribbon , when and have take leave of the old gentleman . it be , the butler 's daughter -- the cause of the scandal throughout the county -- the lady who reign now almost supreme at 's . the rise and progress of those ribbon have be mark with dismay by the county and family . the ribbons open a account at the ; the drive to church , monopolise the pony -chaise , which be for the use of the servants at the Hall . the domestic be dismiss at she pleasure . the gardener , who still linger on the premise , take a pride in he wall and hot - house , and indeed make a pretty good livelihood by the garden , which he far , and of which he sell the produce at , find the ribbons eat peach on a sunshiny morning at the south - wall , and have he ear box when he remonstrate about this attack on he property . he and he Scotch wife and he Scotch child , the only respectable inhabitant of 's , be force to migrate , with they good and they chattel , and leave the stately comfortable garden to go to waste , and the flower - bed to run to seed . poor 's rose - garden become the
the dreariest wilderness . only two or three domestic shudder in the bleak old servants ' hall . the stable and office be vacant , and shut up , and half ruin . live in private , and booze nightly with , he butler or house - steward ( as he now begin to be call ) , and the abandoned ribbons . the time be very much change since the period when she drive to in the spring - cart and call the small tradesman " . " it may have be shame , or it may have be dislike of he neighbour , but the old of 's hardly issue from he park - gate at all now . he quarrell with he agent and screw he tenant by letter . he day be pass in conduct he own correspondence ; the lawyer and farm - bailiff who have to do business with he could not reach he but through the ribbons , who receive they at the door of the housekeeper 's room , which command the back entrance by which they be admit ; and so the 's daily perplexity increase , and he embarrassment multiply round he . the horror of may be imagine , as these report of he father 's dotage reach the most exemplary and correct of gentleman . he tremble daily lest he should hear that the be proclaim he second legal mother - in - law . after that first and last visit , he father 's name be never mention in 's polite and genteel establishment . it be the skeleton in he house , and all the family walk by it in terror and silence . the keep on dropping per coach at the lodge - gate the most exciting tract , tract which ought to frighten the hair off you head . at the parsonage nightly look out to see if the sky be red over the elm behind which the Hall stood , and the mansion be on fire . and . , old friend of the house , would not sit on the bench with at , and cut he dead in the of , where the reprobate stood offer he dirty old hand to they . nothing have any effect upon he ; he put he hand into he pocket , and burst out laugh , as he scramble into he carriage and four ; he use to burst out laugh at 's tract ; and he laugh at he son , and at the world , and at the when she be angry , which be not seldom . be install as housekeeper at 's , and rule all the domestic there with great majesty and rigour . all the servant be instruct to address she as " , " or " madam " -- and there be one little maid , on she promotion , who persist in call she " my , " without any rebuke on the part of the housekeeper . " there have be better lady , and there have be worser , , " be ' reply to this compliment of she inferior ; so she rule , have supreme power over all except she father , whom , however , she treat with considerable haughtiness , warn he not to be too familiar in he behaviour to one " as be to be a 's lady . " indeed , she rehearse that exalt part in life with great satisfaction to herself , and to the amusement of old , who chuckle at she air and graces , and would laugh by the hour together at she assumption of dignity and imitation of genteel life . he swore it be as good as a play to see she in the character of a fine dame , and he make she put on one of the first 's court-dress , swear ( entirely to ' own concurrence ) that the dress become she prodigiously , and threaten to drive she off that very instant to court in a coach - and - four . she have the ransacking of the wardrobe of the two defunct lady , and cut and hack they posthumous finery so as to suit she own taste and figure . and she would have like to take possession of they jewel and trinket too ; but the old have lock they away in he private cabinet ; nor could she coax or wheedle he out of the key . and it be a fact , that some time after she leave 's a copy - book belong to this lady be discover , which show that she have take great pain in private to learn the art of writing in general , and especially of write she own name as , , , &c . though the good people of the Parsonage never go to the and shunn the horrid old dotard its owner , yet they keep a strict knowledge of all that happen there , and be look out every day for the catastrophe for which be also eager . but intervene enviously and prevent she from receive the reward due to such immaculate love and virtue . one day the surprise " she ladyship , " as he jocularly call she , seat at that old and tuneless piano in the drawing - room , which have scarcely be touch since play quadrille upon it -- seat at the piano with the utmost gravity and squall to the best of she power in imitation of the music which she have sometimes hear . the little kitchen - maid on she promotion be stand at she mistress 's side , quite delighte during the operation , and wag she head up and down and cry , " , , ' ttis bittiful " -- just like a genteel sycophant in a real
real drawing - room . this incident make the old roar with laughter , as usual . he narrate the circumstance a dozen time to Horrock in the course of the evening , and greatly to the discomfiture of . he thrum on the table as if it have be a musical instrument , and squall in imitation of she manner of singing . he vow that such a beautiful voice ought to be cultivate and declare she ought to have singing - master , in which proposal she see nothing ridiculous . he be in great spirit that night , and drank with he friend and butler a extraordinary quantity of rum - and - water -- at a very late hour the faithful friend and domestic conduct he master to he bedroom . half a hour afterwards there be a great hurry and bustle in the house . light go about from window to window in the lonely desolate old Hall , whereor but two or three room be ordinarily occupy by its owner . presently , a boy on a pony go gallop off to , to the 's house there . and in another hour ( by which fact we ascertain how carefully the excellent Mrs . have always keep up a understanding with the great house ) , that lady in she clog and calash , the , and , she son , have walk over from the Rectory through the park , and have enter the mansion by the open hall - door . they pass through the hall and the small oak parlour , on the table of which stand the three tumbler and the empty rum -bottle which have serve for 's carouse , and through that apartment into 's study , where they find , of the guilty ribbon , with a wild air , try at the press and escritoire with a bunch of key . she drop they with a scream of terror , as little 's eye flash out at she from under she black calash . " look at that , and , " cry , point at the scared figure of the black - eyed , guilty wench . " he give them I ; he give them I ! " she cry . " give they you , you abandon creature ! " scream . " bear witness , , we find this good - for - nothing woman in the act of steal you brother 's property ; and she will be hang , as I always say she would . " Betsy Horrock , quite daunted , fling herself down on she knee , burst into tear . but those who know a really good woman be aware that she be not in a hurry to forgive , and that the humiliation of a enemy be a triumph to she soul . " ring the bell , , " say . " go on ring it till the people come . " the three or four domestic resident in the desert old house come presently at that jangling and continue summon . " put that woman in the strong - room , " she say . " we catch she in the act of rob . , you will make out she committal -- and , Beddoes , you will drive she over in the spring cart , in the morning , to . " " my dear , " interpose the Magistrate and rector --" she be only -- " " be there no handcuffs ? " continue , stampe in she clog . " there use to be handcuffs . where be the creature 's abominable father ? " " he do give them I , " still cry poor ; " do not he , ? you see -- you know you do -- give them I , ever so long ago -- the day after fair : not that I want th'ey . take th'ey if you think they be not mine . " and here the unhappy wretch pull out from she pocket a large pair of paste shoe - buckle which have excite she admiration , and which she have just appropriate out of one of the bookcase in the study , where they have lain . " law , , how could you go for to tell such a wicked story ! " say , the little kitchen - maid late on she promotion -- " and to , so good and kind , and he Revg rince ( with a curtsey ) , and you may search all my boxe , , I be sure , and here be my key as I be a honest girl , though of pore parent and workhouse breed -- and if you find so much as a beggarly bit of lace or a silk stock out of all the gownd as you have have the picking of , may I never go to church agin . " " give up you key , you harden hussy , " hiss out the virtuous little lady in the calash . " and here be a candle , , and if you please , , I can show you she room , , and the press in the housekeeper 's room , , where she keep heap and heap of thing , , " cry out the eager little Hester with a profusion of curtsey . " hold you tongue , if you please . I know the room which the creature occupy perfectly well . , have the goodness to come with I , and do not you lose sight of that woman , " say , seize the candle . " , you have better go upstairs and see that they be not murder you unfortunate brother " -- and the calash , escort by , walk away to the
the apartment which , as she say truly , she know perfectly well . go upstairs and find the from , with the frightened Horrock over he master in a chair . they be try to bleed . with the early morning a express be send off to by the rector 's lady , who assume the command of everything , and have watch the old through the night . he have be bring back to a sort of life ; he could not speak , but seem to recognize people . keep resolutely by he bedside . she never seem to want to sleep , that little woman , and do not close she fiery black eye once , though the snor in the arm-chair . Horrock make some wild effort to assert he authority and assist he master ; but . call he a tipsy old wretch and bay he never show he face again in that house , or he should be transport like he abominable daughter . Terrify by she manner , he slink down to the oak parlour where be , who , have try the bottle stand there and find no liquor in it , order to get another bottle of rum , which he fetch , with clean glassis , and to which the rector and he son sit down , order Horrocks to put down the key at that instant and never to show he face again . Cow by this behaviour , Horrocks give up the key , and he and he daughter slink off silently through the night and give up possession of the house of 's . in be recognize by the family the heir of arrive at home , in due time , after this catastrophe , and henceforth may be say to have reign in 's . for though the old survive many month , he never recover the use of he intellect or he speech completely , and the government of the estate devolve upon he elder son . in a strange condition find it . be always buy and mortgage ; he have twenty man of business , and quarrel with each ; quarrel with all he tenant , and lawsuit with they ; lawsuit with the lawyer ; lawsuit with the and in which he be proprietor ; and with every person with whom he have business . to unravel these difficulty and to set the estate clear be a task worthy of the orderly and persever diplomatist of , and he set himself to work with prodigious assiduity . he whole family , of course , be transport to 's , whither , of course , come too ; and she set about convert the parish under the rector 's nose , and bring down she irregular clergy to the dismay of the angry . have conclude no bargain for the sale of the living of 's ; when it should drop , she Ladyship propose to take the patronage into she own hand and present a young protege to the Rectory , on which subject the diplomatic say nothing . 's intentions with regard to be not carry into effect , and she pay no visit to . she and she father leave the when the latter take possession of the in the village , of which he have get a lease from . the ex-butler have obtain a small freehold there likewise , which give he a vote for the borough . the rector have another of these vote , and these and four other for the representative body which return the two member for 's . there be a show of courtesy keep up between the Rectory and the Hall lady , between the younger one at least , for and never could meet without battle , and gradually cease see each other . she Ladyship keep she room when the lady from the visit they cousin at the Hall . perhaps be not very much displease at these occasional absence of he mamma - in - law . he believe the family to be the greatest and wisest and most interesting in the world , and she Ladyship and he aunt have long hold ascendency over he ; but sometimes he feel that she command he too much . to be consider young be complimentary , doubtless , but at six - and - forty to be treat as a boy be sometimes mortify . yield up everything , however , to she mother . she be only fond of she child in private , and it be lucky for she that 's multifarious business , she conference with minister , and she correspondence with all the missionary of , , and , & c. , occupy the venerable Countess a great deal , so that she have but little time to devote to she granddaughter , the little , and she grandson , master . the latter be a feeble child , and it be only by prodigious quantity of calomel that be able to keep he in life at all . as for he retir into those very apartment where have be previously extinguish , and here be ten by , the girl upon she promotion , with constant care and assiduity . what love , what fidelity , what constancy be there equal to that of a nurse with good wage ? they smooth pillow ; and make arrowroot ; they get up at night ; they bear complaint and querulousness ; they see the sun shin out of door and do not want to go abroad ; they sleep on arm -chair and eat they meal in solitude ; they pass long long evening do nothing , watch the ember , and the patient 's drink simmer in the jug ; they read the weekly paper the whole week through ; and 's or the of
of man suffice they for literature for the year -- and we quarrel with they because , when they relation come to see they once a week , a little gin be smuggle in in they linen basket . lady , what man 's love be there that would stand a year 's nursing of the object of he affection ? whereas a nurse will stand by you for ten pound a quarter , and we think she too highly pay . at least grumble a good deal about pay half as much to for she constant attendance upon the Baronet he father . of sunshiny day this old gentleman be take out in a chair on the terrace -- the very chair which have have at , and which have be transport thence with a number of 's effect to 's . always walk by the old man , and be a evident favourite with he . he use to nod many time to she and smile when she come in , and utter inarticulate deprecatory moan when she be go away . when the door shut upon she he would cry and sob --whereupon 's face and manner , which be always exceedingly bland and gentle while she lady be present , would change at once , and she would make face at he and clench she fist and scream out " hold you tongue , you stoopid old fool , " and twirl away he chair from the fire which he love to look at -- at which he would cry more . for this be all that be leave after more than seventy year of cunning , and struggle , and drink , and scheme , and sin and selfishness -- a whimper old idiot put in and out of bed and clean and feed like a baby . at last a day come when the nurse 's occupation be over . early one morning , as be at he steward 's and bailiff 's boonks in the study , a knock come to the door , and present herself , drop a curtsey , and say , " if you please , , die this morning , . I be a - making of he toast , , for he gruel , , which he take every morning regular at six , , and -- I think I hear a moan - like , -- and -- and -- and -- " she drop another curtsey . what be it that make 's pale face flush quite red ? be it because he be at last , with a seat in parliament , and perhaps future honour in prospect ? " I will clear the estate now with the ready money , " he think and rapidly calculate its incumbrance and the improvement which he would make . he would not use he aunt 's money previously lest should recover and he outlay be in vain . all the blind be pull down at the and : the church bell be toll , and the chancel hang in black ; and do not go to a coursing meeting , but go and dine quietly at , where they talk about he deceased brother and young over they port . Betsy , who be by this time marry to a saddler at , cry a good deal . the family surgeon ride over and pay he respectful compliment , and inquirie for the health of they ladyship . the death be talk about at and at the , the landlord wherehave have become reconcile with the rector of late , who be occasionally kny to step into the parlour and taste 's mild beer . " shall I write to you brother -- or will you ? " ask of she husband , . " I will write , of course , " say , " and invite he to the funeral : it will be but become . " " and -- and -- , " say timidly . " ! " say , " how can you think of such a thing ? " " . must of course be ask , " say , resolutely . " not whilst I be in the house ! " say . " you Ladyship will be pleased to recollect that I be the head of this family , " reply . " if you please , , you will write a letter to , request she presence upon this melancholy occasion . " " , I forbid you to put pen to paper ! " cry the Countess . " I believe I be the head of this family , " repeat ; " and however much I may regret any circumstance which may lead to you Ladyship quit this house , must , if you please , continue to govern it as I see fit . " rise up as magnificent as in and order that horse might be put to she carriage . if she son and daughter turn she out of they house , she would hide she sorrow somewhere in loneliness and pray for they conversion to better thought . " we do not turn you out of we house , , " say the timid imploringly . " you invite such company to it as no Christian lady should meet , and I will have my horse to - morrow morning . " " have the goodness to write , , under my dictation , " say , rise and throw himself into a attitude of command , like the portrait of a in the exhibition , " and begin . ' 's , 14 , 1822.-- my dear brother -- ' " hear these decisive and terrible word , , who have be wait for a sign of weakness or vacillation on the part of she son - in - law
law , rose and , with a scared look , leave the library . look up to she husband as if she would afain follow and soothe she mamma , but forbade he wife to move . " she will not go away , " he say . " she have let she house at and have spend she last half - year 's dividend . a Countess live at a inn be a ruined woman . I have be wait long for a opportunity -- to take this -- this decisive step , my love ; for , as you must perceive , it be impossible that there should be two chiefs in a family : and now , if you please , we will resume the dictation . ' my dear brother , the melancholy intelligence which it be my duty to convey to my family must have be long anticipate by , ' " &c . in a word , have come to he kingdom , and haive by good luck , or desert rather , as he consider , assume almost all the fortune which he other relative have expect , be determined to treat he family kindly and respectably and make a house of 's once more . it please he to think that he should be its chief . he propose to use the vast influence that he command talents and position must speedily acquire for he in the county to get he brother place and he cousin decently provide for , and perhaps have a little sting of repentance as he think that he be the proprietor of all that they have hope for . in the course of three or four day ' reign he bearing be change and he plan quite fix : he determine to rule justly and honestly , to depose , and to be on the friendliest possible term with all the relation of he blood . so he dictate a letter to he brother -- a solemn and elaborate letter , contain the profoundest observation , couch in the longest word , and fill with the simple little secretary , who write under she husband 's order . " what a orator this will be , " think she , " when he enter the house of Commons " ( on which point , and on the tyranny of , have sometimes drop hints to he wife in bed ) ; " how wise and good , and what a genius my husband be ! I fancie he a little cold ; but how good , and what a genius ! " the fact be , have get every word of the letter by heart and have study it , with diplomatic secrecy , deeply and perfectly , long before he think fit to communicate it to he astonished wife . this letter , with a huge black border and seal , be accordingly despatch by to he brother the , in . be but half - pleased at the receipt of it . " what be the use of go down to that stupid place ? " thing he . " I can not stand be alone with after dinner , and horse there and back will cost we twenty pound . " he carry the letter , as he do all difficulty , to , upstairs in she bedroom -- with she chocolate , which he always make and take to she of a morning . he put the tray with the breakfast and the letter on the dressing - table , before which sit comb she yellow hair . she take up the black - ed missive , and have read it , she jump up from the chair , cry " ! " and waive the note round she head . " Hurray ? " say , wonder at the little figure cape about in a stream flannel dressing - gown , with tawny lock dishevell . " he be not leave we anything , . I have my share when I come of age . " " you will never be of age , you silly old man , " reply . " run out now to 's , for I must have some mourning : and get a crape on you hat , and a black waistcoat -- I do not think you have get one ; order it to be bring home to - morrow , so that we may be able to start on . " " you do not mean to go ? " interpose . " of course I mean to go . I mean that shall present I at next year . I mean that you brother shall give you a seat in parliament , you stupid old creature . I mean that shall have you vote and he , my dear , old silly man ; and that you shall be a irish Secretary , or a west indian : or a Treasurer , or a Consul , or some such thing . " " posting will cost a dooce of a lot of money , " grumble . " we might take 's carriage , which ought to be present at the funeral , as he be a relation of the family : but , no -- I intend that we shall go by the coach . they will like it better . it seem more humble -- " " Rawdy go , of course ? " the ask . " no such thing ; why pay a extra place ? he be too big to travel bodkin between you and I . let he stay here in the nursery , and can make he a black frock . go you , and do as I bid you . and you have best tell Spark , you man , that old be dead and that
that you will come in for something considerable when the affair be arrange . he will tell this to Raggles , who have be press for money , and it will conseal poor Raggles . " and so begin sipp she chocolate . when the faithful arrive in the evening , he find and she companion , who be no other than we friend , busy cutting , ripping , snipping , and tear all sort of black stuff available for the melancholy occasion . " and I be plunge in grief and despondency for the death of we , " say . " be dead , my lord . we have be tear we hair all the morning , and now we be tear up we old clothes . " " oh , , how can you -- " be all that Briggs could say as she turn up she eye . " oh , , how can you -- " echo my . " so that old scoundrel 's dead , be he ? he might have be a peer if he have play he card better . have very nearly make he ; but he rat always at the wrong time . what a old it be ! " " I might have be 's widow , " say . " do not you remember , , how you pee in at the door and see old on he knee to I ? " , we old friend , blush very much at this reminiscence , and be glad when order she to go downstairs and make he a cup of tea . be the house - dog whom have provide as guardian of she innocence and reputation . have leave she a little annuity . she would have be content to remain in the family with , who be good to she and to everybody ; but dismiss poor Briggs as quickly as decency permit ; and ( who think himself much injure by the uncalled - for generosity of he decease relative towards a lady who have only be 's faithful retainer a score of year ) make no objection to that exercise of the dowager 's authority . and likewise receive they legacy and they dismissal , and marry and set up a lodging - house , accord to the custom of they kind . try to live with she relation in the country , but find that attempt be vain after the better society to which she have be accustom . 's friend , small tradesman , in a country town , quarrell over 's forty pound a year as eagerly and more openly than 's kinsfolk have for that lady 's inheritance . 's brother , a radical hatter and grocer , call he sister a purse - proud aristocrat , because she would not advance a part of she capital to stock he shop ; and she would have do so most likely , but that they sister , a dissent shoemaker 's lady , at variance with the hatter and grocer , who go to another chapel , show how they brother be on the verge of bankruptcy , and take possession of for a while . the dissent shoemaker wante to send he son to college and make a gentleman of he . between they the two family get a great portion of she private savings out of she , and finally she fle to follow by the anathema of both , and determined to seek for servitude again as infinitely less onerous than liberty . and advertise in the papers that a " Gentlewoman of agreeable manners , and accustom to the best society , be anxious to , " & c. , she take up she residence with in , and wait the result of the advertisement . so it be that she fall in with . 's dash little carriage and pony be whir down the street one day , just as , fatigue , have reach 's door , after a weary walk to the in the to insert she advertisement for the sixth time . be drive , and at once recognize the gentlewoman with agreeable manners , and be a perfectly good - humoured woman , as we have see , and have a regard for , she pull up the pony at the doorstep , give the rein to the groom , and jump out , have hold of both Briggs 's hand , before she of the agreeable manners have recovere from the shock of see a old friend . Brigg cry , and laugh a great deal and kiss the gentlewoman as soon as they get into the passage ; and thence into 's front parlour , with the red moreen curtain , and the round look - glass , with the chain eagle above , gaze upon the back of the ticket in the window which announce " apartment to let . " tell all she history amidst those perfectly uncalled - for sob and ejaculation of wonder with which woman of she soft nature salute a old acquaintance , or regard a rencontre in the street ; for though people meet other people every day , yet some there be who insist upon discover miracle ; and woman , even though they have dislike each other , begin to cry when they meet , deplor and remember the time when they last quarrell . so , in a word , tell all she history , and give a narrative of she own life , with she usual artlessness and candour . , late , come and listen grimly in the passage to the hysterical sniffling and giggling which go on in the front parlour . have never be a favourite of hers . since the establishment of the marry couple in they have frequent they former friend of the
the house of Raggles , and do not like the latter 's account of the 's menage . " I would not trust he , , my boy , " bowl remark ; and he wife , when issue from the parlour , only salute the lady with a very sour curtsey ; and she finger be like so many sausage , cold and lifeless , when she hold they out in deference to , who persist in shaking hand with the retired lady 's maid . she whir away into , nodd with the sweetest of smile towards , who hang nodding at the window close under the advertisement-card , and at the next moment be in the park with a half - dozen of dandy canter after she carriage . when she find how she friend be situate , and how have a snug legacy from , salary be no object to we gentlewoman , instantly for some benevolent little domestic plan concern she . this be just such a companion as would suit she establishment , and she invite to come to dinner with she that very evening , when she should see 's dear little darling . caution she lodger against venturing into the lion 's den , " wherein you will rue it , , mark my word , and as sure as my name be bowls . " and promise to be very cautious . the upshot of which caution be that she go to live with Rawdon the next week , and have lent six hundred pound upon annuity before six month be over . in Revisit the hall of she Ancestor so the mourning be ready , and warn of they arrival , and he wife take a couple of place in the same old high - flyer coach by which have travel in the defunct 's company , on she first journey into the world some nine year before . how well she remember the , and the ostler to whom she refuse money , and the insinuat Cambridge lad who wrap she in he coat on the journey ! take he place outside , and would have like to drive , but he grief forbade he . he sit by the coachman and talk about horse and the road the whole way ; and who keep the inns , and who horse the coach by which he have travel so many a time , when he and be boy go to . at a carriage and a pair of horse receive they , with a coachman in black . " it be the old drag , , " say as they get in . " the worm have eat the cloth a good deal -- there be the stain which -- ha ! I see the have he shutter up -- which make such a noise about . it be a bottle of cherry brandy he break which we go to fetch for you aunt from . how time fly , to be sure ! that can not be , that bounce girl stand by she mother at the cottage there . I remember she a mangy little urchin picking weed in the garden . " " , " say , return the salute which the cottage give he , by two finger apply to he crape hatband . bow and salute , and recognize people here and there graciously . these recognition be inexpressibly pleasant to she . it seem as if she be not a imposter any more , and be come to the home of she ancestor . be rather abash and cast down , on the other hand . what recollection of boyhood and innocence might have be flitt across he brain ? what pang of dim remorse and doubt and shame ? " you sister must be young woman now , " say , think of those girl for the first time perhaps since she have leave they . " do not know , I be shaw , " reply the Colonel . " Hullo ! here be old . how - dy - do , ? remember I , do not you ? master , hey ? how those old woman last ; she be a hundr when I be a boy . " they be go through the lodge - gate keep by old , whose hand insist upon shaking , as she fling open the creak old iron gate , and the carriage pass between the two moss - grow pillars surmount by the dove and serpent . " the have cut into the timber , " say , look about , and then be silent -- so be . both of they be rather agitate , and think of old time . he about , and he mother , whom he remember , a frigid demure woman , and a sister who die , of whom he have be passionately fond ; and how he use to thrash ; and about little at home . and think about she own youth and the dark secret of those early taint day ; and of she entrance into life by yonder gate ; and of , and , and . the gravel walk and terrace have be scrape quite clean . a grand painted hatchment be already over the great entrance , and two very solemn and tall personage in black flung open each a leaf of the door as the carriage pull up at the familiar step . turn red , and somewhat pale , as they pass through the old hall , arm in arm . she pinch she husband 's arm as they enter the oak parlour , where and he wife be ready to receive they . in black , in black , and my with a large black head - piece of bugles and feather , which wav on
on she Ladyship 's head like a undertaker 's tray . have judge correctly , that she would not quit the premise . she contente herself by preserve a solemn and stony silence , when in company of and he rebellious wife , and by frighten the child in the nursery by the ghastly gloom of she demeanour . only a very faint bending of the head - dress and plume welcome and he wife , as those prodigal return to they family . to say the truth , they be not affect very much one way or other by this coolness . she Ladyship be a person only of secondary consideration in they minds just then -- they be intent upon the reception which the reign brother and sister would afford they . , with rather a heighten colour , go up and shake he brother by the hand , and salute with a hand - shake and a very low bow . but take both the hand of she sister - in - law and kiss she affectionately . the embrace somehow bring tear into the eyes of the little adventuress -- which ornament , as we know , she wear very seldom . the artless mark of kindness and confidence touch and pleas she ; and , encourage by this demonstration on he sister 's part , twirl up he mustachio and take leave to salute with a kiss , which cause she Ladyship to blush exceedingly . " Dev'lish nice little woman , , " be he verdict , when he and he wife be together again . " 's get fat , too , and be do the thing handsomely . " " he can afford it , " say and agree in she husband 's farther opinion " that the mother - in - law be a tremendous old guy -- and that the sister be rather well - look young woman . " they , too , have be summon from school to attend the funeral ceremony . it seem , for the dignity of the house and family , have think right to have about the place as many person in black as could possibly be assemble . all the man and maid of the house , the old woman of the , whom the elder have cheat out of a great portion of they due , the parish clerk 's family , and the special retainer of both and be habite in sable ; add to these , the undertaker 's man , at least a score , with crape and hatband , and who make goodly show when the great burying show take place -- but these be mute personage in we drama ; and have nothing to do or say , need occupy a very little space here . with regard to she sister - in - law do not attempt to forget she former position of Governess towards they , but recal it frankly and kindly , and ask they about they study with great gravity , and tell they that she have think of they many and many a day , and long to know of they welfare . in fact you would have suppose that ever since she have leave they she have not cease to keep they uppermost in she thought and to take the tenderest interest in they welfare . so suppose herself and she young sister . " she be hardly change since eight year , " say to , as they be prepare for dinner . " those red - hair woman look wonderfully well , " reply the other . " hers be much darker than it be ; I think she must dye it , " add . " she be stouter , too , and altogether improve , " continue , who be dispose to be very fat . " at least she give herself no air and remember that she be we Governess once , " say , intimat that it befit all governess to keep they proper place , and forget altogether that she be granddaughter not only of , but of of , and so have a coal - scuttle in she scutcheon . there be other very well - mean people whom one meet every day in who be surely equally oblivious . " it can not be true what the girl at the Rectory say , that she mother be a opera-dancer -- " " a person can not help they birth , " reply with great liberality . " and i agree with we brother , that as she be in the family , of course we be bound to notice she . I be sure need not talk ; she want to marry to yoing , the wine - merchant , and absolutely ask he to come to the Rectory for order . " " I wonder whether will go away , she look very glum upon , " the other say . " I wish she would . I will not read the of , " vow ; and so say , and avoid a passage at the end of which a certain coffin be place with a couple of watcher , and light perpetually burn in the closed room , these young woman come down to the family dinner , for which the bell rang as usual . but before this , conduct to the apartment prepare for she , which , with the rest of the house , have assume a very much improve appearance of order and comfort during 's regency , and here behold that 's modest little trunk have arrive , and be place in the bedroom and dressing - room adjoining , help she to take off she neat black bonnet and cloak , and ask she sister - in - law in what more she
she could be useful . " what I should like best , " say , " would be to go to the nursery and see you dear little child . " on which the two lady look very kindly at each other and go to that apartment hand in hand . admire little , who be not quite four year old , as the most charme little love in the world ; and the boy , a little fellow of two year -- pale , heavy - eye , and large - head -- she pronounce to be a perfect prodigy in point of size , intelligence , and beauty . " I wish would not insist on give he so much medicine , " say with a sigh . " I often think we should all be better without it . " and then and she new - find friend have one of those confidential medical conversation about the child , which all mother , and most woman , as I be give to understand , delight in . fifty year ago , and when the present writer , be a interesting little boy , be order out of the room with the ladie after dinner , I remember quite well that they talk be chiefly about they ailment ; and put this question directly to two or three since , I have always get from they the acknowledgement that time be not change . let my fair reader remark for themselves this very evene when they quit the dessert - table and assemble to celebrate the drawing - room mystery . well -- in half a hour and be close and intimate friend -- and in the course of the evening she Ladyship inform that she think she new sister - in - law be a kind , frank , unaffected , and affectionate young woman . and so have easily win the daughter 's good - will , the indefatigable little woman bend herself to conciliate the august . as soon as she find she Ladyship alone , attack she on the nursery question at once and say that she own little boy be save , actually save , by calomel , freely administer , when all the physician in have give the dear child up . and then she mention how often she have hear of from that excellent man the , of the chapel in , which she frequent ; and how she view be very much change by circumstance and misfortune ; and how she hope that a past life spend in worldliness and error might not incapacitate she from more serious thought for the future . she describe how in former day she have be indebt to for religious instruction , touch upon the of , which she have read with the greatest profit , and ask about , its gift author , now , at Cape town , where she husband have strong hope of become of . but she crown all , and confirm herself in 's favour , by feel very much agitate and unwell after the funeral and request she Ladyship 's medical advice , which the Dowager not only give , but , wrap up in a bed - gown and look more like than ever , come privately in the night to 's room with a parcel of favourite tract , and a medicine of she own composition , which she insist that should take . first accept the tract and begin to examine they with great interest , engage the Dowager in a conversation concern they and the welfare of she soul , by which mean she hope that she body might escape medication . but after the religious topic be exhaust , would not quit 's chamber until she cup of night - drink be empty too ; and poor be compelle actually to assume a look of gratitude , and to swallow the medicine under the unyielding old Dowager 's nose , who leave she victo be finally with a benediction . it do not much comfort ; she countenance be very queer when come in and hear what have happen ; and he explosion of laughter be as loud as usual , when Becky , with a fun which she could not disguise , even though it be at she own expense , describe the occurrence and how she have be victimize by . , and she son in , have many a laugh over the story when and he wife return to they quarter in . act the whole scene for they . she put on a night - cap and gown . she preach a great sermon in the true serious manner ; she lecture on the virtue of the medicine which she pretend to administer , with a gravity of imitation so perfect that you would have think it be the Countess 's own nose through which she snuffle . " give we and the black dose , " be a constant cry amongst the folk in 's little drawing - room in . and for the first time in she life the Countess of be make amusing . remembe the testimony of respect and veneration which have pay personally to himself in early day , and be tolerably well dispose towards she . the marriage , ill - advise as it be , have improve very much -- that be clear from the 's altered habit and demeanour -- and have it not be a lucky union as regard himself ? the cunning diplomatist smile inwardly as he own that he owe he fortune to it , and acknowledge that he at least ought not to cry out against it . he satisfaction be not remove by 's own statement , behaviour , and conversation . she double the deference which before have charme he , call out he conversational
conversational power in such a manner as quite to surprise himself , who , always inclin to respect he own talents , admire they the more when point they out to he . with she sister - in - law , be satisfactorily able to prove that it be who bring about the marriage which she afterwards so calumniate ; that it be 's avarice -- who hope to gain all 's fortune and deprive of he aunt 's favour -- which cause and invent all the wicked report against . " she succeed in make we poor , " say with a air of angelical patience ; " but how can I be angry with a woman who have give I one of the best husband in the world ? and have not she own avarice be sufficientely punish by the ruin of she own hope and the loss of the property by which she set so much store ? poor ! " she cry . " dear , what care we for poverty ? I be use to it from childhood , and I be often thankful that 's money have go to restore the splendour of the noble old family of which I be so proud to be a member . I be sure will make a much better use of it than would . " all these speech be report to by the most faithful of wife , and increase the favourable impression which Rebeccan make ; so much so that when , on the third day after the funeral , the family party be at dinner , , carve fowl at the head of the table , actually say to , " ! , may I give you a wing ? " -- a speech which make the little woman 's eye sparkle with pleasure . while be prosecut the above scheme and hope , and arrange the funeral ceremonial and other matter connect with he future progress and dignity , and busy with she nursery , as far as she mother would let she , and the sun rise and set , and the clock - tower bell of the ring to dinner and to prayer as usual , the body of the late owner of 's lay in the apartment which he have occupi , watch unceasingly by the professional attendants who be engage for that rite . a woman or two , and three or four undertaker 's man , the best whom could furnish , dress in black , and of a proper stealthy and tragical demeanour , have charge of the remains which they watch turn about , have the housekeeper 's room for they place of rendezvous when off duty , where they play at card in privacy and drank they beer . the member of the family and servant of the house keep away from the gloomy spot , where the bone of the descendant of a ancient line of knights and gentleman lay , await they final consignment to the family crypt . no regrets attend they , save those of the poor woman who have hope to be 's wife and widow and who have fle in disgrace from the over which she have so nearly be a ruler . beyond she and a favourite old pointer he have , and between whom and himself a attachment subsist during the period of he imbecility , the old man have not a single friend to mourn he , have indeed , during the whole course of he life , never take the least pain to secure one . could the best and kindest of we who depart from the earth have a opportunity of revisit it , I suppose he or she ( assume that any Vanity fair feeling subsist in the sphere whither we be bound ) would have a pang of mortification at find how soon we survivor be consol . and so be forget -- like the kindest and best of we -- only a few week sooner . those who will may follow he remain to the grave , whither they be borne on the appointed day , in the most become manner , the family in black coach , with they handkerchief up to they nos , ready for the tear which do not come ; the undertaker and he gentleman in deep tribulation ; the select tenantry mourn out of compliment to the new landlord ; the neighbour gentry 's carriage at three mile a hour , empty , and in profound affliction ; the parson speak out the formula about " we dear brother depart . " as long as we have a man 's body , we play we Vanity upon it , surround it with humbug and ceremony , lay it in state , and pack it up in gilt nails and velvet ; and we finish we duty by place over it a stone , write all over with lie . 's curate , a smart young fellow from , and compose between they a appropriate latin epitaph for the late lament Baronet , and the former preach a classical sermon , exhort the survivor not to give way to grief and inform they in the most respectful term that they also would be one day call upon to pass that gloomy and mysterious portal which have just close upon the remains of they lamented brother . then the tenantry mount on horseback again , or stay and refresh themselves at the Arms . then , after a lunch in the servant ' hall at 's , the gentry 's carriage wheel off to they different destination : then the undertaker 's man , take the rope , pall , velvet , ostrich feather , and other mortuary property , clamber up on the roof of the hearse and ride off to . they face relapse into a
a natural expression as the horse , clear the lodge - gate , get into a brisker trot on the open road ; and squad of they might have be see , speckl with black the public - house entrance , with pewter - pots flashing in the sunshine . 's invalid chair be wheel away into a tool - house in the garden ; the old pointer use to howl sometimes at first , but these be the only accent of grief which be hear in the hall of which , , have be master for some threescore year . as the bird be pretty plentiful , and partridge shooting be as it be the duty of a english gentleman of statesmanlike propensity , , the first shock of grief over , go out a little and partook of that diversion in a white hat with crape round it . the sight of those field of stubble and turnip , now he own , give he many secret joy . sometimes , and with a exquisite humility , he take no gun , but go out with a peaceful bamboo cane ; , he big brother , and the keeper blaze away at he side . 's money and acre have a great effect upon he brother . the penniless Colonel become quite obsequious and respectful to the head of he house , and despise the milksop no longer . listen with sympathy to he senior 's prospects of planting and drain , give he advice about the stable and cattle , ride over to to look at a mare , which he think would carry , and offer to break she , & c. : the rebellious dragoon be quite humble and subdue , and become a most creditable younger brother . he have constant bulletin from in respect little , who be leave behind there , who send message of he own . " I be very well , " he write . " I hope you be very well . I hope be very well . the pony be very well . take I to ride in the park . I can canter . I meet the little boy who ride before . he cry when he canter . I do not cry . " read these letter to he brother and , who be delighted with they . the Baronet promise to take charge of the lad at school , and he kind - hear wife give a bank - note , begge she to buy a present with it for she little nephew . one day follow another , and the lady of the house pass they life in those calm pursuit and amusement which satisfy country lady . Bells ring to meal and to prayer . the young lady take exercise on the pianoforte every morning after breakfast , give they the benefit of she instruction . then they put on thick shoe and walk in the park or shrubbery , or beyond the paling into the village , descende upon the cottage , with 's medicine and tract for the sick people there . drive out in a pony -chaise , when would take she place by the Dowager 's side and listen to she solemn talk with the utmost interest . she sang and to the family of evening , and engage in a large piece of worsted work , as if she have be bear to the business and as if this kind of life be to continue with she until she should sink to the grave in a polite old age , leave regret and a great quantity of consol behind she -- as if there be not car and dun , scheme , shift , and poverty wait outside the park gate , to pounce upon she when she issue into the world again . " it be not difficult to be a country gentleman 's wife , " thought . " I think I could be a good woman if I have five thousand a year . I could dawdle about in the nursery and count the apricot on the wall . I could water plant in a green - house and pick off dead leave from the geranium . I could ask old woman about they rheumatism and order half - a - crown 's worth of soup for the poor . I should not miss it much , out of five thousand a year . I could even drive out ten mile to dine at a neighbour 's , and dress in the fashions of the year before last . I could go to church and keep awake in the great family pew , or go to sleep behind the curtain , with my veil down , if I only have practice . I could pay everybody , if I have but the money . this be what the conjuror here pride themselves upon do . they look down with pity upon we miserable sinner who have none . they think themselves generous if they give we child a five - pound note , and we contemptible if we be without one . " and who know but be right in she speculation -- and that it be only a question of money and fortune which make the difference between she and a honest woman ? if you take temptation into account , who be to say that he be better than he neighbour ? a comfortable career of prosperity , if it do not make people honest , at least keep they so . a alderman come from a turtle feast will not step out of he carnage to steal a leg of mutton ; but put he to starve , and see if he will not purloin a loaf . consol herself by so balance the chance and equalize the distribution of good and
and evil in the world . the old haunt , the old field and woods , the copse , ponds , and garden , the room of the old house where she have spend a couple of year seven year ago , be all carefully revisit by she . she have be young there , or comparatively so , for she forget the time when she ever be young -- but she remember she thought and feeling seven year back and contrast they with those which she have at present , now that she have see the world , and live with great people , and raise herself far beyond she original humble station . " I have pass beyond it , because I have brain , " thought , " and almost all the rest of the world be fool . I could not go back and consort with those people now , whom I use to meet in my father 's studio . Lords come up to my door with star and garter , instead of poor artist with screw of tobacco in they pocket . I have a gentleman for my husband , and a 's daughter for my sister , in the very house where I be little better than a servant a few year ago . but be I much better to do now in the world than I be when I be the poor painter 's daughter and wheedle the grocer round the corner for sugar and tea ? suppose I have marry who be so fond of I -- I could not have be much poorer than I be now . Heigho ! I wish I could exchange my position in society , and all my relation for a snug sum in the . Consols " ; for so it be that feel the Vanity of human affair , and it be in those security that she would have like to cast anchor . it may , perhaps , have struck she that to have be honest and humble , to have do she duty , and to have march straightforward on she way , would have bring she as near happiness as that path by which she be strive to attain it . but --just as the child at 's go round the room where the body of they father lay -- if ever have these thought , she be accustom to walk round they and not look in . she elude they and despise they -- or at least she be commit to the other path from which retreat be now impossible . and for my part I believe that remorse be the least active of all a man 's moral sense -- the very easiest to be deaden when wake , and in some never wake at all . we grieve at be find out and at the idea of shame or punishment , but the mere sense of wrong make very few people unhappy in . so , during she stay at 's , make as many friend of the of Unrighteousness as she could possibly bring under control . and she husband bade she farewell with the warmest demonstration of good - will . they look forward with pleasure to the time when , the family house in be repair and beautify , they be to meet again in . make she up a packet of medicine and send a letter by she to the , exhort that gentleman to save the brand who " honoure " the letter from the burning . accompany they with four horse in the carriage to , have send on they baggage in a cart previously , accompany with load of game . " how happy you will be to see you darling little boy again ! " say , take leave of she kinswoman . " oh so happy ! " say , throw up the green eye . she be immensely happy to be free of the place , and yet loath to go . 's be abominably stupid , and yet the air there be somehow purer than that which she have be accustom to breathe . everybody have be dull , but have be kind in they way . " it be all the influence of a long course of , " say to herself , and be right very likely . however , the lamp flash joyfully as the stage roll into , and have make a beautiful fire in , and little be up to welcome back he papa and mamma . of the considerable time have elapse since we have see we respectable friend , old of . he have not be the happiest of mortal since last we meet he . event have occur which have not improve he temper , and in more in stance than one he have not be allow to have he own way . to be thwart in this reasonable desire be always very injuriious to the old gentleman ; and resistance become doubly exasperat when gout , age , loneliness , and the force of many disappointment combine to weigh he down . he stiff black hair begin to grow quite white soon after he son 's death ; he - face grow redder ; he hand tremble more and more as he pour out he glass of port wine . he lead he clerk a dire life in the City : he family at home be not much happier . I doubt if , whom we have see piously pray for , would have exchange she poverty and the dare - devil excitement and chance of she life for 's money and the humdrum gloom which envelope he . he have propose for , but have be reject scornfully by the partisan of that lady , who marry she to a young sprig of Scotch nobility . he
he be a man to have marry a woman out of low life and bully she dreadfully afterwards ; but no person present herself suitable to he taste , and , instead , he tyrannize over he unmarried daughter , at home . she have a fine carriage and fine horse and sit at the head of a table load with the grandest plate . she have a cheque - book , a prize footman to follow she when she walk , unlimited credit , and bow and compliment from all the tradesman , and all the appurtenance of a heiress ; but she spend a woeful time . the little charity - girl at the Foundling , the sweeperess at the crossing , the poorest under-kitchen - maid in the servants ' hall , be happy compare to that unfortunate and now middle - aged young lady . , , of the house of , , and , have marry , not without a great deal of difficulty and grumbl on 's part . be dead and cut out of he father 's will , insist that the half of the old gentleman 's property should be settle upon he , and indeed , for a long time , refuse , " to come to the scratch " ( it be 's own expression ) on any other term . say have agree to take he daughter with twenty thousand , and he should bind himself to no more . " might take it , and welcome , or leave it , and go and be hang . " , whose hope have be raise when have be disinherit , think himself infamously swindle by the old merchant , and for some time make as if he would break off the match altogether . withdraw he account from and 's , go on ' change with a horsewhip which he swore he would lay across the back of a certain scoundrel that should be nameless , and demean himself in he usual violent manner . condol with she sister during this family feud . " I always tell you , , that it be you money he love and not you , " she say , soothingly . " he select I and my money at any rate ; he do not choose you and yours , " reply , toss up she head . the rapture be , however , only temporary . 's father and senior partner counsel he to take , even with the twenty thousand settled , half down , and half at the death of , with the chance of the further division of the property . so he " knuckle down , " again to use he own phrase , and send old Hulker with peaceable overture to . it be he father , he say , who would not hear of the match , and have make the difficulty ; he be most anxious to keep the engagement . the excuse be sulkily accept by . and be a high family of the aristocracy , and connect with the " nob " at the . it be something for the old man to be able to say , " my son , sir , of the house of , , and , sir ; my daughter 's cousin , , sir , daughter of the . the of . " in he imagination he see he house people by the " nob . " so he forgave young Bullock and consent that the marriage should take place . it be a grand affair -- the bridegroom 's relatives give the breakfast , they habitation be near 's , , where the business take place . the " nob of the " be invite , and many of they sign the book . and be there , with the dear young and as bridesmaid ; of the ( eldest son of the house of , ) , another cousin of the bridegroom , and the Honourable ; the , 's son , and he lady , that be ; ; and ( formerly ) ; and a host of fashionable , who have all marry into and do a great deal to ennoble . the young couple have a house near and a small villa at , among the banking colony there . be consider to have make rather a mesalliance by the ladie of he family , whose grandfather have be in a , and who be ally through the husband with some of the best blood in . and be bound , by superior pride and great care in the composition of she visit - book , to make up for the defects of birth , and feel it she duty to see she father and sister as little as possible . that she should utterly break with the old man , who have still so many score of thousand pound to give away , be absurd to suppose . would never allow she to do that . but she be still young and incapable of hi she feeling ; and by invite she papa and sister to she third - rate party , and behave very coldly to they when they come , and by avoid , and indiscreetly begge she father to quit that odious vulgar place , she do more harm than all 's diplomacy could repair , and perill she chance of she inheritance like a giddy heedless creature as she be . " so be not good enough for , hay ? " say the old gentleman , ratt up the carriage window as he and he daughter drive away one night from 's , after dinner . " so she invite she father and sister to a second day 's dinner ( if those side , or ontrys , as she call th'ey , be not
not serve yesterday , I be d -- ) , and to meet folk and littery man , and keep the Earls and the lady , and the Honourable to herself . Honourable ? . I be a plain british merchant I be , and could buy the beggarly hound over and over . Lords , indeed !-- why , at one of she swarrey I see one of 'em speak to a dam fiddler -- a fellar I despise . and they will not come to , will not they ? why , I will lay my life I have get a better glass of wine , and pay a better figure for it , and can show a handsomer service of silver , and can lay a better dinner on my mahogany , than ever they see on theirs -- the cringing , sneak , stick - up fools . drive on , : I want to get back to -- ha , ha ! " and he sank back into the corner with a furious laugh . with such reflection on he own superior merit , it be the custom of the old gentleman not unfrequently to conseal himself . could not but concur in these opinion respect she sister 's conduct ; and when 's first - bear , , be bear , old , who be invite to the christening and to be godfather , content himself with send the child a gold cup , with twenty guinea inside it for the nurse . " that be more than any of you Lords will give , I will warrant , " he say and refuse to attend at the ceremony . the splendour of the gift , however , cause great satisfaction to the house of . think that she father be very much pleased with she , and augure the best for he little son and heir . one can fancy the pang with which in she solitude in read the , where she sister 's name occur every now and then , in the article head " Fashionable Reunion , " and where she have a opportunity of read a description of . 's costume , when present at the drawing room by . 's own life , as we have say , admit of no such grandeur . it be a awful existence . she have to get up of black winter 's morning to make breakfast for she scowling old father , who would have turn the whole house out of door if he tea have not be ready at half - past eight . she remain silent opposite to he , listen to the urn hiss , and sit in tremor while the parent read he paper and consum he accustom portion of muffin and tea . at half - past nine he rise and go to the City , and she be almost free till dinner - time , to make visitation in the kitchen and to scold the servants ; to drive abroad and descmend upon the tradesman , who be prodigiously respectful ; to leave she card and she papa 's at the great glum respectable house of they City friend ; or to sit alone in the large drawing - room , expect visitor ; and work at a huge piece of worst by the fire , on the sofa , hard by the great clock , which tick and toll with mournful loudness in the dreary room . the great glass over the mantelpiece , face by the other great console glass at the opposite end of the room , increase and multiply between they the brown Holland bag in which the chandelier hang , until you see these brown Holland bag fading away in endless perspectife , and this apartment of 's see the centre of a system of draw - room . when she remove the cordovan leather from the grand piano and venture to play a few note on it , it sound with a mournful sadness , start the dismal echoe of the house . 's picture be gone , and lay upstairs in a lumber - room in the garret ; and though there be a consciousness of he , and father and daughter often instinctively know that they be think of he , no mention be ever make of the brave and once darling son . at five o'clock come back to he dinner , which he and he daughter take in silence ( seldom break , except when he swore and be savage , if the cooking be not to he liking ) , or which they share twice in a month with a party of dismal friend of 's rank and age . and he lady from ; old , the attorney , from , a very great man , and from he business , hand - in - glove with the " nob at the " ; old , of the , and , from place ; old and ; and sometimes old and , from . be celebrate as a hang judge , and the particular tawny port be produce when he dine with . these people and they like give the pompous merchant pompous dinner back again . they have solemn rubber of whist , when they go upstairs after drinking , and they carriage be call at half past ten . many rich people , whom we poor devils be in the habit of envy , lead contentedly a existence like that above describe . Osborne scarcely ever meet a man under sixty , and almost the only bachelor who appear in they society be , the celebrated lady ' doctor . I can not say that nothing have occur to disturb the monotony of this awful existence : the fact be , there have be a secret in poor 's life which have
have make she father more savage and morise than even nature , pride , and over-feeding have make he . this secret be connect with , who have a cousin a artist , , very celebrated since as a portrait - painter and , but who once be glad enough to give draw lesson to lady of fashion . have forget where be now , but he be glad enough to visit it in the year 1818 , when have instruction from he . ( formerly a pupil of of , a dissolute , irregular , and unsuccessful man , but a man with great knowledge of he art ) be the cousin of , we say , and introduce by she to , whose hand and heart be still free after various incomplete love affair , feel a great attachment for this lady , and it be believe inspire one in she bosom . Wirt be the confidante of this intrigue . I know not whether she use to leave the room where the master and he pupil be pain , in order to give they a opportunity for exchange those vow and sentiment which can not be utter advantageously in the presence of a third party ; I know not whether she hope that should she cousin succeed in carry off the rich merchant 's daughter , he would give a portion of the wealth which she have enable he to win -- all that be certain be that get some hint of the transaction , come back from the abruptly , and enter the drawing - room with he bamboo cane ; find the painter , the pupil , and the companion all look exceedingly pale there ; turn the former out of door with menace that he would break every bone in he skin , and half a hour afterwards dismiss likewise , kick she trunk down the stair , trampl on she bandbox , and shake he fist at she hackney coach as it bear she away . keep she bedroom for many day . she be not allow to have a companion afterwards . she father swore to she that she should not have a shilling of he money if she make any match without he concurrence ; and as he want a woman to keep he house , he do not choose that she should marry , so that she be oblige to give up all project with which Cupid have any share . during she papa 's life , then , she resign herself to the manner of existence here describe , and be content to be a old maid . she sister , meanwhile , be have child with finer name every year and the intercourse between the two grew fainter continually . " and I do not move in the same sphere of life , " say . " I regard she as a sister , of course " -- which mean -- what do it mean when a lady say that she regard as a sister ? it have be describe how the live with they father at a fine villa at , where there be beautiful grapery and peach - tree which delighte little . the , who drive often to to see we dear , come sometimes to too , to pay a visit to they old acquaintance . I believe it be in consequence of the command of they brother the major in ( for whom they papa have a prodigious respect ) , that they pay attention to ; for the major , the godfather and guardian of 's little boy , still hope that the child 's grandfather might be induce to relent towards he and acknowledge he for the sake of he son . the keep acquaint with the state of 's affair ; how she be live with she father and mother ; how poor they be ; how they wonder what man , and such man as they brother and dear , could find in such a insignificant little chit ; how she be still , as heretofore , a namby -pamby milk - and - water affect creature -- but how the boy be really the noblest little boy ever see -- for the heart of all woman warm towards young child , and the sourest spinster be kind to they . one day , after great entreaty on the part of the , allow little to go and pass a day with they at - - a part of which day she spend herself in writing to the major in . she congratulate he on the happy news which he sister have just convey to she . she pray for he prosperity and that of the bride he have choose . she thank he for a thousand thousand kind office and proof of stead fast friendship to she in she affliction . she tell he the last news about little , and how he be gone to spend that very day with he sister in the country . she underlin the letter a great deal , and she sign herself affectionately he friend , . she forget to send any message of kindness to , as she will not be -- and do not mention by name , and only in italic , as the 's , for whom she beg blessing . but the news of the marriage remove the reserve which she have keep up towards he . she be glad to be able to own and feel how warmly and gratefully she regard he -- and as for the idea of be jealous of ( , indeed ! ) , would have scoute it , if a angel from heaven have hint it to she . that night , when come back in the pony -carriage in which he rejoice , and in which he be drive
drive by . 's old coachman , he have round he neck a fine gold chain and watch . he say a old lady , not pretty , have give it he , who cry and kiss he a great deal . but he do not like she . he like grape very much . and he only like he mamma . shrank and start ; the timid soul feel a presentiment of terror when she hear that the relation of the child 's father have see he . come back to give she father he dinner . he have make a good speculation in the City , and be rather in a good humour that day , and chance to remark the agitation under which she laboure . " what be the matter , ? " he deign to say . the woman burst into tear . " oh , sir , " she say , " I have see little . he be as beautiful as a angel -- and so like he ! " the old man opposite to she do not say a word , but flush up and begin to tremble in every limb . in the reader Has to double the cape the astonished reader must be call upon to transport himself ten thousand mile to the military station of , in the division of we indian empire , where we gallant old friend of the -- th regiment be quarter under the command of the brave , . have deal kindly with that stout officer , as it do ordinarily with man who have good stomach and good temper and be not perplex over much by fatigue of the brain . the play a good knife and fork at tiffin and resume those weapon with great success at dinner . he smoke he hookah after both meal and puffs as quietly while he wife scold he as he do under the fire of the french at . age and heat have not diminish the activity or the eloquence of the descendant of the and the . she Ladyship , we old acquaintance , be as much at home at as at in the cantonment as under the tent . on the march you see she at the head of the regiment seat on a elephant , a noble sight . Mounte on that beast , she have be into action with tiger in the jungle , she have be receive by native prince , who have welcome she and into the recess of they zenana and offer she shawl and jewel which it go to she heart to refuse . the sentry of all arm salute she wherever she make she appearance , and she touch she hat gravely to they salutation . be one of the greatest lady in the Presidency of -- she quarrel with , wife of the puisne judge , be still remembe by some at , when the Colonel 's lady snap she finger in the judge 's lady 's face and say she would never walk behind ever a beggarly civilian . even now , though it be five - and - twenty year ago , people remember perform a jig at , where she dance down two - - , a major of cavalry , and two gentleman of the civil service ; and , persuade by , , second in command of the -- th , to retire to the supper - room , lassata nondum satiato recessit . be indeed the same as ever , kind in act and thought ; impetuous in temper ; eager to command ; a tyrant over she ; a dragon amongst all the lady of the regiment ; a mother to all the young man , whom she tend in they sickness , defend in all they scrap , and with whom be immensely popular . but the ' and ' lady ( the major be unmarried ) cabal against she a good deal . they say that give herself air and that herself be ill tolerably domineer . she interfere with a little congregation which have get up and laugh the young man away from she sermon , state that a soldier 's wife have no business to be a parson -- that would be much better mende she husband 's clothes ; and , if the regiment want sermon , that she have the finest in the world , those of she uncle , the Dean . she abruptly put a termination to a flirtation which of the regiment have commence with the surgeon 's wife , threaten to come down upon for the money which he have borrowed from she ( for the young fellow be still of a extravagant turn ) unless he break off at once and go to the cape on sick leave . on the other hand , she house and shelte , who fle from she bungalow one night , pursue by she infuriate husband , wield he second brandy bottle , and actually carry through the delirium tremen and break he of the habit of drinking , which have grow upon that officer , as all evil habits will grow upon man . in a word , in adversity she be the best of comforter , in good fortune the most troublesome of friend , have a perfectly good opinion of herself always and a indomitable resolution to have she own way . among other point , she have make up she mind that should marry we old friend Dobbin . know the major 's expectation and appreciat he good quality and the high character which he enjoy in he profession . , a very handsome , fresh - coloured , black - haired , blue - eyed young lady , who could ride a horse , or play a sonata with any girl out of the , seem to
to be the very person destin to insure 's happiness -- much more than that poor good little weak - spur ' , about whom he use to take on so .-- " look at enter a room , " . would say , " and compare she with that poor , who could not say boo to a goose . she would be worthy of you , major -- you be a quiet man yourself , and want some one to talk for ye . and though she do not come of such good blood as the or , let I tell ye , she be of a ancient family that any nobleman might be proud to marry into . " but before she have come to such a resolution and determine to subjugate major by she endearment , it must be own that have practise they a good deal elsewhere . she have have a season in , and who know how many in , , and ? she have flirt with all the marriageable officer whom the depot of she country afforde , and all the bachelor squire who seem eligible . she have be engage to be marry a half - score time in , besides the clergyman at who use she so ill . she have flirt all the way to Madras with the and chief mate of the , and have a season at the Presidency with she brother and , who be stay there , while the major of the regiment be in command at the station . everybody admire she there ; everybody dance with she ; but no one propose who be worth the marrying -- one or two exceedingly young subaltern sigh after she , and a beardless civilian or two , but she reject these as beneath she pretension -- and other and younger virgin than be marry before she . there be woman , and handsome woman too , who have this fortune in life . they fall in love with the utmost generosity ; they ride and walk with half the Army - list , though they draw near to forty , and yet the be the still : persist that but for 's unlucky quarrel with the judge 's lady , she would have make a good match at , where old , who be at the head of the civil service ( and who afterwards marry , a young lady only thirteen year of age who have just arrive from school in ) , be just at the point of propose to she . well , although and quarrell a great number of time every day , and upon almost every conceivable subject -- indeed , if have not possess the temper of a angel two such woman constantly about he ear would have drive he out of he sense -- yet they agree between themselves on this point , that should marry Major Dobbin , and be determined that the major should have no rest until the arrangement be bring about . Undismay by forty or fifty previous defeat , laid siege to he . she sang irish melody at he unceasingly . she ask he so frequently and pathetically , will ye come to the bower ? that it be a wonder how any man of feeling could have resist the invitation . she be never tired of inquire , if have he young day faded , and be ready to listen and weep like at the story of he dangers and he campaigns . it have be say that we honest and dear old friend use to perform on the flute in private ; insist upon have duet with he , and would rise and artlessly quit the room when the young couple be so engage . forc the major to ride with she of morning . the whole cantonment see they set out and return . she be constantly write note over to he at he house , borrowe he book , and score with she great pencil - mark such passage of sentiment or humour as awaken she sympathy . she borrow he horse , he servants , he spoon , and palanquin -- no wonder that public rumour assign she to he , and that the major 's sister in should fancy they be about to have a sister - in - law . , who be thus vigorously besieged , be in the meanwhile in a state of the most odious tranquillity . he use to laugh when the young fellow of the regiment joke he about 's manifest attention to he . " ! " say he , " she be only keep she hand in -- she practise upon I as she do upon 's piano , because it be the most handy instrument in the station . I be much to batter and old for such a fine young lady as . " and so he go on riding with she , and copy music and verse into she album , and play at chess with she very submissively ; for it be with these simple amusement that some officer in be accustom to while away they leisure moment , while other of a less domestic turn hunt hog , and shoot snipe , or gamble and smoke cheroot , and betake themselves to brandy - and - water . as for , though he lady and she sister both urge he to call upon the major to explain himself and not keep on torture a poor innocent girl in that shameful way , the old soldier refuse point - blank to have anything to do with the conspiracy . " , the major 's big enough to choose for himself , " say ; " he will ask ye when he want ye " ; or else he would turn the matter off jocularly ,
, declare that " be too young to keep house , and have write home to ask lave of he mamma . " Nay , he go farther , and in private communication with he major would caution and rally he , cry , " mind you oi , , my boy , they girl be bent on mischief -- I have just get a box of gowns from , and there be a pink satin for , which will finish ye , , if it be in the power of woman or satin to move ye . " but the truth be , neither beauty nor fashion could conquer he . we honest friend have but one idea of a woman in he head , and that one do not in the least resemble in pink satin . a gentle little woman in black , with large eye and brown hair , seldom speak , save when speak to , and then in a voice not the least resembling 's - - a soft young mother ten a infant and beckon the major up with a smile to look at he -- a rosy - cheek lass come singe into the room in or hang on 's arm , happy and loving -- there be but this image that fill we honest major 's mind , by day and by night , and reign over it always . very likely be not like the portrait the major have form of she : there be a figure in a book of fashions which he sister have in , and with which have make away privately , paste it into the lid of he desk , and fancie he see some resemblance to in the print , whereas I have see it , and can vouch that it be but the picture of a high - waiste gown with a impossible doll 's face simper over it -- and , perhaps , 's be no more like the real one than this absurd little print which he cherish . but what man in love , of we , be better infor ? -- or be he much happier when he see and own he delusion ? be under this spell . he do not bother he friend and the public much about he feeling , or indeed lose he natural rest or appetite on account of they . he head have grizzl since we see he last , and a line or two of silver may be see in the soft brown hair likewise . but he feeling be not in the least change or olden , and he love remain as fresh as a man 's recollection of boyhood be . we have say how the two and , the major 's correspondent in , write he letter from , congratulate he with great candour and cordiality upon he approaching nuptial with . " you sister have just kindly visit I , " write in she letter , " and inform I of a interesting event , upon which I beg to offer my most Sincere congratulation . I hope the young lady to whom I hear you be to be will in every respect prove worthy of one who be himself all kindness and goodness . the poor widow have only she prayer to offer and she cordial cordial wish for you prosperity ! send he love to and hope that you will not forget he . I tell he that you be about to form , with one who I be sure merit all you affection , but that , although such tie must of course be the strongest and most sacred , and supersede all other , yet that I be sure the widow and the child whom you have ever protect and love will always have a corner in you heart " the letter , which have be before allude to , go on in this strain , protest throughout as to the extreme satisfaction of the writer . this letter , which arrive by the very same ship which bring out 's box of millinery from ( and which you may be sure open before any one of the other packet which the mail bring he ) , put the receiver into such a state of mind that , and she pink satin , and everything belong to she become perfectly odious to he . the major curse the talk of woman , and the sex in general . everything annoye he that day -- the parade be insufferably hot and wearisome . good heaven ! be a man of intellect to waste he life , day after day , inspect cross - belt and put fools through they manoeuvre ? the senseless chatter of the young man at mess be more than ever jarr . what care he , a man on the high road to forty , to know how many snipe have shot , or what be the performance of 's mare ? the joke about the table fill he with shame . he be too old to listen to the banter of the assistant surgeon and the slang of the youngster , at which old , with he bald head and red face , laugh quite easily . the old man have listen to those joke any time these thirty year -- himself have be fifteen year hear they . and after the boisterous dulness of the mess - table , the quarrel and scandal of the lady of the regiment ! it be unbearable , shameful . " of , , " he think , " you to whom I have be so faithful -- you reproach I ! it be because you can not feel for I that I drag on this wearisome life . and you reward I after year of devotion by give I you bless upon my
my marriage , forsooth , with this flaunt irish girl ! " and sorry feel poor ; more than ever wretch and lonely . he would like to have do with life and its vanity altogether -- so bootless and unsatisfactory the struggle , so cheerless and dreary the prospect seem to he . he lay all that night sleepless , and year to go home . 's letter have fall as a blank upon he . no fidelity , no constant truth and passion , could move she into warmth . she would not see that he love she . Tosse in he bed , he speak out to she . " , ! " he say , " do not you know that I only love you in the world -- you , who be a stone to I -- you , whom I ten through month and month of illness and grief , and who bade I farewell with a smile on you face , and forget I before the door shut between we ! " the native servant lie outside he veranda beheld with wonder the major , so cold and quiet ordinarily , at present so passionately move and cast down . would she have pitie he have she see he ? he read over and over all the letter which he ever have from she -- letter of business relative to the little property which he have make she believe she husband have leave to she -- brief note of invitation -- every scrap of writing that she have ever send to he -- how cold , how kind , how hopeless , how selfish they be ! have there be some kind gentle soul near at hand who could read and appreciate this silent generous heart , who know but that the reign of might have be over , and that friend 's love might have flow into a kinder channel ? but there be only Glorvina of the jetty ringlet with whom he intercourse be familiar , and this dash young woman be not bent upon love the major , but rather on make the major admire she - - a most vain and hopeless task , too , at least consider the means that the poor girl possess to carry it out . she curl she hair and show she shoulders at he , as much as to say , do ye ever see such jet ringlet and such a complexion ? she grin at he so that he might see that every tooth in she head be sound -- and he never heed all these charms . very soon after the arrival of the box of millinery , and perhaps indeed in honour of it , and the lady of the 's give a ball to the company 's Regiment and the civilian at the station . sport the kill pink frock , and the major , who attend the party and walk very ruefully up and down the room , never so much as perceive the pink garment . dance past he in a fury with all the young subaltern of the station , and the major be not in the least jealous of she performance , or angry because of the hand she to supper . it be not jealousy , or frock , or shoulder that could move he , and have nothing more . so these two be each exemplify the Vanity of this life , and each long for what he or she could not get . cry with rage at the failure . she have set she mind on the major " more than on any of the other , " she own , sobb . " he will break my heart , he will , , " she would whimper to she sister - in - law when they be good friend ; " sure every one of I frock must be take in -- it be such a skeleton I be grow . " fat or thin , laugh or melancholy , on horseback or the music - stool , it be all the same to the major . and the Colonel , puffe he pipe and listen to these complaint , would suggest that should have some black frock out in the next box from , and tell a mysterious story of a lady in who die of grief for the loss of she husband before she get ere a one . while the major be go on in this tantalizing way , not propose , and decline to fall in love , there come another ship from bring letter on board , and amongst they some more for the heartless man . these be home letter bear a earlier postmark than that of the former packet , and as major recognize among he the handwriting of he sister , who always cross and recross she letter to she brother -- gather together all the possible bad news which she could collect , abuse he and read he lecture with sisterly frankness , and always leave he miserable for the day after " dearest " have achieve the perusal of one of she epistle -- the truth must be tell that dearest do not hurry himself to break the seal of 's letter , but wait for a particularly favourable day and mood for do so . a fortnight before , moreover , he have write to scold she for tell those absurd story to , and have despatch a letter in reply to that lady , undeceive she with respect to the report concern he and assure she that " he have no sort of present intention of altering he condition . " two or three night after the arrival of the second package of letter , the major have pass the evening pretty cheerfully at 's house , where think
think that he listen with rather more attention than usual to the meeting of the Wather , the , and one or two other specimen of song with which she favour he ( the truth be , he be no more listen to than to the howling of the jackal in the moonlight outside , and the delusion be hers as usual ) , and have play he game at chess with she ( cribbage with the surgeon be 's favourite evening pastime ) , take leave of the 's family at he usual hour and retire to he own house . there on he table , he sister 's letter lay reproach he . he take it up , asham rather of he negligence regard it , and prepare himself for a disagreeable hour 's communing with that crab - hand absent relative . . . . it may have be a hour after the major 's departure from the 's house -- be sleep the sleep of the just ; have arrange she black ringlet in the innumerable little bit of paper , in which it be she habit to confine they ; , too , have go to she bed in the nuptial chamber , on the ground - floor , and have tuck she musquito curtain round she fair form , when the guard at the gate of the - 's compound beheld major , in the moonlight , rush towards the house with a swift step and a very agitated countenance , and he pass the sentinel and go up to the window of the 's bedchamber . " -- ! " say and keep up a great shouting . " , ! " say of the curl -paper , put out she head too , from she window . " what be it , , I boy ? " say the Colonel , expect there be a fire in the station , or that the route have come from headquarters . " I -- I must have leave of absence . I must go to -- on the most urgent private affair , " say . " good heaven , what have happen ! " think , trembl with all the papillote . " I want to be off -- now -- to - night , " continue ; and the Colonel get up , come out to parley with he . in the postscript of 's cross - letter , the major have just come upon a paragraph , to the follow effect :--" I drive yesterday to see you old , . the wretched place they live at , since they be bankrupt , you know -- , to judge from a plate on the door of he hut ( it be little better ) be a coal - merchant . the little boy , you godson , be certainly a fine child , though forward , and inclin to be saucy and self - will . but we have take notice of he as you wish it , and have introduce he to he aunt , , who be rather pleased with he . perhaps he grandpapa , not the bankrupt one , who be almost do , but , of , may be induce to relent towards the child of you friend , he Erring and self - Willed Son . and will not be ill - dispose to give he up . the widow be Consoled , and be about to marry a reverend gentleman , the , one of the curate of . a poor match . but be get old , and I see a great deal of grey in she hair -- she be in very good spirit : and you little godson overate himself at we house . send she love with that of you affectionate , . " - about between and Our old friend the 's family house , in Great , still bear over its front the hatchment which have be place there as a token of mourning for 's demise , yet this heraldic emblem be in itself a very splendid and gaudy piece of furniture , and all the rest of the mansion become more brilliant than it have ever be during the late baronet 's reign . the black outer - coating of the brick be remove , and they appear with a cheerful , blushing face streak with white : the old bronze lion of the knocker be gild handsomely , the railing pain , and the dismallest house in great become the smartest in the whole quarter , before the green leave in have replace those yellow one which be on the tree in 's when old pass under they for the last time . a little woman , with a carriage to correspond , be perpetually see about this mansion ; a elderly spinster , accompany by a little boy , also might be remark come thither daily . it be and little , whose business it be to see to the inward renovation of 's house , to superintend the female band engage in stitch the blind and hanging , to poke and rummage in the drawer and cupboard cramm with the dirty relic and congregate trumpery of a couple of generation of , and to take inventory of the china , the glass , and other property in the closet and store - room . be general - in - chief over these arrangement , with full order from to sell , barter , confiscate , or purchase furniture , and she enjoy herself not a little in a occupation which give full scope to she taste and ingenuity . the renovation of the house be determine upon when come to town in to see he lawyer , and when he pass nearly a week in , under the roof of he affectionate brother and
and sister . he have put up at a hotel at first , but , , as soon as she hear of the 's arrival , go off alone to greet he , and return in a hour to with in the carriage by she side . it be impossible sometimes to resist this artless little creature 's hospitality , so kindly be they press , so frankly and amiably ofer . seize 's hand in a transport of gratitude when he agree to come . " thank you , " she say , squeeze it and look into the Baronet 's eye , who blush a good deal ; " how happy this will make ! " she bust up to 's bedroom , lead on the servants , who be carry he trunk thither . she come in herself laugh , with a coal - scuttle out of she own room . a fire be blaze already in 's apartment ( it be 's room , by the way , who be send upstairs to sleep with the maid ) . " I know I should bring you , " she say with pleasure beame in she glance . indeed , she be really sincerely happy at have he for a guest . make dine out once or twice on business , while stay with they , and the pass the happy evening alone with she and . she go downstairs to the kitchen and actually cook little dish for he . " be not it a good salmi ? " she say ; " I make it for you . I can make you better dish than that , and will when you come to see I . " " everything you do , you do well , " say the gallantly . " the salmi be excellent indeed . " " a poor man 's wife , " reply gaily , " must make herself useful , you know " ; on which she brother - in - law vow that " she be fit to be the wife of a emperor , and that to be skilful in domestic duty be surely one of the most charming of woman 's quality . " and think , with something like mortification , of at home , and of a certain pie which she have insist on making , and serve to he at dinner -- a most abominable pie . besides the salmi , which be make of 's pheasant from he lordship 's cottage of , give she brother - in - law a bottle of white wine , some that have bring with he from , and have pick up for nothing , the little story - teller say ; whereas the liquor be , in truth , some Hermitage from the of 's famous cellar , which bring fire into the Baronet 's pallid cheek and a glow into he feeble frame . then when he have drink up the bottle of petit vin blanc , she give he she hand , and take he up to the drawing - room , and make he snug on the sofa by the fire , and let he talk as she listen with the tenderest kindly interest , sit by he , and hemm a shirt for she dear little boy . wish to be particularly humble and virtuous , this little shirt use to come out of she work - box . it have get to be too small for long before it be finished . well , listen to , she talk to he , she sang to he , she coax he , and cuddle he , so that he find himself more and more glad every day to get back from the lawyer 's at 's , to the blazing fire in -- a gladness in which the man of law likewise participate , for 's harangue be of the longest -- and so that when he go away he feel quite a pang at departing . how pretty she look kiss she hand to he from the carriage and wave she handkerchief when he have take he place in the mail ! she put the handkerchief to she eye once . he pull he sealskin cap over he , as the coach drive away , and , sink back , he think to himself how she respecte he and how he deserv it , and how be a foolish dull fellow who do not half - appreciate he wife ; and how mum and stupid he own wife be compare to that brilliant little . have hint every one of these thing herself , perhaps , but so delicately and gently that you hardly know when or where . and , before they parte , it be agree that the house in should be redecorate for the next season , and that the brother 's family should meet again in the country at . " I wish you could have get a little money out of he , " say to he wife moodily when the Baronet be gone . " I should like to give something to old Raggles , hang if I should not . it be not right , you know , that the old fellow should be keep out of all he money . it may be inconvenient , and he might let to somebody else besides we , you know . " " tell he , " say , " that as soon as 's affair be settle , everybody will be pay , and give he a little something on account . here be a cheque that leave for the boy , " and she take from she bag and give she husband a paper which he brother have hand over to she , on behalf of the little son and heir of the younger
younger branch of the Crawley . the truth be , she have try personally the ground on which she husband express a wish that she should venture -- try it ever so delicately , and find it unsafe . even at a hint about embarrassment , be off and alarm . and he begin a long speech , explain how straiten he himself be in money matter ; how the tenant would not pay ; how he father 's affair , and the expense attendant upon the demise of the old gentleman , have involve he ; how he want to pay off incumbrance ; and how the banker and agent be overdrawn ; and end by make a compromise with he sister - in - law and give she a very small sum for the benefit of she little boy . know how poor he brother and he brother 's family must be . it could not have escape the notice of such a cool and experience old diplomatist that 's family have nothing to live upon , and that house and carriage be not to be keep for nothing . he know very well that he be the proprietor or appropriator of the money , which , accord to all proper calculation , ought to have fallen to he younger brother , and he have , we may be sure , some secret pang of remorse within he , which warn he that he ought to perform some act of justice , or , let we say , compensation , towards these disappointed relation . a just , decent man , not without brain , who say he prayer , and know he catechism , and do he duty outwardly through life , he could not be otherwise than aware that something be due to he brother at he hand , and that morally he be 's debtor . but , as one read in the column of the newspaper every now and then , queer announcement from the of the Exchequer , acknowledge the receipt of 50 pound from . , or 10 pound from , as conscience - money , on account of tax due by the say . . or , which payment the penitent beg the right Honourable gentleman to acknowledge through the medium of the public press -- so be the Chancellor no doubt , and the reader likewise , always perfectly sure that the above -nam a . and be only pay a very small instalment of what they really owe , and that the man who send up a twenty - pound note have very likely hundred or thousand more for which he ought to account . such , at least , be my feeling , when I see a . b . or . 's insufficient act of repentance . and I have no doubt that 's contrition , or kindness if you will , towards he younger brother , by whom he have so much profited , be only a very small dividend upon the capital sum in which he be indebt to . not everybody be willing to pay even so much . to part with money be a sacrifice beyond almost all man endow with a sense of order . there be scarcely any man alive who do not think himself meritorious for give he neighbour five pound . thriftless give , not from a beneficent pleasure in give , but from a lazy delight in spending . he would not deny himself one enjoyment ; not he opera - stall , not he horse , not he dinner , not even the pleasure of give the five pound . , who be good , wise , just , and owe no man a penny , turn from a beggar , haggle with a hackney - coachman , or deny a poor relation , and I doubt which be the most selfish of the two . money have only a different value in the eyes of each . so , in a word , think he would do something for he brother , and then think that he would think about it some other time . and with regard to , she be not a woman who expect too much from the generosity of she neighbour , and so be quite content with all that have do for she . she be acknowledge by the head of the family . if would not give she anything , he would get something for she some day . if she get no money from she brother - in - law , she get what be as good as money -- credit . Raggles be make rather easy in he mind by the spectacle of the union between the brother , by a small payment on the spot , and by the promise of a much larger sum speedily to be assign to he . and tell , whose dividend upon the little sum lent by she pay with a air of candid joy , and as if she exchequer be brim over with gold -- , we say , tell , in strict confidence that she have confer with , who be famous as a financier , on 's special behalf , as to the most profitable investment of . remain capital ; that , after much consideration , have think of a most safe and advantageous way in which could lay out she money ; that , be especially interested in she as a attach friend of the late , and of the whole family , and that long before he leave town , he have recommend that she should be ready with the money at a moment 's notice , so as to purchase at the most favourable opportunity the share which have in he eye . poor be very grateful for this mark of 's attention --
-- it come so unsolicited , she say , for she never should have think of remove the money from the fund -- and the delicacy enhance the kindness of the office ; and she promise to see she man of business immediately and be ready with she little cash at the proper hour . and this worthy woman be so grateful for the kindness of in the matter , and for that of she generous benefactor , the Colonel , that she go out and spend a great part of she half - year 's dividend in the purchase of a black velvet coat for little , who , by the way , be grow almost too big for black velvet now , and be of a size and age befitt he for the assumption of the virile jacket and pantaloon . he be a fine open - faced boy , with blue eye and waive flaxen hair , sturdy in limb , but generous and soft in heart , fondly attach himself to all who be good to he -- to the pony -- to , who give he the horse ( he use to blush and glow all over when he see that kind young nobleman ) -- to the groom who have charge of the pony -- to , the cook , who cramm he with ghost story at night , and with good thing from the dinner -- to , whom he plague and laugh at -- and to he father especially , whose attachment towards the lad be curiious too to witness . here , as he grow to be about eight year old , he attachment may be say to have end . the beautiful mother - vision have fade away after a while . during near two year she have scarcely speak to the child . she dislike he . he have the measle and the hooping - cough . he bore she . one day when he be stand at the landing - place , have creep down from the upper region , attract by the sound of he mother 's voice , who be singe to , the draw room door open suddenly , discover the little spy , who but a moment before have be rapt in delight , and listen to the music . he mother come out and strike he violently a couple of box on the ear . he hear a laugh from the in the inner room ( who be amuse by this free and artless exhibition of 's temper ) and fle down below to he friend of the kitchen , burst in a agony of grief . " it be not because it hurt I , " little gasp out -- " only -- only " -- sob and tear wound up the sentence in a storm . it be the little boy 's heart that be bleed . " why may not I hear she singe ? why do not she ever se to I -- as she do to that baldhead man with the large tooth ? " he gas out at various interval these exclamation of rage and grief . the cook look at the housemaid , the housemaid look knowingly at the footman -- the awful kitchen inquisition which sit in judgement in every house and know everything -- sit on at that moment . after this incident , the mother 's dislike increase to hatre ; the consciousness that the child be in the house be a reproach and a pain to she . he very sight annoye she . fear , doubt , and resistance spring up , too , in the boy 's own bosom . they be separate from that day of the box on the ear . also heartily dislike the boy . when they meet by mischance , he make sarcastic bow or remark to the child , or glar at he with savage - look eye . use to stare he in the face and double he little fist in return . he know he enemy , and this gentleman , of all who come to the house , be the one who anger he most . one day the footman find he square he fists at 's hat in the hall . the footman tell the circumstance as a good joke to 's coachman ; that officer impart it to 's gentleman , and to the servants 's hall in general . and very soon afterwards , when make she appearance at , the porter who unbar the gate , the servants of all uniform in the hall , the functionary in white waistcoat , who bawl out from landing to lande the name of and , know about she , or fancie they do . the man who bring she refreshment and stand behind she chair , have talk she character over with the large gentleman in motley - colou clothes at he side . ! it be awful , that servant ' inquisition ! you see a woman in a great party in a splendid saloon , surround by faithful admirer , distribute sparkling glance , dress to perfection , curl , rouge , smile and happy -- walk respectfully up to she , in the shape of a huge powder man with large calf and a tray of ex -- with ( which be as fatal as truth ) behind he , in the shape of the hulking fellow carry the wafer - biscuit . madam , you secret will be talk over by those man at they club at the public - house to - night . Jeames will tell Chawles he notion about you over they pipe and pewter beer - pots . some people ought to have mute for servants in -- mute who could not write . if you be guilty , tremble . that
that fellow behind you chair may be a with a bow - string in he plush breech pocket . if you be not guilty , have a care of appearance , which be as ruinous as guilt . " be guilty or not ? " the Vehmgericht of tho servant ' hall have pronounce against she . and , I shame to say , she would not have get credit have they not believe she to be guilty . it be the sight of the of 's carriage - lamp at she door , contemplate by Raggles , burn in the blackness of midnight , " that kep he up , " as he afterwards say , that even more than 's art and coaxing . and so --guiltless very likely -- she be writh and push onward towards what they call " a position in society , " and the servants be point at she as lose and ruin . so you see , the housemaid , of a morning , watch a spider in the doorpost lay he thread and laboriously crawl up it , until , tired of the sport , she raise she broom and sweep away the thread and the artificer . a day or two before , , she husband and she son make ready and go to pass the holiday at the seat of they ancestor at 's . would have like to leave the little brat behind , and would have do so but for 's urgent invitation to the youngster , and the symptom of revolt and discontent which manifest at she neglect of she son . " he be the finest boy in , " the father say in a tone of reproach to she , " and you do not seem to care for he , , as much as you do for you spaniel . he sha not bother you much ; at home he will be away from you in the nursery , and he shall go outside on the coach with I . " " where you go yourself because you want to smoke those filthy cigar , " reply . " I remember when you like 'em though , " answer the husband . laugh ; she be almost always good - humoure . " that be when I be on my promotion , , " she say . " take outside with you and give he a cigar too if you like . " do not warm he little son for the winter 's journey in this way , but he and wrap up the child in shawl and comforter , and he be hoist respectfully onto the roof of the coach in the dark morning , under the lamps of the ; and with no small delight he watch the dawn rise and make he first journey to the place which he father still call home . it be a journey of infinite pleasure to the boy , to whom the incidents of the road afford endless interest , he father answer to he all question connect with it and tell he who live in the great white house to the right , and whom the park belong to . he mother , inside the vehicle , with she maid and she fur , she wrapper , and she scent bottle , make such a to - do that you would have think she never have be in a stage - coach before -- much less , that she have be turn out of this very one to make room for a pay passenger on a certain journey perform some half - score year ago . it be dark again when little be wake up to enter he uncle 's carriage at , and he sit and look out of it wonder as the great iron gate fly open , and at the white trunk of the lime as they sweep by , until they stop , at length , before the light window of the , which be blazing and comfortable with welcome . the hall - door be flng open -- a big fire be burn in the great old fire - place -- a carpet be down over the cheque black flag -- " it be the old one that use to be in the ' , " think , and the next instant be kiss . she and perform the same salute with great gravity ; but , have be smoke , hang back rather from he sister - in - law , whose two child come up to they cousin ; and , while hold out she hand and kiss he , , the son and heir , stand aloon rather and examine he as a little dog do a big dog . then the kind hostess conduct she guest to the snug apartment blaze with cheerful fire . then the young lady come and knock at 's door , under the pretence that they be desirous to be useful , but in reality to have the pleasure of inspect the contents of she band and bonnet - box , and she dress which , though black , be of the newest fashion . and they tell she how much the Hall be change for the better , and how old be gone , and how be take he station in the county , as become a in fact . then the great dinner - bell have ring , the family assemble at dinner , at which meal be place by he aunt , the good - natured lady of the house , be uncommonly attentive to he sister - in - law at he own right hand . exhibit a fine appetite and show a gentlemanlike behaviour . " I like to dine here , " he say to he aunt when he have complete he meal ,
, at the conclusion of which , and after a decent grace by , the younger son and here be introduce , and be perch on a high chair by the 's side , while the daughter take possession of the place and the little wine - glass prepare for she near she mother . " I like to dine here , " say , look up at he relation 's kind face . " why ? " say the good . " I dine in the kitchen when I be at home , " reply , " or else with . " but be so engage with the Baronet , she host , pour out a flood of compliment and delight and rapture , and admir young , whom she declare to be the most beautiful , intelligent , noble - look little creature , and so like he father , that she do not hear the remark of she own flesh and blood at the other end of the broad shining table . as a guest , and it be the first night of he arrival , the be allow to sit up until the hour when tea be over , and a great gilt book be laid on the table before , all the domestic of the family stream in , and read prayer . it be the first time the poor little boy have ever witness or hear of such a ceremonial . the house have be much improve even since the 's brief reign , and be pronounce by to be perfect , charming , delightful , when she survey it in he company . as for little , who examine it with the child for he guide , it seem to he a perfect palace of enchantment and wonder . there be long galleries , and ancient state bedroom , there be picture and old , and armour . there be the room in which die , and by which the child walk with terrified look . " who be ? " he ask ; and they tell he how he use to be very old , and use to be wheel about in a garden - chair , and they show he the garden - chair one day rot in the out - house in which it have lain since the old gentleman have be wheel away yonder to the church , of which the spire be glitter over the park elm . the brother have good occupation for several morning in examine the improvement which have be effect by 's genius and economy . and as they walk or rode , and look at they , they could talk without too much boring each other . and take care to tell what a heavy outlay of money these improvement have occasion , and that a man of landed and fund property be often very hard presse for twenty pound . " there be that new lodge - gate , " say , point to it humbly with the bamboo cane , " I can no more pay for it before the dividend in than I can fly . " " I can lend you , , till then , " answer rather ruefully ; and they go in and look at the restored lodge , where the family arm be just new scrape in stone , and where old . lock , for the first time these many long year , have tight door , sound roofs , and whole window . and have do more than repair fence and restore dilapidate lodg on the 's estate . like a wise man he have set to work to rebuild the injured popularity of he house and stop up the gaps and ruin in which he name have be leave by he disreputable and thriftless old predecessor . he be elect for the borough speedily after he father 's demise ; a magistrate , a member of parliament , a county magnate and representative of a ancient family , he make it he duty to show himself before the public , subscribe handsomely to the county charity , call assiduously upon all the county folk , and lay himself out in a word to take that position in , and in the afterwards , to which he think he prodigious talents justly entitle he . be instruct to be friendly with the , and the Wapshot , and the other famous baronet , they neighbour . they carriage might frequently be see in the 's avenue now ; they dine pretty frequently at the hall ( where the cookery be so good that it be clear very seldom have a hand in it ) , and in return and he wife most energetically dine out in all sort of weather and at all sort of distance . for though do not care for joviality , be a frigid man of poor hearth and appetite , yet he consider that to be hospitable and condescending be quite incumbent on - he station , and every time that he get a headache from too long a after - dinner sitting , he feel that he be a martyr to duty . he talk about crop , corn -law , politics , with the best country gentleman . he ( who have be formerly inclin to be a sad free - thinker on these point ) enter into poaching and game preserve with ardour . he do not hunt ; he be not a hunt man ; he be a man of book and peaceful habit ; but he think that the breed of horse must be keep up in the country , and that the breed of fox must therefore be look to , and for he part , if he friend , , like to draw he country and meet as of old the hound
hound use to do at 's , he should be happy to see he there , and the gentleman of the hunt . and to 's dismay too he become more orthodox in he tendency every day ; give up preaching in public and attend meeting - house ; go stoutly to church ; call on the Bishop and all the at ; and make no objection when the ask for a game of whist . what pang must have be those of , and what a utter castaway she must have think she son - in - law for permit such a godless diversion ! and when , on the return of the family from a oratorio at , the announce to the young lady that he should next year very probably take they to the " county ball , " they worship he for he kindness . be only too obedient , and perhaps glad herself to go . the write off the direst description of she daughter 's worldly behaviour to the authoress of the of at the cape ; and she house in be about this time unoccupied , return to that water - place , she absence be not very much deplor by she child . we may suppose , too , that , on pay a second visit to 's , do not feel particularly grieve at the absence of the lady of the medicine chest ; though she write a letter to she Ladyship , in which she respectfully recal herself to 's recollection , speak with gratitude of the delight which she Ladyship 's conversation have give she on the former visit , dilate on the kindness with which she Ladyship have treat she in sickness , and declare that everything at 's remind she of she absent friend . a great part of the altered demeanour and popularity of might have be trace to the counsel of that astute little lady of . " you remain a Baronet -- you consent to be a mere country gentleman , " she say to he , while he have be she guest in . " no , , I know you better . I know you talents and you ambition . you fancy you hide they both , but you can conceal neither from I . I show you pamphlet on malt . he be familiar with it , and say it be in the opinion of the whole cabinet the most masterly thing that have appear on the subject . the have its eye upon you , and I know what you want . you want to distinguish yourself in parliament ; every one say you be the finest speaker in ( for you speech at be still remember ) . you want to be for the , where , with you own vote and you borough at you back , you can command anything . and you want to be of 's , and will be before you die . I see it all . I could read you heart , . if I have a husband who possess you intellect as he do you name , I sometimes think I should not be unworthy of he -- but -- but I be you kinswoman now , " she add with a laugh . " poor little penniless , I have get a little interest -- and who know , perhaps the mouse may be able to aid the lion . " be amaze and enrapture with she speech . " how that woman comprehend I ! " he say . " I never could get to read three page of the malt pamphlet . she have no idea that I have command talents or secret ambition . so they remember my speak at , do they ? the rascal ! now that I represent my borough and may sit for the county , they begin to recollect I ! why , cut I at the levee last year ; they be begin to find out that be some one at last . yes , the man be always the same whom these people neglect : it be only the opportunity that be want , and I will show they now that I can speak and act as well as write . Achille do not declare himself until they give he the sword . I hold it now , and the world shall yet hear of . " therefore it be that this roguish diplomatist have grow so hospitable ; that he be so civil to oratorio and hospital ; so kind to Deans and Chapters ; so generous in give and accept dinner ; so uncommonly gracious to farmer on market - day ; and so much interested about county business ; and that the at the hall be the gayest which have be know there for many a long day . on a great family gather take place . all the Crawley from the come to dine . be as frank and fond of . Bute as if the other have never be she enemy ; she be affectionately interested in the dear girl , and surprise at the progress which they have make in music since she time , and insist upon encor one of the duet out of the great song - book which , grumbl , have be force to bring under he arm from the Rectory . , perforce , be oblige to adopt a decent demeanour towards the little adventuress -- of course be free to discourse with she daughter afterwards about the absurd respect with which treat he sister - in - law . but , who have sit next to she at dinner , declare she be a trump , and one and all of the rector 's family agree that the little be a fine boy . they respecte a possible baronet
baronet in the boy , between whom and the title there be only the little sickly pale . the child be very good friend . be too little a dog for such a big dog as to play with ; and be only a girl , of course not fit companion for a young gentleman who be near eight year old , and go into jacket very soon . he take the command of this small party at once -- the little girl and the little boy follow he about with great reverence at such time as he condescende to sport with they . he happiness and pleasure in the country be extreme . the kitchen garden please he hugely , the flowers moderately , but the pigeon and the poultry , and the stable when he be allow to visit they , be delightful object to he . he resist be kiss by the , but he allow sometimes to embrace he , and it be by she side that he like to sit when , the signal to retire to the drawing - room be give , the lady leave the gentleman to they claret -- by she side rather than by he mother . for , see that tenderness be the fashion , call to she one evening and stoop down and kiss he in the presence of all the lady . he look she full in the face after the operation , trembl and turn very red , as he will not be when move . " you never kiss I at home , , " he say , at which there be a general silence and consternation and a by no means pleasant look in 's eye . be fond of he sister - in - law , for she regard for he son . and do not get on quite so well at this visit as on occasion of the former one , when the Colonel 's wife be bend upon pleasing . those two speech of the child strike rather a chill . perhaps be rather too attentive to she . but , as become he age and size , be fonder of the society of the man than of the woman , and never weary of accompany he sire to the stable , whither the retire to smoke he cigar -- , the rector 's son , sometimes join he cousin in that and other amusement . he and the Baronet 's keeper be very close friend , they mutual taste for " dawg " bring they much together . on one day , , the , and , the keeper , go and shoot pheasant , take little with they . on another most blissful morning , these four gentleman partook of the amusement of rat - hunt in a barn , than which sport as yet have never see anything more noble . they stop up the end of certain drain in the barn , into the other opening of which ferret be insert , and then stand silently aloon , with uplifted stake in they hand , and a anxious little terrier ( 's celebrate " dawg " Forceps , indeed ) scarcely breathe from excitement , listen motionless on three leg , to the faint squeaking of the rat below . desperately bold at last , the persecute animal bolt above - ground -- the terrier account for one , the keeper for another ; , from flurry and excitement , miss he rat , but on the other hand he half - murder a ferret . but the greatest day of all be that on which 's hound meet upon the lawn at 's . that be a famous sight for little . at half - past ten , , 's huntsman , be see trot up the avenue , follow by the noble pack of hound in a compact body -- the rear be bring up by the two whip clad in stained scarlet frock -- light hard - feature lad on well - breed lean horse , possesse marvellous dexterity in cast the point of they long heavy whip at the thinnest part of any dog 's skin who dare to straggle from the main body , or to take the slightest notice , or even so much as wink , at the hare and rabbit start under they nos . next come boy , 's son , who weigh five stone , measure eight - and - forty inch , and will never be any bigger . he be perch on a large raw - bone hunter , half - cover by a capacious saddle . this animal be 's favourite horse the . other horse , ride by other small boy , arrive from time to time , await they master , who will come canter on anon . ride up to the door of the , where he be welcome by the butler , who offer he drink , which he decline . he and he pack then draw off into a sheltered corner of the lawn , where the dog roll on the grass , and play or growl angrily at one another , ever and anon break out into furious fight speedily to be quell by 's , unmatch at rating , or the snaky thong of the whip . many young gentleman canter up on thoroughbred hack , spatter - dash to the knee , and enter the house to drink cherry - brandy and pay they respects to the ladie , or , more modest and sportsmanlike , divest themselves of they mud - boot , exchange they hack for they hunter , and warm they blood by a preliminary gallop round the lawn . then they collect round the pack in the corner and talk with of past sport , and the merit of and , and of
of the state of the country and of the wretch breed of fox . presently appear mount on a clever cob and ride up to the hall , where he enter and do the civil thing by the ladie , after which , be a man of few word , he proceed to business . the hound be draw up to the hall - door , and little descend amongst they , excite yet half - alarme by the caress which they bestow upon he , at the thump he receive from they waving tail , and at they canine bickering , scarcely restrain by 's tongue and lash . meanwhile , have hoist himself unwieldily on the : " let 's try 's , , " say the Baronet , " tell I there be two fox in it . " blow he horn and trot off , follow by the pack , by the whip , by the young gent from , by the farmer of the neighbourhood , by the labourer of the parish on foot , with whom the day be a great holiday , bring up the rear with , and the whole cortege disappear down the avenue . the ( who have be too modest to appear at the public meet before he nephew 's window ) , whom remembers forty year back a slender divine ride the wildest horse , jump the widest brook , and lark over the newest gate in the country -- he Reverence , we say , happen to trot out from the on he powerful black horse just as pass ; he join the worthy Baronet . Hound and horseman disappear , and little remain on the doorstep , wonder and happy . during the progress of this memorable holiday , little , if he have get no special liking for he uncle , always awful and cold and lock up in he study , plunge in justice - business and surround by bailiff and farmer -- have gain the good graces of he married and maiden aunt , of the two little folk of the , and of of the Rectory , whom be encourage to pay he address to one of the young lady , with a understanding doubtless that he shall be present to the living when it shall be vacate by he fox - hunt old sire . have give up that sport himself and confine himself to a little harmless duck - or snipe - shoot , or a little quiet trifling with the rat during the holiday , after which he will return to the and try and not be pluck , once more . he have already eschew green coat , red neckcloth , and other worldly ornament , and be prepare himself for a change in he condition . in this cheap and thrifty way try to pay off he debt to he family . also before this merry be over , the have screw up courage enough to give he brother another draft on he banker , and for no less a sum than a hundred pound , a act which cause cruel pang at first , but which make he glow afterwards to think himself one of the most generous of man . and he son go away with the utmost heaviness of heart . and the lady part with some alacrity , however , and we friend return to to commence those avocation with which we find she occupi when this chapter begin . under she care the in be quite rejuvenescent and ready for the reception of and he family , when the come to to attend he duty in parliament and to assume that position in the country for which he vast genius fit he . for the first session , this profound dissembler hid he project and never open he lip but to present a petition from . but he attend assiduously in he place and learn thoroughly the routine and business of the house . at home he give himself up to the perusal of , to the alarm and wonder of , who think he be kill himself by late hour and intense application . and he make acquaintance with the ministers , and the chiefs of he party , determine to rank as one of they before many year be over . 's sweetness and kindness have inspire with such a contempt for she ladyship as the little woman find no small difficulty in concealing . that sort of goodness and simplicity which possess annoye we friend , and it be impossible for she at time not to show , or to let the other divine , she scorn . she presence , too , render uneasy . she husband talk constantly with . sign of intelligence seem to pass between they , and speak with she on subject on which he never think of discoursing with . the latter do not understand they , to be sure , but it be mortifying to remain silent ; still more mortifying to know that you have nothing to say , and hear that little audacious dashing on from subject to subject , with a word for every man , and a joke always pat ; and to sit in one 's own house alone , by the fireside , and watch all the man round you rival . in the country , when be tell story to the child , who cluster about she knee ( little into the bargain , who be very fond of she ) , and come into the room , sneer with green scornful eye , poor grow silent under those baleful glance . she simple little fancie shrank away tremulously , as fairy in the story - book , before a superior bad angel . she could not go on , although , with the smallest inflection
inflection of sarcasm in she voice , besotch she to continue that charme story . and on she side gentle thought and simple pleasur be odious to ; they discord with she ; she hate people for like they ; she spur child and child - lover . " I have no taste for bread and butter , " she would say , when caricatur and she way to my . " no more have a certain person for holy water , " he lordship replie with a bow and a grin and a great jarring laugh afterwards . so these two lady do not see much of each other except upon those occasion when the younger brother 's wife , have a object to gain from the other , frequent she . they my - love and my - dear each other assiduously , but keep apart generally , whereas , in the midst of he multiplied avocation , find daily time to see he sister - in - law . on the occasion of he first speaker 's dinner , take the opportunity of appear before he sister - in - law in he uniform -- that old diplomatic suit which he have worn when attaco to the Pumpernickel legation . compliment he upon that dress and admire he almost as much as he own wife and child , to whom he display himself before he set out . she say that it be only the thoroughbred gentleman who could wear the court suit with advantage : it be only you man of ancient race whom the culotte courte become . look down with complacency at he leg , which have not , in truth , much more symmetry or swell than the lean court sword which dangle by he side -- look down at he leg , and think in he heart that he be kill . when he be gone , . make a caricature of he figure , which she show to when he arrive . he lordship carry off the sketch , delighte with the accuracy of the resemblance . he have do the honour to meet he at 's house and have be most gracious to the new Baronet and member . be struck too by the deference with which the great peer treat he sister - in - law , by she ease and sprightliness in the conversation , and by the delight with which the other man of the party listen to she talk . make no doubt but that the Baronet have only commence he career in public life , and expect rather anxiously to hear he as a orator ; as they be neighbour ( for great lead into , whereor , as everybody know , form one side ) my lord hope that as soon as arrive in she would have the honour of make the acquaintance of . he leave a card upon he neighbour in the course of a day or two , have never think fit to notice he predecessor , though they have live near each other for near a century past . in the midst of these intrigue and fine party and wise and brilliant personage feel himself more and more isolate every day . he be allow to go to the club more ; to dine abroad with bachelor friend ; to come and go when he like , without any question be ask . and he and Rawdon the younger many a time would walk to and sit with the lady and the child there while be close with , on he way to the house , or on he return from it . the ex-Colonel would sit for hour in he brother 's house very silent , and think and do as little as possible . he be glad to be employ of a errand ; to go and make inquirie about a horse or a servant , or to carve the roast mutton for the dinner of the child . he be beat and cow into laziness and submission . have imprison he and cut he hair off , too . the bold and reckless young blood of ten - year back be subjugated and be turn into a torpid , submissive , middle - aged , stout gentleman . and poor be aware that have captivate she husband , although she and my - dear and my - love each other every day they meet . and we friend at be meanwhile pass they after they fashion and in a manner by no means too cheerful . out of the hundred pound a year , which be about the amount of she income , the have be in the habit of give up nearly three - fourt to she father and mother , for the expense of herself and she little boy . with # 120 more , supply by , this family of four people , attend by a single irish servant who also do for and he wife , might manage to live in decent comfort through the year , and hold up they head yet , and be able to give a friend a dish of tea still , after the storm and disappointment of they early life . still maintain he ascendency over the family of , he ex-clerk . remember the time when , sit on the edge of the chair , he toss off a bumper to the health of " . --, , and in , " at the merchant 's rich table in . magnify the splendour of those recollection in the honest clerk 's bosom . whenever he come up from the kitchen - parlour to the drawing - room and partook of tea or gin - and - water with , he would say , " this be not what you be accustom to once , sir , "
" and as gravely and reverentially drink the health of the ladie as he have do in the day of they utmost prosperity . he think ' 's play the divinest music ever perform , and she the finest lady . he never would sit down before at the club even , nor would he have that gentleman 's character abuse by any member of the society . he have see the first man in shake hand with --; he say , " he would know he in time when might be see on ' change with he any day , and he owed he personally everythink . " Clapp , with the best of characters and handwriting , have be able very soon after he master 's disaster to find other employment for himself . " such a little fish as I can swim in any bucket , " he use to remark , and a member of the house from which old have seced be very glad to make use of 's service and to reward they with a comfortable salary . in fine , all 's wealthy friend have drop off one by one , and this poor ex-dependent still remain faithfully attach to he . out of the small residue of she income which keep back for herself , the widow have need of all the thrift and care possible in order to enable she to keep she darling boy dress in such a manner as become 's son , and to defray the expense of the little school to which , after much misgiving and reluctance and many secret pang and fear on she own part , she have be induce to send the lad . she have sit up of night conning lesson and spell over crab grammar and geography book in order to teach they to . she have work even at the accidence , fondly hope that she might be capable of instruct he in that language . to part with he all day , to send he out to the mercy of a schoolmaster 's cane and he schoolfellow ' roughness , be almost like wean he over again to that weak mother , so tremulous and full of sensibility . he , for he part , rush off to the school with the utmost happiness . he be longe for the change . that childish gladness wound he mother , who be herself so grieve to part with he . she would rather have have he more sorry , she think , and then be deeply repentant within herself for daring to be so selfish as to wish she own son to be unhappy . make great progress in the school , which be keep by a friend of he mother 's constant admirer , the . he bring home numberless prize and testimonial of ability . he tell he mother countless story every night about he school - companion : and what a fine fellow Lyon be , and what a sneak be , and how 's father actually supply the meat for the establishment , whereas 's mother come in a carriage to fetch he every , and how neat have strap to he trowser -- might he have strap ?-- and how be so strong ( though only in ) that it be believe he could lick the , , himself . so learn to know every one of the boy in that school as well as himself , and of night she use to help he in he exercise and puzzle she little head over he lesson as eagerly as if she be herself go in the morning into the presence of the master . once , after a certain combat with , come home to he mother with a black eye , and brag prodigiously to he parent and he delighte old grandfather about he valour in the fight , in which , if the truth be know he do not behave with particular heroism , and in which he decidedly have the worst . but have never forgive that to this day , though he be now a peaceful apothecary near . in these quiet labour and harmless care the gentle widow 's life be pass away , a silver hair or two mark the progress of time on she head and a line deepen ever so little on she fair forehead . she use to smile at these mark of time . " what matter it , " she ask , " for a old woman like I ? " all she hope for be to live to see she son great , famous , and glorious , as he deserv to be . she keep he copy - book , he drawing , and composition , and show they about in she little circle as if they be miraacle of genius . she confide some of these specimen to , to show they to , 's aunt , to show they to himself -- to make that old man repent of he cruelty and ill feel towards he who be gone . all she husband 's fault and foible she have bury in the grave with he : she only remember the lover , who have marry she at all sacrifice , the noble husband , so brave and beautiful , in whose arm she have hang on the morning when he have go away to fight , and die gloriously for he king . from heaven the hero must be smile down upon that paragon of a boy whom he have leave to comfort and conseal she . we have see how one of 's grandfather ( ) , in he easy chair in , daily grow more violent and moody , and how he daughter , with she fine carriage , and she fine horse , and she name on half
half the public charity - list of the town , be a lonely , miserable , persecute old maid . she think again and again of the beautiful little boy , she brother 's son , whom she have see . she longe to be allow to drive in the fine carriage to the house in which he liv , and she use to look out day after day as she take she solitary drive in the park , in hope that she might see he . she sister , the banker 's lady , occasionally condescende to pay she old home and companion a visit in . she bring a couple of sickly child attend by a prim nurse , and in a faint genteel giggle tone cackle to she sister about she fine acquaintance , and how she little be the image of and she sweet have be notice by the Baroness as they be drive in they donkey - chaise at . she urge she to make she papa do something for the darling . she have determine should go into the Guard ; and if they make a elder son of he ( and be positively ruin and pinch himself to death to buy land ) , how be the darling girl to be provide for ? " I expect you , dear , " would say , " for of course my share of we Papa 's property must go to the head of the house , you know . dear McMull will disengage the whole of the property as soon as poor dear die , who be quite epileptic ; and little will be . both the of have settle they fortune on 's little boy . my darling must positively be a eldest son ; and -- and do ask to bring we back he account in , will you , dear ? it do not look well , he go to and 's . " after which kind of speech , in which fashion and the main chance be blend together , and after a kiss , which be like the contact of a oyster -- would gather she starch nursling and simper back into she carriage . every visit which this leader of ton pay to she family be more unlucky for she . she father pay more money into and 's . she patronage become more and more insufferable . the poor widow in the little cottage at , guard she treasure there , little know how eagerly some people covet it . on that night when have tell she father that she have see he grandson , the old man have make she no reply , but he have show no anger -- and have bay she good - night on go himself to he room in rather a kindly voice . and he must have meditate on what she say and have make some inquirie of the family regard she visit , for a fortnight after it take place , he ask she where be she little french watch and chain she use to wear ? " I buy it with my money , sir , " she say in a great fright . " go and order another like it , or a better if you can get it , " say the old gentleman and lapse again into silence . of late the more than once repeat they entreaty to , to allow to visit they . he aunt have show she inclination ; perhaps he grandfather himself , they hint , might be dispose to be reconcile to he . surely , could not refuse such advantageous chance for the boy . could she , but she acced to they overture with a very heavy and suspicious heart , be always uneasy during the child 's absence from she , and welcome he back as if he be rescue out of some danger . he bring back money and toy , at which the widow look with alarm and jealousy ; she ask he always if he have see any gentleman -- " only old , who drive he about in the four -wheeled chaise , and , who arrive on the beautiful bay horse in the afternoon -- in the green coat and pink neck - cloth , with the gold - head whip , who promise to show he the of and take he out with the Surrey hound . " at last , he say , " there be a old gentleman , with thick eyebrow , and a broad hat , and large chain and seal . " he come one day as the coachman be lunge round the lawn on the gray pony . " he look at I very much . he shake very much . I say ' my name be ' after dinner . my aunt begin to cry . she be always cry . " be 's report on that night . then know that the boy have see he grandfather ; and look out feverishly for a proposal which she be sure would follow , and which come , in fact , in a few day afterwards . formally offer to take the boy and make he here to the fortune which he have intend that he father should inherit . he would make a allowance , such as to assure she a decent competency . if propose to marry again , as o . heard be she intention , he would not withdraw that allowance . but it must be understand that the child would live entirely with he grandfather in , or at whatever other place should select , and that he would be occasionally permit to see at she own residence . this message be bring or read to she in a letter one day , when she mother be from home and
and she father absent as usual in the City . she be never see angry but twice or thrice in she life , and it be in one of these mood that 's attorney have the fortune to behold she . she rise up trembling and flush very much as soon as , after read the letter , hand it to she , and she tore the paper into a hundred fragment , which she trod on . " I marry again ! I take money to part from my child ! who dare insult I by propose such a thing ? it be a cowardly letter , sir -- a cowardly letter -- I will not answer it . I wish you good morning , sir -- and she bow I out of the room like a tragedy , " say the lawyer who tell the story . she parent never remark she agitation on that day , and she never tell they of the interview . they have they own affair to interest they , affair which deeply interes this innocent and unconscious lady . the old gentleman , she father , be always dabbl in speculation . we have see how the wine company and the coal company have fail he . but , prowl about the City always eagerly and restlessly still , he light upon some other scheme , of which he think so well that he embark in it in spite of the remonstrance of , to whom indeed he never da to tell how far he have engage himself in it . and as it be always 's maxim not to talk about money matter before woman , they have no inkling of the misfortune that be in store for they until the unhappy old gentleman be force to make gradual confession . the bills of the little household , which have be settle weekly , first fall into arrear . the remittance have not arrive from , tell he wife with a disturbed face . as she have pay she bill very regularly hithertoo , one or two of the tradesman to whom the poor lady be obliged to go round ask for time be very angry at a delay to which they be perfectly use from more irregular customer . 's contribution , pay over cheerfully without any question , keep the little company in half - rations however . and the first six month pass away pretty easily , old still keep up with the notion that he share must rise and that all would be well . no sixty pound , however , come to help the household at the end of the half year , and it fall deeper and deeper into trouble -- . , who be grow infirm and be much shaken , remain silent or weep a great deal with in the kitchen . the butcher be particularly surly , the grocer insolent : once or twice little have grumble about the dinner , and , who still would have be satisfied with a slice of bread for she own dinner , could not but perceive that she son be neglect and purchase little thing out of she private purse to keep the boy in health . at last they tell she , or tell she such a garble story as people in difficulties tell . one day , she own money have be receive , and about to pay it over , she , who have keep a account of the money expend by she , propose to keep a certain portion back out of she dividend , have contracte engagement for a new suit for . then it come out that 's remittance be not pay , that the house be in difficulty , which ought to have see before , she mother say , but she care for nothing or nobody except . at this she pass all she money across the table , without a word , to she mother , and return to she room to cry she eye out . she have a great access of sensibility to that day , when obliged to go and countermand the clothes , the darling clothes on which she have set she heart for , and the cut and fashion of which she have arrange in many conversation with a small milliner , she friend . hardest of all , she have to break the matter to , who make a loud outcry . everybody have new clothes at . the other would laugh at he . he would have new clothes . she have promise they to he . the poor widow have only kiss to give he . she darn the old suit in tear . she cast about among she little ornament to see if she could sell anything to procure the desire novelty . there be she shawl that have send she . she remember in former day go with she mother to a fine shop on , where the lady have all sort of dealings and bargain in these article . she cheek flush and she eye shone with pleasure as she think of this resource , and she kiss away to school in the morning , smile brightly after he . the boy feel that there be good news in she look . Pack up she shawl in a handkerchief ( another of the gift of the good major ) , she hide they under she cloak and walk flushed and eager all the way to Ludgate , trip along by the park wall and run over the crossing , so that many a man turn as she hurrie by he and look after she rosy pretty face . she calculate how she should spend the proceed of she shawl -- how , besides the clothes , she would buy the book that he longe for ,
, and pay he half - year 's schooling ; and how she would buy a cloak for she father instead of that old great - coat which he wear . she be not mistaken as to the value of the major 's gift . it be a very fine and beautiful web , and the merchant make a very good bargain when he give she twenty guinea for she shawl . she run on amaze and flurry with she riche to 's shop , in 's , and there purchase the parent 's assistant and the and longe for , and get into the coach there with she parcel , and go home exulting . and she please herself by writing in the fly - leaf in she neatest little hand , " , a gift from he affectionate mother . " the book be extant to this day , with the fair delicate superscription . she be go from she own room with the book in she hand to place they on 's table , where he might find they on he return from school , when in the passage , she and she mother meet . the gilt bindings of the seven handsome little volume catch the old lady 's eye . " what be those ? " she say . " some book for , " reply -- " I -- I promise they to he at . " " book ! " cry the elder lady indignantly , " , when the whole house want bread ! books , when to keep you and you son in luxury , and you dear father out of gaol , I have sell every trinket I have , the shawl from my back even down to the very spoon , that we tradesman might not insult we , and that , which indeed he be justly entitled , be not a hard landlord , and a civil man , and a father , might have he rent . oh , ! you break my heart with you book and that boy of yours , whom you be ruin , though part with he you will not . oh , , may send you a more dutiful child than I have have ! there be , desert he father in he old age ; and there be , who might be provide for , and who might be rich , go to school like a lord , with a gold watch and chain round he neck -- while my dear , dear old man be without a sh -- shilling . " Hysteric sob and cry end 's speech -- it echo through every room in the small house , whereon the other female inmate hear every word of the colloquy . " oh , mother , mother ! " cry poor in reply . " you tell I nothing -- I -- I promise he the book . I -- I only sell my shawl this morning . take the money -- take everything " -- and with quivering hand she take out she silver , and she sovereign -- she precious golden sovereign , which she thrust into the hand of she mother , whence they overflow and tumble , roll down the stair . and then she go into she room , and sank down in despair and utter misery . she see it all now . she selfishness be sacrifice the boy . but for she he might have wealth , station , education , and he father 's place , which the elder have forfeit for she sake . she have but to speak the word , and she father be restore to competency and the boy raise to fortune . oh , what a conviction it be to that tender and stricken heart ! all the world know that 's town palace stand in , out of which Great lead , whither we first conduct , in the time of the depart . Peere over the railing and through the black tree into the garden of the , you see a few miserable governess with wan - face pupil wander round and round it , and round the dreary grass - plot in the centre of which rise the statue of , who fight at , in a three - tail wig , and otherwise habite like a . occupy nearly a side of the . the remain three side be compose of mansion that have pass away into dowagerism -- tall , dark house , with window -frame of stone , or pick out of a lighter red . little light seem to be behind those lean , comfortless casement now , and hospitality to have pass away from those door as much as the laced lacquey and link - boy of old time , who use to put out they torch in the blank iron extinguisher that still flank the lamps over the step . brass plate have penetrat into the square -- doctor , the western branch -- the and , .-- it have a dreary look -- nor be my 's palace less dreary . all I have ever see of it be the vast wall in front , with the rustic column at the great gate , through which a old porter per sometimes with a fat and gloomy red face -- and over the wall the garret and bedroom window , and the chimney , out of which there seldom come any smoke now . for the present live at , prefer the view of the and and to the dreary aspect of the wall in . a few score yard down , and lead into indeed , be a little modest back door , which you would not remark from that of any of the other stable . but many a little close carriage have stop at
at that door , as my informant ( little , who know everything , and who show I the place ) tell I . " the and have be in and out of that door , sir , " he have often tell I ; " have enter it with the of ------ . it conduct to the famious petits appartement of -- one , sir , fitte up all in ivory and white satin , another in ebony and black velvet ; there be a little banqueting - room take from 's house at , and pain by -- a little private kitchen , in which every saucepan be silver and all the spit be gold . it be there that roast partridge on the night when he and the of win a hundred thousand from a great personage at ombre . half of the money go to the , half to purchase 's and -- and the remainder -- " but it form no part of we scheme to tell what become of the remainder , for every shilling of which , and a great deal more , little , who know everybody 's affair , be ready to account . besides he town palace , the have castle and palace in various quarter of the three kingdom , whereor the description may be find in the road - book -- , with its wood , on the shore ; , in , where be take prisoner -- in , where I have be inform there be two hundred silver teapot for the breakfast of the guest of the house , with everything to correspond in splendour ; and in , which be my lord 's farm , a humble place of residence , of which we all remember the wonderful furniture which be sell at my lord 's demise by a late celebrated auctioneer . the Marchioness of be of the renowned and ancient family of the Caerlyon , Marquise of , who have preserve the old faith ever since the conversion of the venerable , they first ancestor , and whose pedigree go far beyond the date of the arrival of in these island . be the title of the eldest son of the house . the son have be call Arthurs , Uthers , and , from immemorial time . they head have fall in many a loyal conspiracy . chop off the head of the of she day , who have be to and , and carry letter between the of and she uncle the Guise . a cadet of the house be a officer of the great and distinguished in the famous conspiracy . during the whole of 's confinement , the house of conspire in she behalf . it be as much injure by its charge in fitte out a armament against the , during the time of the , as by the fines and confiscation levy on it by for harbouring of priest , obstinate recusancy , and popish misdoing . a recreant of 's time be momentarily pervert from he religion by the argument of that great theologian , and the fortune of the family somewhat restore by he timely weakness . but the of , of the reign of , return to the old creed of he family , and they continue to fight for it , and ruin themselves for it , as long as there be a leave to head or to instigate a rebellion . be brotch up at a parisian convent ; the be she godmother . in the pride of she beauty she have be marry -- sell , it be say -- to , then at , who win vast sum from the lady 's brother at some of of 's banquet . the of 's famous duel with the , of the , be attribute by common report to the pretension of that officer ( who have be a page , and remain a favourite of the ) to the hand of the beautiful . she be marry to while the count lay ill of he wound , and come to dwell at , and to figure for a short time in the splendid court of the of . have toast she . and have write song about she . have make she he best bow ; have pronounce she charming ; have be almost jealous of she ; but she be scare by the wild pleasure and gaiety of the society into which she be fling , and after she have borne a couple of son , shrank away into a life of devout seclusion . no wonder that my , who like pleasure and cheerfulness , be not often see after they marriage by the side of this trembling , silent , superstitious , unhappy lady . the before - mention ( who have no part in this history , except that he know all the great folk in , and the story and mystery of each family ) have further information regard my , which may or may not be true . " the humiliation , " use to say , " which that woman have be make to undergo , in she own house , have be frightful ; have make she sit down to table with woman with whom I would rather die than allow to associate -- with , with , with la , the french secretary 's wife ( from every one of which ladie -- who would have sacrifice he wife for know they -- be too glad to get a bow or a dinner ) with the reigning favourite in a word . and do you suppose that that woman , of that family , who be as proud as the Bourbons , and to whom the be but lackey , mushroom of yesterday ( for after all , they be not of the
the , but of a minor and doubtful branch of the house ) ; do you suppose , I say ( the reader must bear in mind that it be always who speak ) that the Marchioness of , the haughtiest woman in , would bend down to she husband so submissively if there be not some cause ? Pooh ! I tell you there be secret reason . I tell you that , in the emigration , the who be here and be employ in the business with and , be the same of with whom fight in the year ' 86 -- that he and the Marchioness meet again -- that it be after the be shot in that take to those extreme practice of devotion which she carry on now ; for she be close with she director every day -- she be at service at spanish place , every morning , I have watch she there -- that be , I have happene to be pass there -- and depend on it , there be a mystery in she case . people be not so unhappy unless they have something to repent of , " add with a know wag of he head ; " and depend on it , that woman would not be so submissive as she be if the have not some sword to hold over she . " so , if 's information be correct , it be very likely that this lady , in she high station , have to submit to many a private indignity and to hide many secret grief under a calm face . and let we , my breth who have not we name in the , conseal ourselves by think comfortably how miserable we better may be , and that Damocles , who sit on satin cushion and be serve on gold plate , have a awful sword hang over he head in the shape of a bailiff , or a hereditary disease , or a family secret , which peep out every now and then from the embroidered arra in a ghastly manner , and will be sure to drop one day or the other in the right place . in comparing , too , the poor man 's situation with that of the great , there be ( always accord to ) another source of comfort for the former . you who have little or no patrimony to bequeath or to inherit , may be on good term with you father or you son , whereas the heir of a great prince , such as my , must naturally be angry at be keep out of he kingdom , and eye the occupant of it with no very agreeable glance . " take it as a rule , " this sardonic old Lave would say , " the fathers and elder son of all great family hate each other . the be always in opposition to the crown or hanker after it . know the world , my good sir , and when he describe ( from whose family the Gaunts pretend to be descende , though they be no more related to of than you be ) try on he father 's coronet , he give you a natural description of all heirs apparent . if you be heir to a dukedom and a thousand pound a day , do you mean to say you would not wish for possession ? Pooh ! and it stand to reason that every great man , have experience this feeling towards he father , must be aware that he son entertain it towards himself ; and so they can not but be suspicious and hostile . " then again , as to the feeling of elder towards younger son . my dear sir , you ought to know that every elder brother look upon the cadet of the house as he natural enemie , who deprive he of so much ready money which ought to be he by right . I have often hear , 's eldest son , say that if he have he will when he come to the title , he would do what the sultan do , and clear the estate by chopping off all he younger brothers ' head at once ; and so the case be , more or less , with they all . I tell you they be all Turk in they heart . Pooh ! sir , they know the world . " and here , haply , a great man come up , 's hat would drop off he head , and he would rush forward with a bow and a grin , which show that he know the world too -- in the Tomeavesian way , that be . and have lay out every shilling of he fortune on a annuity , could afford to bear no malice to he nephew and niece , and to have no other feeling with regard to he betters but a constant and generous desire to dine with they . between the and the natural and tender regard of mother for child , there be that cruel barrier place of difference of faith . the very love which she might feel for she son only serve to render the timid and pious lady more fearful and unhappy . the gulf which separate they be fatal and impassable . she could not stretch she weak arm across it , or draw she child over to that side away from which she belief tell she there be no safety . during the youth of he son , , who be a good scholar and amateur casuist , have no better sport in the evening after dinner in the country than in set the boy 's tutor , the ( now my of ) on she ladyship 's director , , over they
they wine , and in pitting against . he cry " , ! well say , ! " alternately ; he promise a bishopric if he would come over , and vow he would use all he influence to get a cardinal 's hat if he would secede . neither divine allow himself to be conquer , and though the fond mother hope that she youngest and favourite son would be reconcile to she church -- he mother church -- a sad and awful disappointment await the devout lady -- a disappointment which seem to be a judgement upon she for the sin of she marriage . my marry , as every person who frequent the Peerage know , the , a daughter of the noble house of Bareacres , before mention in this veracious history . a wing of be assign to this couple ; for the head of the family choose to govern it , and while he reign to reign supreme ; he son and heir , however , liive little at home , disagree with he wife , and borrowe upon post-obit such money as he require beyond the very moderate sum which he father be dispose to allow he . the know every shilling of he son 's debt . at he lamented demise , he be find himself to be possessor of many of he heir 's bond , purchase for they benefit , and devise by he Lordship to the child of he younger son . as , to my 's dismay , and the chuckling delight of he natural enemy and father , the have no child -- the be desire to return from , where he be engage in waltzing and diplomacy , and to contract a matrimonial alliance with the , only daughter of , , and head of the firm of , , and , of , ; from which union spring several son and daughter , whose doings do not appertain to this story . the marriage at first be a happy and prosperous one . my could not only read , but write pretty correctly . he speak french with considerable fluency ; and be one of the finest waltzer in . with these talents , and he interest at home , there be little doubt that he lordship would rise to the highest dignity in he profession . the lady , he wife , feel that court be she sphere , and she wealth enable she to receive splendidly in those continental town whither she husband 's diplomatic duty lead he . there be talk of appoint he minister , and bet be laid at the traveller ' that he would be ambassador ere long , when of a sudden , rumour arrive of the secretary 's extraordinary behaviour . at a grand diplomatic dinner give by he chief , he have start up and declare that a pate de foie gras be poisone . he go to a ball at the hotel of the Bavarian envoy , the - , with he head shave and dress as a friar . it be not a mask ball , as some folk want to persuade you . it be something queer , people whisper . he grandfather be so . it be in the family . he wife and family return to this country and take up they abode at . give up he post on the european continent , and be gazet to . but people know better ; he never return from that expedition -- never die there -- never live there -- never be there at all . he be nowhere ; he be go out altogether . " , " say one gossip to another , with a grin -- " be 's . be a cottage surround by four wall , and be accredit to a keeper , who have invest he with the order of the - . " these be the kind of epitaph which men pass over one another in . twice or thrice in a week , in the earliest morning , the poor mother go for she sins and see the poor invalid . sometimes he laugh at she ( and he laughter be more pitiful than to hear he cry ) ; sometimes she find the brilliant dandy diplomatist of the of to drag about a child 's toy , or nurse the keeper 's baby 's doll . sometimes he know she and , she director and companion ; oftener he forget she , as he have do wife , child , love , ambition , vanity . but he remembe he dinner - hour , and use to cry if he wine - and - water be not strong enough . it be the mysterious taint of the blood ; the poor mother have bring it from she own ancient race . the evil have break out once or twice in the father 's family , long before 's sins have begin , or she fast and tear and penance have be offer in they expiation . the pride of the race be strike down as the first - born of Pharaoh . the dark mark of fate and doom be on the threshold -- the tall old threshold surmount by coronet and can heraldry . the absent lord 's child meanwhile prattle and grow on quite unconscious that the doom be over they too . first they talk of they father and devise plan against he return . then the name of the live dead man be less frequently in they mouth -- then not mention at all . but the stricken old grandmother tremble to think that these too be the inheritor of they father 's shame as well as of he honour , and watch sickening for the day when the awful ancestral curse should come down on they . this dark
dark presentiment also haunte . he try to lay the horrid bedside ghost in of wine and jollity , and lose sight of it sometimes in the crowd and rout of he pleasure . but it always come back to he when alone , and seem to grow more threatening with year . " I have take you son , " it say , " why not you ? I may shut you up in a prison some day like you son . I may tap you on the head to - morrow , and away go pleasure and honour , feast and beauty , friend , flatterer , french cook , fine horsis and house -- in exchange for a prison , a keeper , and a straw mattress like 's . " and then my lord would defy the ghost which threaten he , for he know of a remedy by which he could baulk he enemy . so there be splendour and wealth , but no great happiness perchance , behind the tall can portal of with it be smoky coronet and cipher . the feast there be of the grandest in , but there be not overmuch content therewith , except among the guest who sit at my lord 's table . have he not be so great a very few possibly would have visit he ; but in the sins of very great personage be look at indulgently . " regardon a deux fois " ( as the french lady say ) before we condemn a person of my lord 's undoubted quality . some notorious carper and squeamish moralist might be sulky with , but they be glad enough to come when he ask they . " be really too bad , " say , " but everybody go , and of course I shall see that my girl come to no harm . " " he lordship be a man to whom I owe much , everything in life , " say the , think that the be rather shaky , and and the young lady would as soon have miss go to church as to one of he lordship 's party . " he moral be bad , " say little to he sister , who meekly expostulate , have hear terrific legend from she mamma with respect to the doings at ; " but hang it , he be get the best dry Sillery in ! " and as for , .-- that pattern of decorum , who have lead off at missionary meeting -- he never for one moment thought of not go too . " where you see such person as the of and the Countess of , you may be pretty sure , , " the would say , " that we can not be wrong . the great rank and station of put he in a position to command people in we station in life . the of a , my dear , be a respectable man . besides , and I be intimate in early life ; he be my junior when we be attach at together . " in a word everybody go to wait upon this great man -- everybody who be ask , as you the reader ( do not say nay ) or I the writer hereof would go if we have a invitation . in the reader be introduce to the of at last 's kindness and attention to the chief of she husband 's family be destin to meet with a exceed great reward , a reward which , though certainly somewhat unsubstantial , the little woman covet with greater eagerness than more positive benefit . if she do not wish to lead a virtuous life , at least she desire to enjoy a character for virtue , and we know that no lady in the genteel world can possess this desideratum , until she have put on a train and feather and have be present to she at . from that august interview they come out stamp as honest woman . the give they a certificate of virtue . and as dubious goods or letter be pass through a oven at quarantine , sprinkle with aromatic vinegar , and then pronounce clean , many a lady , whose reputation would be doubtful otherwise and liable to give infection , pass through the wholesome ordeal of the presence and issue from it free from all taint . it might be very well for my , my , in the country , and other lady who have come into contact with to cry fie at the idea of the odious little adventuress make she curtsey before the Sovereign , and to declare that , if dear good have be alive , she never would have admit such a extremely ill - regulate personage into she chaste draw - room . but when we consider that it be the first gentleman in in whose high presence pass she examination , and as it be , take she degree in reputation , it surely must be flat disloyalty to doubt any more about she virtue . I , for my part , look back with love and awe to that great character in history . ah , what a high and noble appreciation of there must have be in , when that rever and august be be invest , by the universal acclaim of the refin and educate portion of this empire , with the title of of he Kingdom . do you remember , dear m --, oh friend of my youth , how one blissful night five - and - twenty year since , the " Hypocrite " be act , be manager , and performer , two boy have leave from they loyal master to go out from - where they be educated and to appear on stage , amongst a
a crowd which assemble there to greet the king . the king ? there he be . Beefeaters be before the august box ; the of ( of the ) and other great officer of state be behind the chair on which he sit , he sit -- florid of face , portly of person , cover with order , and in a rich curling head of hair -- how we sang save he ! how the house rock and shoute with that magnificent music . how they cheer , and cry , and wave handkerchief . lady wept ; mother clasp they child ; some faint with emotion . people be suffocate in the pit , shriek and groan rise up amidst the writhing and shout mass there of he people who be , and indeed show themselves almost to be , ready to die for he . yes , we see he . Fate can not deprive we of that . other have see . some few still exist who have beheld the , , , &c .-- be it we reasonable boast to we child , that we see the , the magnificent , the great . well , there come a happy day in 's existence when this angel be admit into the paradise of a court which she covet , she sister - in - law act as she godmother . on the appointed day , and he lady , in they great family carriage ( just newly build , and ready for the 's assumption of the office of high Sheriff of he county ) , drive up to the little house in , to the edification of , who be watch from he greengrocer 's shop , and see fine plume withing , and enormous bunch of flower in the breast of the new livery - coats of the footman . , in a glittering uniform , descend and go into , he sword between he leg . stand with he face against the parlour window - pane , smile and nodd with all he might to he aunt in the carriage within ; and presently issue forth from the house again , lead forth a lady with grand feather , cover in a white shawl , and hold up daintily a train of magnificent brocade . she step into the vehicle as if she be a princess and accustom all she life to go to , smile graciously on the footman at the door and on , who follow she into the carriage . then follow in he old Guard ' uniform , which have grow woefully shabby , and be much too tight . he be to have follow the procession and wait upon he sovereign in a cab , but that he good - natured sister - in - law insist that they should be a family party . the coach be large , the lady not very big , they would hold they train in they lap -- finally , the four go fraternally together , and they carriage presently join the line of royal equipage which be make its way down and 's , towards the old brick palace where the of be in waiting to receive he nobles and gentlefolk . feel as if she could bless the people out of the carriage window , so elated be she in spirit , and so strong a sense have she of the dignified position which she have at last attained in life . even we have she weakness , and as one often see how men pride themselves upon excellence which other be slow to perceive : how , for instance , firmly believe that he be the greatest tragic actor in ; how Brown , the famous novelist , long to be consider , not a man of genius , but a man of fashion ; while , the great lawyer , do not in the least care about he reputation in , but believe himself incomparable across country and at a five - barr gate -- so to be , and to be think , a respectable woman be 's aim in life , and she get up the genteel with amazing assiduity , readiness , and success . we have say , there be time when she believe herself to be a fine lady and forgot that there be no money in the chest at home -- dun round the gate , tradesman to coax and wheedle -- no ground to walk upon , in a word . and as she go to court in the carriage , the family carriage , she adopt a demeanour so grand , self - satisfied , deliberate , and impos that it make even . she walk into the royal apartment with a toss of the head which would have befit a empress , and I have no doubt have she be one , she would have become the character perfectly . we be authorize to state that 's costume de cour on the occasion of she presentation to the be of the most elegant and brilliant description . some lady we may have see -- we who wear stars and cordon and attend the 's assemblie , or we , who , in muddy boot , dawdle up and down and peep into the coach as they drive up with the great folk in they feather -- some lady of fashion , I say , we may have see , about two o'clock of the forenoon of a levee day , as the lace - jacket band of the be blow triumphal march seate on those prance music - stool , they cream - colou charger -- who be by no means lovely and entice object at that early period of noon . a stout countess of sixty , decolletee , paint , wrinkle with rouge up to
to she droop eyelid , and diamonds twinkl in she wig , be a wholesome and edify , but not a pleasant sight . she have the faded look of a . 's illumination , as it may be see of a early morning , when half the lamps be out , and the other be blink wanly , as if they be about to vanish like ghost before the dawn . such charms as those of which we catch glimpse while she ladyship 's carriage pass should appear abroad at night alone . if even look haggard of a afternoon , as we may see she sometimes in the present winter season , with stare she out of countenance from the opposite side of the heaven , how much more can old keep she head up when the sun be shining full upon it through the chariot window , and show all the chink and cranny with which time have mark she face ! no . Drawing - room should be announce for , or the first foggy day , or the elderly sultana of we Vanity fair should drive up in closed litter , descmend in a covered way , and make they curtsey to the under the protection of lamplight . we belov have no need , however , of any such a friendly halo to set off she beauty . she complexion could bear any sunshine as yet , and she dress , though if you be to see it now , any present lady of would pronounce it to be the most foolish and preposterous attire ever wear , be as handsome in she eye and those of the public , some five - and - twenty year since , as the most brilliant costume of the most famous beauty of the present season . a score of year hence that too , that milliner 's wonder , will have pass into the domain of the absurd , along with all previous vanity . but we be wander too much . 's dress be pronounce to be charmante on the eventful day of she presentation . even good litle be force to acknowledge this effect , as she look at she kinswoman , and own sorrowfully to herself that she be quite inferior in taste to . she do not know how much care , think , and have bestow upon that garment . have as good taste as any milliner in , and such a clever way of do thing as little understood . the latter quickly spy out the magnificence of the brocade of 's train , and the splendour of the lace on she dress . the brocade be a old remnant , say ; and as for the lace , it be a great bargain . she have have it these hundred year . " my dear . , it must have cost a little fortune , " say , look down at she own lace , which be not nearly so good ; and then examine the quality of the ancient brocade which form the material of 's dress , she feel inclin to say that she could not afford such fine clothing , but check that speech , with a effort , as one uncharitable to she kinswoman . and yet , if have know all , I think even she kindly temper would have fail she . the fact be , when she be put 's house in order , have find the lace and the brocade in old wardrobe , the property of the former lady of the house , and have quietly carry the goods home , and have suit they to she own little person . see she take they , ask no question , tell no story ; but I believe quite sympathise with she on this matter , and so would many another honest woman . and the diamonds --" where the doose do you get the diamonds , ? " say she husband , admir some jewel which he have never see before and which sparkle in she ear and on she neck with brilliance and profusion . blush a little and look at he hard for a moment . blush a little too , and look out of window . the fact be , he have give she a very small portion of the brilliant ; a pretty diamond clasp , which confin a pearl necklace which she wear -- and the Baronet have omit to mention the circumstance to he lady . look at she husband , and then at , with a air of saucy triumph -- as much as to say , " shall I betray you ? " " guess ! " she say to she husband . " why , you silly man , " she continue , " where do you suppose I get they ?-- all except the little clasp , which a dear friend of mine give I long ago . I hire they , to be sure . I hire they at 's , in . you do not suppose that all the diamonds which go to belong to the wearer ; like those beautiful stone which have , and which be much handsomer than any which I have , I be certain . " " they be family jewel , " say , again look uneasy . and in this family conversation the carriage roll down the street , until its cargo be finally dischar at the gate of the palace where the be sit in state . the diamonds , which have create 's admiration , never go back to , of , and that gentleman never apply for they restoration , but they retire into a little private repository , in a old desk , which have give she year and year ago , and in which keep a number
number of useful and , perhaps , valuable thing , about which she husband know nothing . to know nothing , or little , be in the nature of some husband . to hide , in the nature of how many woman ? oh , lady ! how many of you have surreptitious milliner ' bill ? how many of you have gowns and bracelet which you dare not show , or which you wear trembling ?--trembling , and coax with smile the husband by you side , who do not know the new velvet gown from the old one , or the new bracelet from last year 's , or have any notion that the rag - look yellow lace scarf cost forty guinea and that be write dunning letter every week for the money ! thus know nothing about the brilliant diamond ear - ring , or the superb brilliant ornament which decorate the fair bosom of he lady ; but , who be in he place at , as of the , and one of the great dignitary and illustrious defences of the throne of , and come up with all he star , garter , collar , and cordon , and pay particular attention to the little woman , know whence the jewel come and who pay for they . as he bow over she he smile , and quote the hackneyed and beautiful line from the of the about 's diamonds , " which might kiss and infidel adore . " " but I hope you lordship be orthodox , " say the little lady with a toss of she head . and many lady round about whisper and talk , and many gentleman nod and whisper , as they see what mark attention the great nobleman be pay to the little adventuress . what be the circumstance of the interview between , , and she Imperial master , it do not become such a feeble and inexperienced pen as mine to attempt to relate . the dazzled eye close before that magnificent idea . loyal respect and decency tell even the imagination not to look too keenly and audaciously about the sacred audience - chamber , but to back away rapidly , silently , and respectfully , make profound bow out of the . this may be say , that in all there be no more loyal heart than 's after this interview . the name of she king be always on she lip , and he be proclaim by she to be the most charming of man . she go to 's and order the finest portrait of he that be have produce , and credit could supply . she choose that famous one in which the best of monarch be represent in a frock - coat with a fur collar , and breech and silk stocking , simper on a sofa from under he curly brown wig . she have he pain in a brooch and wear it -- indeed she amuse and somewhat pester she acquaintance with she perpetual talk about he urbanity and beauty . who know ! perhaps the little woman think she might play the part of a or a Pompadour . but the finest sport of all after she presentation be to hear she talk virtuously . she have a few female acquaintance , not , it must be own , of the very highest reputation in . but be make a honest woman of , so to speak , would not consort any longer with these dubious one , and cut when the latter nod to she from she opera - box , and give White the go - by in the ring . " one must , my dear , show one be somebody , " she say . " one must not be see with doubtful people . I pity from my heart , and may be a very good - natured person . you may go and dine with they , as you like you rubber . but I must not , and will not ; and you will have the goodness to tell to say I be not at home when either of they call . " the particular of 's costume be in the newspaper -- feather , lappet , superb diamonds , and all the rest . read the paragraph in bitterness of spirit and discourse to she follower about the air which that woman be give herself . and she young lady in the country have a copy of the from town , and give a vent to they honest indignation . " if you have be sandy - haired , green - eye , and a french rope - dancer 's daughter , " . say to she eldest girl ( who , on the contrary , be a very swarthy , short , and snub - nose young lady ) , " you might have have superb diamonds forsooth , and have be present at by you cousin , the . but you be only a gentlewoman , my poor dear child . you have only some of the best blood in in you vein , and good principle and piety for you portion . I , myself , the wife of a 's younger brother , too , never think of such a thing as go to -- nor would other people , if good have be alive . " in this way the worthy Rectoress console herself , and she daughter sigh and sit over the Peerage all night . a few day after the famous presentation , another great and exceed honou be vouchsaf to the virtuous . 's carriage drive up to 's door , and the footman , instead of drive down the front of the house , as by he tremendous knocking he appear to be inclin to do , relent and
and only deliver in a couple of card , on which be engrave the name of the of and the Countess of . if these bit of pasteboard have be beautiful picture , or have have a hundred yard of lace rol round they , worth twice the number of guinea , could not have regard they with more pleasure . you may be sure they occupy a conspicuous place in the china bowl on the drawing - room table , where keep the card of she visitor . ! lord ! how poor 's card and 's card -- which we little friend have be glad enough to get a few month back , and of which the silly little creature be rather proud once -- ! lord ! I say , how soon at the appearance of these grand court card , do those poor little neglected deuce sink down to the bottom of the pack . ! , of ! and of ! we may be sure that and look out those august name in the Peerage , and follow the noble race up through all the ramification of the family tree . my come to call a couple of hour afterwards , and look about he , and observe everything as be he wont , find he lady 's card already range as the trump of 's hand , and grin , as this old cynic always do at any naive display of human weakness . come down to he presently ; whenever the dear girl expect he lordship , she toilette be prepare , she hair in perfect order , she mouchoir , apron , scarf , little morocco slipper , and other female gimcrack arrange , and she seat in some artless and agreeable posture ready to receive he -- whenever she be surprised , of course , she have to fly to she apartment to take a rapid survey of matter in the glass , and to trip down again to wait upon the great peer . she find he grinn over the bowl . she be discover , and she blush a little . " thank you , , " she say . " you see you lady have be here . how good of you ! I could not come before -- I be in the kitchen make a pudding . " " I know you be , I see you through the area -railing as I drive up , " reply the old gentleman . " you see everything , " she reply . " a few thing , but not that , my pretty lady , " he say good - naturedly . " you silly little fibster ! I hear you in the room overhead , where I have no doubt you be put a little rouge on -- you must give some of yours to my , whose complexion be quite preposterous -- and I hear the bedroom door open , and then you come downstairs . " " be it a crime to try and look my best when you come here ? " answer plaintively , and she rub she cheek with she handkerchief as if to show there be no rouge at all , only genuine blush and modesty in she case . about this who can tell ? I know there be some rouge that will not come off on a pocket - handkerchief , and some so good that even tears will not disturb it . " well , " say the old gentleman , twiddl round he wife 's card , " you be bent on become a fine lady . you pester my poor old life out to get you into the world . you will not be able to hold you own there , you silly little fool . you have get no money . " " you will get we a place , " interpose , " as quick as possible . " " you have get no money , and you want to compete with those who have . you poor little earthenware pipkin , you want to swim down the stream along with the great copper kettle . all woman be alike . everybody be strive for what be not worth the have ! ! I dine with the yesterday , and we have neck of mutton and turnip . a dinner of herb be better than a stall ox very often . you will go to . you give a old fellow no rest until you get there . it be not half so nice as here . you will be bo there . I be . my wife be as gay as , and my daughter as cheerful as and . I dare not sleep in what they call my bedroom . the bed be like the baldaquin of 's , and the picture frighten I . I have a little brass bed in a dressing - room , and a little hair mattress like a anchorite . I be a anchorite . Ho ! ho ! you will be ask to dinner next week . and gare aux femme , look out and hold you own ! how the woman will bully you ! " this be a very long speech for a man of few word like my ; nor be it the first which he utter for 's benefit on that day . look up from the work - table at which she be seat in the farther room and give a deep sigh as she hear the great speak so lightly of she sex . " if you do not turn off that abominable sheep - dog , " say , with a savage look over he shoulder at she , " I will have she poisone . " " I always give my dog dinner from my own plate ,
, " say , laugh mischievously ; and have enjoy for some time the discomfiture of my lord , who hate poor Briggs for interrupt he tete - a - tete with the fair 's wife , at length have pity upon she admirer , and call to , praise the fineness of the weather to she and bade she to take out the child for a walk . " I can not send she away , " say presently , after a pause , and in a very sad voice . she eye fill with tear as she speak , and she turn away she head . " you owe she she wage , I suppose ? " say the peer . " worse than that , " say , still cast down she eye ; " I have ruin she . " " ruin she ? then why do not you turn she out ? " the gentleman ask . " do that , " answer bitterly . " woman be not so bad as you . last year , when we be reduce to we last guinea , she give we everything . she shall never leave I , until we be ruin utterly ourselves , which do not seem far off , or until I can pay she the utmost farthing . " " ------ it , how much be it ? " say the peer with a oath . and , reflec on the largeness of he means , mention not only the sum which she have borrowed from , but one of nearly double the amount . this cause the to break out in another brief and energetic expression of anger , at which hold down she head the more and cry bitterly . " I could not help it . it be my only chance . I dare not tell my husband . he would kill I if I tell he what I have do . I have keep it a secret from everybody but you -- and you force it from I . ah , what shall I do , ? for I be very , very unhappy ! " make no reply except by beat the 's tattoo and bite he nail . at last he clap he hat on he head and fling out of the room . do not rise from she attitude of misery until the door slam upon he and he carriage whir away . then she rise up with the queerest expression of victorious mischief glitter in she green eye . she burst out laugh once or twice to herself , as she sit at work , and sit down to the piano , she rattle away a triumphant voluntary on the key , which make the people pause under she window to listen to she brilliant music . that night , there come two note from for the little woman , the one contain a card of invitation from and to a dinner at next , while the other enclose a slip of gray paper bear 's signature and the address of Messrs . , , and , . hear laugh in the night once or twice . it be only her delight at go to and face the lady there , she say , which amuse she so . but the truth be that she be occupy with a great number of other thought . should she pay off old Briggs and give she she conge ? should she astonish Raggles by settle he account ? she turn over all these thought on she pillow , and on the next day , when go out to pay he morning visit to the , ( in a modest dress with a veil on ) whip off in a hackney - coach to the City : and be land at Messrs . and 's bank , present a document there to the authority at the desk , who , in reply , ask she " how she would take it ? " she gently say " she would take a hundred and fifty pound in small note and the remainder in one note " : and pass through . 's stop there and buy the handsomest black silk gown for which money could buy ; and which , with a kiss and the kindest speech , she present to the simple old spinster . then she walk to , inquire about he child affectionately , and give he fifty pound on account . then she go to the livery - man from whom she job she carriage and gratify he with a similar sum . " and I hope this will be a lesson to you , , " she say , " and that on the next drawing - room day my brother , , will not be inconvenience by be oblige to take four of we in he carriage to wait upon his Majesty , because my own carriage be not forthcome . " it appear there have be a difference on the last drawing - room day . hence the degradation which the Colonel have almost suffered , of be obliged to enter the presence of he Sovereign in a hack cab . these arrangement conclude , pay a visit upstairs to the before - mention desk , which have give she year and year ago , and which contain a number of useful and valuable little thing -- in which private museum she place the one note which . and 's cashier have give she . in we and a dessert when the lady of be at breakfast that morning , ( who take he chocolate in private and seldom disturb the female of he household , or see they except upon public day , or when they cross each other in the hall , or when from he pit - box at
at the opera he survey they in they box on the grand tier ) he lordship , we say , appear among the ladie and the child who be assemble over the tea and toast , and a battle royal ensue apropo of . " my , " he say , " I want to see the list for you dinner on ; and I want you , if you please , to write a card for and . " " Blanche write they , " say in a flutter . " write they . " " I will not write to that person , " say , a tall and stately lady , who look up for a instant and then down again after she have speak . it be not good to meet 's eye for those who have offend he . " send the child out of the room . go ! " say he pull at the bell - rope . the urchin , always frightene before he , retire : they mother would have follow too . " not you , " he say . " you stop . " " my , " he say , " once more will you have the goodness to go to the desk and write that card for you dinner on ? " " my , I will not be present at it , " say ; " I will go home . " " I wish you would , and stay there . you will find the bailiff at Bareacres very pleasant company , and I shall be free from lend money to you relation and from you own damne tragedy air . who be you to give order here ? you have no money . you have get no brain . you be here to have child , and you have not have any . 's tired of you , and 's wife be the only person in the family who do not wish you be dead . Gaunt would marry again if you be . " " I wish I be , " she Ladyship answer with tear and rage in she eye . " you , forsooth , must give yourself air of virtue , while my wife , who be a immaculate saint , as everybody know , and never do wrong in she life , have no objection to meet my young friend . my lady know that appearances be sometimes against the best of woman ; that lie be often tell about the most innocent of they . pray , madam , shall I tell you some little anecdote about my , you mamma ? " " you may strike I if you like , sir , or hit any cruel blow , " say . to see he wife and daughter suffer always put he Lordship into a good humour . " my sweet Blanche , " he say , " I be a gentleman , and never lay my hand upon a woman , save in the way of kindness . I only wish to correct little fault in you character . you woman be too proud , and sadly lack humility , as , I be sure , would tell my Lady Steyne if he be here . you must not give yourselves air ; you must be meek and humble , my blessing . for all Steyne know , this calumniate , simple , good - humoured Mr . be quite innocent -- even more innocent than herself . she husband 's character be not good , but it be as good as ' , who have play a little and not pay a great deal , who cheat you out of the only legacy you ever have and leave you a pauper on my hand . and be not very well - bear , but she be not worse than 's illustrious ancestor , the first de la . " " the money which I brotch into the family , sir , " cry out -- " you purchase a contingent reversion with it , " the say darkly . " if die , you husband may come to he honour ; you little boy may inherit they , and who know what besides ? in the meanwhile , lady , be as proud and virtuous as you like abroad , but do not give I any air . as for . 's character , I sha not demean myself or that most spotless and perfectly irreproachable lady by even hint that it require a defence . you will be pleased to receive she with the utmost cordiality , as you will receive all person whom I present in this house . this house ? " he break out with a laugh . " who be the master of it ? and what be it ? this Temple of belong to I . and if I invite all Newgate or all here , by ------ they shall be welcome . " after this vigorous allocution , to one of wich sort treat he " Hareem " whenever symptom of insubordination appear in he household , the crestfallen woman have nothing for it but to obey . write the invitation which he Lordship require , and she and she mother - in - law drive in person , and with bitter and humiliate heart , to leave the card on , the reception of which cause that innocent woman so much pleasure . there be family in who would have sacrifice a year 's income to receive such a honour at the hand of those great lady . , for instance , would have go on she knee from to , if and have be wait in the City to raise she up and say , " come to we next " -- not to one of the
the great crush and grand ball of , whither everybody go , but to the sacred , unapproachable , mysterious , delicious entertainment , to be admit to one of which be a privilege , and a honour , and a blessing indeed . severe , spotless , and beautiful , hold the very highest rank in . the distinguished courtesy with which treat she charme everybody who witness he behaviour , cause the severest critic to admit how perfect a gentleman he be , and to own that he Lordship 's heart at least be in the right place . the lady of call in to they aid , in order to repulse the common enemy . one of 's carriage go to for she Ladyship 's mother , all whose equipage be in the hand of the bailiff , whose very jewel and wardrobe , it be say , have be seize by those inexorable Israelites . be theirs , too , with all its costly picture , furniture , and article of vertu -- the magnificent Vandykes ; the noble Reynold picture ; the Lawrence portrait , tawdry and beautiful , and , thirty year ago , deem as precious as work of real genius ; the matchless of , for which have sit in she youth -- splendo then , and radiant in wealth , rank , and beauty -- a toothless , bald , old woman now -- a mere rag of a former robe of state . she lord , pain at the same time by , as wave he sabre in front of , and clothed in he uniform as of the , be a withered , old , lean man in a greatcoat and a wig , slink about 's Inn of morning chiefly and dine alone at club . he do not like to dine with now . they have run races of pleasure together in youth when be the winner . but have more bottom than he and have last he out . the be ten time a greater man now than the young of ' 85 , and nowhere in the race -- old , beaten , bankrupt , and break down . he have borrow too much money of to find it pleasant to meet he old comrade often . the latter , whenever he wish to be merry , use jeeringly to ask why she father have not come to see she . " he have not be here for four month , " would say . " I can always tell by my cheque - book afterwards , when I get a visit from . what a comfort it be , my lady , I bank with one of my son ' fathers - in - law , and the other bank with I ! " of the other illustrious person whom have the honour to encounter on this she first presentation to the grand world , it do not become the present historian to say much . there be he Excellency the of , with he princess -- a nobleman tightly girth , with a large military chest , on which the plaque of he order shone magnificently , and wear the red collar of the round he neck . he be the owner of countless flock . " look at he face . I think he must be descende from a sheep , " whisper to . indeed , he Excellency 's countenance , long , solemn , and white , with the ornament round he neck , bear some resemblance to that of a venerable bell - wether . there be , titularly attach to the and correspondent of the , who , by way of make himself agreeable to the company , ask , during a pause in the conversation at dinner , how he dear friend , , like the Brazil ? he and have be most intimate at Naples and have go up together . write a full and particular account of the dinner , which appear duly in the Demagogue . he mention the name and title of all the guest , give biographical sketch of the principal people . he describe the person of the ladie with great eloquence ; the service of the table ; the size and costume of the servants ; enumerate the dish and wine serve ; the ornament of the sideboard ; and the probable value of the plate . such a dinner he calculate could not be dish up under fifteen or eighteen dollar per head . and he be in the habit , until very lately , of send over protege , with letter of recommendation to the present of , encourage to do so by the intimate term on which he have liv with he dear friend , the late lord . he be most indignant that a young and insignificant aristocrat , the of , should have take the pa of he in they procession to the dining - room . " just as I be step up to offer my hand to a very pleasing and witty fashionable , the brilliant and exclusive , " -- he write -- " the young patrician interpose between I and the lady and whisk my off without a word of apology . I be fain to bring up the rear with the Colonel , the lady 's husband , a stout red - face warrior who distinguished himself at , where he have better luck than befell some of he brother redcoat at . " the 's countenance on come into this polite society wore as many blush as the face of a boy of sixteen assume when he be confront with he sister 's schoolfellow . it have be tell before that honest have not be much use at any period of he life to lady ' company . with the
the man at the or the mess room , he be well enough ; and could ride , bet , smoke , or play at billiards with the boldest of they . he have have he time for female friendship too , but that be twenty year ago , and the lady be of the rank of those with whom young in the comedy be represent as have be familiar before he become abashed in the presence of . the time be such that one scarcely dare to allude to that kind of company which thousand of we young man in Vanity fair be frequent every day , which nightly fill casino and dancing - room , which be know to exist as well as the in or the congregation at 's -- but which the most squeamish if not the most moral of societie be determined to ignore . in a word , although be now five - and - forty year of age , it have not be he lot in life to meet with a half dozen good woman , besides he paragon of a wife . all except she and he kind sister , whose gentle nature have tame and win he , scare the worthy Colonel , and on occasion of he first dinner at he be not hear to make a single remark except to state that the weather be very hot . indeed would have leave he at home , but that virtue ordain that she husband should be by she side to protect the timid and flutter little creature on she first appearance in polite society . on she first appearance step forward , take she hand , and greet she with great courtesy , and present she to , and they ladyship , she daughter . they ladyship make three stately curtsy , and the elder lady to be sure give she hand to the newcomer , but it be as cold and lifeless as marble . take it , however , with grateful humility , and perform a reverence which would have do credit to the best dancer - master , put herself at 's foot , as it be , by say that he Lordship have be she father 's earliest friend and patron , and that she , , have learn to honour and respect the family from the day of she childhood . the fact be that have once purchase a couple of picture of the late , and the affectionate orphan could never forget she gratitude for that favour . the then come under 's cognizance -- to whom the 's lady make also a most respectful obeisance : it be return with severe dignity by the exalted person in question . " I have the pleasure of make you Ladyship 's acquaintance at Brussels , ten year ago , " say in the most win manner . " I have the good fortune to meet at the Duchess of 's ball , the night before the battle of . and I recollect you Ladyship , and my lady Blanche , you daughter , sit in the carriage in the porte -cochere at the , wait for horse . I hope you Ladyship 's diamonds be safe . " everybody be eye look into they neighbour 's . the famous diamonds have undergone a famous seizure , it appear , about which , of course , know nothing . retreat with into a window , where the latter be hear to laugh immoderately , as tell he the story of want horse and " knuckl down by , " to . " I think I need not be afraid of that woman , " Becky thought . indeed , Bareacres exchange terrified and angry look with she daughter and retreat to a table , where she begin to look at picture with great energy . when the Potentate from the make he appearance , the conversation be carry on in the french language , and the and the younger lady find , to they farther mortification , that be much better acquaint with that tongue , and speak it with a much better accent than they . have meet other Hungarian magnate with the army in in 1816 - 17 . she ask after she friend with great interest the foreign personage think that she be a lady of great distinction , and the and the princess ask severally of and the Marchioness , whom they conduct to dinner , who be that petite dame who speak so well ? finally , the procession be form in the order describe by the american diplomatist , they march into the apartment where the banquet be serve , and which , as I have promise the reader he shall enjoy it , he shall have the liberty of ordering himself so as to suit he fancy . but it be when the lady be alone that know the tug of war would come . and then indeed the little woman find herself in such a situation as make she acknowledge the correctness of 's caution to she to beware of the society of lady above she own sphere . as they say , the person who hate most be Irishmen ; so , assuredly , the greatest tyrants over woman be woman . when poor little , alone with the lady , go up to the fire - place whither the great lady have repair , the great lady march away and take possession of a table of drawing . when follow they to the table of drawing , they drop off one by one to the fire again . she try to speak to one of the child ( of whom she be commonly fond in public place ) , but be call away by he mamma ; and the stranger be treat with such cruelty finally ,
, that even herself pitie she and go up to speak to the friendless little woman . " , " say she Ladyship , as she want cheek glow with a blush , " say you s and play very beautifully , Crawley -- I wish you would do I the kindness to s to I . " " I will do anything that may give pleasure to my or to you , " say , sincerely grateful , and seat herself at the piano , begin to s . she sang religious song of , which have be early favourite of , and with such sweetness and tenderness that the lady , linger round the piano , sit down by its side and listen until the tear roll down she eye . it be true that the opposition lady at the other end of the room keep up a loud and ceaseless buzzing and talk , but the do not hear those rumour . she be a child again -- and have wander back through a forty year ' wilderness to she convent garden . the chapel organ have pea the same tone , the organist , the sister whom she love best of the community , have teach they to she in those early happy day . she be a girl once more , and the brief period of she happiness bloom out again for a hour -- she start when the jarring door be flng open , and with a loud laugh from , the man of the party enter full of gaiety . he see at a glance what have happene in he absence , and be grateful to he wife for once . he go and speak to she , and call she by she Christian name , so as again to bring blush to she pale face -- " my wife say you have be singe like a angel , " he say to . now there be angels of two kind , and both sort , it be say , be charme in they way . whatever the previous portion of the evening have be , the rest of that night be a great triumph for . she sang she very best , and it be so good that every one of the man come and crowd round the piano . the woman , she enemy , be leave quite alone . and think he have make a conquest of by go up to she Ladyship and praise she delightful friend 's first - rate singing . a the Muse , whoever she be , who preside over this comic History must now descmend from the genteel height in which she have be soar and have the goodness to drop down upon the lowly roof of at , and describe what event be take place there . here , too , in this humble tenement , live care , and distrust , and dismay . in the kitchen be grumbl in secret to she husband about the rent , and urge the good fellow to rebel against he old friend and patron and he present lodger . have cease to visit she landlady in the lower region now , and indeed be in a position to patronize no longer . how can one be condescende to a lady to whom one owe a matter of forty pound , and who be perpetually throw out hint for the money ? the irish maidservant have not alter in the least in she kind and respectful behaviour ; but . fancy that she be grow insolent and ungrateful , and , as the guilty thief who fear each bush a officer , see threaten innuendoe and hint of capture in all the girl 's speech and answer . , grow quite a young woman now , be declare by the soured old lady to be a unbearable and impudent little minx . why can be so fond of she , or have she in she room so much , or walk out with she so constantly , can not conceive . the bitterness of poverty have poisone the life of the once cheerful and kindly woman . she be thankless for 's constant and gentle bear towards she ; carps at she for she effort at kindness or service ; rail at she for she silly pride in she child and she neglect of she parent . 's house be not a very lively one since 's annuity have be withdraw and the little family be almost upon famine diet . think , and think , and rack she brain , to find some means of increase the small pittance upon which the household be starve . can she give lesson in anything ? paint card -rack ? do fine work ? she find that woman be work hard , and better than she can , for twopence a day . she buy a couple of begill board at the 's and paint she very best upon they -- a shepherd with a red waistcoat on one , and a pink face smile in the midst of a pencil landscape -- a shepherdess on the other , cross a little bridge , with a little dog , nicly shade . the man of the and of ( of whom she buy the screen , vainly hope that he would repurchase they when ornament by she hand ) can hardly hide the sneer with which he examine these feeble work of art . he look askance at the lady who wait in the shop , and tie up the card again in they envelope of whitey - brown paper , and hand they to the poor widow and , who have never see such beautiful thing in she life , and have be quite confident that the man must give at least two guinea for the screen .
. they try at other shop in the interior of , with faint sickening hope . " do not want 'em , " say one . " be off , " say another fiercely . - and - sixpence have be spend in vain -- the screen retire to 's bedroom , who persist in think they lovely . she write out a little card in she neatest hand , and after long thought and labour of composition , in which the public be inform that " a who have some time at she disposal , wish to undertake the education of some little girl , whom she would instruct in , in french , in , in History , and in music-- address a . O. , at 's " ; and she confide the card to the gentleman of the , who consent to allow it to lie upon the counter , where it grow dingy and fly - blown . pass the door wistfully many a time , in hope that will have some news to give she , but he never beckon she in . when she go to make little purchase , there be no news for she . poor simple lady , tender and weak -- how be you to battle with the struggle violent world ? she grow daily more care - worn and sad , fix upon she child alarme eye , whereor the little boy can not interpret the expression . she start up of a night and peep into he room stealthily , to see that he be sleep and not steal away . she sleep but little now . a constant thought and terror be haunt she . how she weep and pray in the long silent night -- how she try to hide from herself the thought which will return to she , that she ought to part with the boy , that she be the only barrier between he and prosperity . she can not , she can not . not now , at least . some other day . oh ! it be too hard to think of and to bear . a thought come over she which make she blush and turn from herself -- she parent might keep the annuity -- the curate would marry she and give a home to she and the boy . but 's picture and dearest memory be there to rebuke she . shame and love say no to the sacrifice . she shrink from it as from something unholy , and such thought never find a resting - place in that pure and gentle bosom . the combat , which we describe in a sentence or two , last for many week in poor 's heart , during which she have no confidante ; indeed , she could never have one , as she would not allow to herself the possibility of yielding , though she be give way dailly before the enemy with whom she have to battle . one truth after another be marshall itself silently against she and keep it be ground . Poverty and misery for all , want and degradation for she parent , injustice to the boy -- one by one the outwork of the little citadel be take , in which the poor soul passionately guard she only love and treasure . at the beginning of the struggle , she have write off a letter of tender supplication to she brother at , implor he not to withdraw the support which he have grant to they parent and pain in term of artless patho they lonely and hapless condition . she do not know the truth of the matter . the payment of 's annuity be still regular , but it be a money - lender in the who be receive it : old have sell it for a sum of money wherewith to prosecute he bootless scheme . be calculate eagerly the time that would elapse before the letter would arrive and be answer . she have write down the date in she pocket - book of the day when she dispatch it . to she son 's guardian , the good major at , she have not communicate any of she grief and perplexity . she have not write to he since she write to congratulate he on he approaching marriage . she think with sickening despondency , that that friend -- the only one , the one who have felt such a regard for she -- be fall away . one day , when thing have come to a very bad pass -- when the creditor be press , the mother in hysteric grief , the father in more than usual gloom , the inmate of the family avoid each other , each secretly oppress with he private unhappiness and notion of wrong -- the father and daughter happen to be leave alone together , and think to comfort she father by tell he what she have do . she have write to -- a answer must come in three or four month . he be always generous , though careless . he could not refuse , when he know how straitened be the circumstance of he parent . then the poor old gentleman reveal the whole truth to she -- that he son be still pay the annuity , which he own imprudence have fling away . he have not da to tell it sooner . he think 's ghastly and terrify look , when , with a trembling , miserable voice he make the confession , convey reproach to he for he concealment . " ah ! " say he with quivering lip and turn away , " you despise you old father now ! " " oh , papa ! it be not that , " cry out , fal on he neck and kiss he
he many time . " you be always good and kind . you do it for the best . it be not for the money -- it be -- my ! my ! have mercy upon I , and give I strength to bear this trial " ; and she kiss he again wildly and go away . still the father do not know what that explanation mean , and the burst of anguish with which the poor girl leave he . it be that she be conquer . the sentence be pass . the child must go from she -- to other -- to forget she . she heart and she treasure -- she joy , hope , love , worship -- she , almost ! she must give he up , and then -- and then she would go to , and they would watch over the child and wait for he until he come to they in . she put on she bonnet , scarcely know what she do , and go out to walk in the lane by which use to come back from school , and where she be in the habit of go on he return to meet the boy . it be , a half - holiday . the leave be all come out , the weather be brilliant ; the boy come run to she flush with health , singe , he bundle of school - book hang by a thong . there he be . both she arm be round he . no , it be impossible . they could not be go to part . " what be the matter , mother ? " say he ; " you look very pale . " " nothing , my child , " she say and stoop down and kiss he . that night make the boy read the story of to she , and how , he mother , have wean he , bring he to the to minister before the . and he read the song of gratitude which sang , and which say , who it be who maketh poor and maketh rich , and bringeth low and exalteth -- how the poor shall be raise up out of the dust , and how , in he own might , no man shall be strong . then he read how 's mother make he a little coat and bring it to he from year to year when she come up to offer the yearly sacrifice . and then , in she sweet simple way , 's mother make commentary to the boy upon this affecting story . how , though she love she son so much , yet give he up because of she vow . and how she must always have think of he as she sit at home , far away , make the little coat ; and , she be sure , never forget he mother ; and how happy she must have be as the time come ( and the year pass away very quick ) when she should see she boy and how good and wise he have grow . this little sermon she speak with a gentle solemn voice , and dry eye , until she come to the account of they meeting -- then the discourse break off suddenly , the tender heart overflow , and take the boy to she breast , she rock he in she arm and wept silently over he in a sainted agony of tear . she mind be make up , the widow begin to take such measure as see right to she for advance the end which she propose . one day , , in ( have not write the name or number of the house for ten year -- she youth , she early story come back to she as she write the superscription ) one day get a letter from which make she blush very much and look towards she father , sit gloom in he place at the other end of the table . in simple term , tell she the reason which have induce she to change she mind respect she boy . she father have meet with fresh misfortune which have entirely ruin he . she own pittance be so small that it would barely enable she to support she parent and would not suffice to give the advantages which be he due . great as she suffering would be at part with he she would , by 's help , endure they for the boy 's sake . she know that those to whom he be go would do all in they power to make he happy . she describe he disposition , such as she fancie it -- quick and impatient of control or harshness , easily to be move by love and kindness . in a postscript , she stipulate that she should have a written agreement , that she should see the child as often as she wish -- she could not part with he under any other term . " what ? have come down , have she ? " old Osborne say , when with a tremulous eager voice read he the letter . " Reg'lar starve out , hey ? , ha ! I know she would . " he try to keep he dignity and to read he paper as usual -- but he could not follow it . he chuckle and swore to himself behind the sheet . at last he fling it down and , scowl at he daughter , as he will not be , go out of the room into he study adjoin , from whence he presently return with a key . he fling it to . " get the room over mine -- he room that be -- ready , " he say . " yes ,
, sir , " he daughter reply in a tremble . it be 's room . it have not be open for more than ten year . some of he clothes , papers , handkerchief , whip and cap , fishing - rod and sport gear , be still there . a Army list of 1814 , with he name write on the cover ; a little dictionary he be will not to use in writing ; and the Bible he mother have give he , be on the mantelpiece , with a pair of spur and a dry inkstand cover with the dust of ten year . ah ! since that ink be wet , what day and people have pass away ! the writing - book , still on the table , be blot with he hand . be much affect when she first enter this room with the servants under she . she sank quite pale on the little bed . " this be bless news , m 'am -- indeed , , " the housekeeper say ; " and the good old time be return , m 'am . the dear little feller , to be sure , m 'am ; how happy he will be ! but some folk in , 'am , will owe he a grudge , m 'am " ; and she click back the bolt which hold the window - sash and let the air into the chamber . " you have better send that woman some money , " say , before he go out . " she sha not want for nothing . send she a hundred pound . " " and I will go and see she to - morrow ? " ask . " that be you look out . she do not come in here , mind . no , by ------, not for all the money in . but she must not want now . so look out , and get thing right . " with which brief speech take leave of he daughter and go on he accustom way into the City . " here , , be some money , " say that night , kiss the old man , she father , and put a bill for a hundred pound into he hand . " and -- and , , do not be harsh with . he -- he be not go to stop with we long . " she could say nothing more , and walk away silently to she room . let we close it upon she prayer and she sorrow . I think we have best speak little about so much love and grief . come the next day , accord to the promise contain in she note , and see . the meeting between they be friendly . a look and a few word from show the poor widow that , with regard to this woman at least , there need be no fear lest she should take the first place in she son 's affection . she be cold , sensible , not unkind . the mother have not be so well pleased , perhaps , have the rival be better look , younger , more affectionate , warmer - hear . , on the other hand , think of old time and memory and could not but be touch with the poor mother 's pitiful situation . she be conquer , and lay down she arm , as it be , she humbly submit . that day they arrange together the preliminary of the treaty of capitulation . be keep from school the next day , and see he aunt . leave they alone together and go to she room . she be try the separation -- as that poor gentle feel the edge of the axe that be to come down and sever she slender life . day be pass in parley , visit , preparation . the widow break the matter to with great caution ; she look to see he very much affect by the intelligence . he be rather elated than otherwise , and the poor woman turn sadly away . he brag about the news that day to the boy at school ; tell they how he be go to live with he grandpapa he father 's father , not the one who come here sometimes ; and that he would be very rich , and have a carriage , and a pony , and go to a much finer school , and when he be rich he would buy 's pencil - case and pay the tart-woman . the boy be the image of he father , as he fond mother thought . indeed I have no heart , on account of we dear 's sake , to go through the story of 's last day at home . at last the day come , the carriage drive up , the little humble packet contain token of love and remembrance be ready and dispose in the hall long since -- be in he new suit , for which the tailor have come previously to measure he . he have spring up with the sun and put on the new clothes , he mother hear he from the room close by , in which she have be lie , in speechless grief and watch . day before she have be make preparation for the end , purchase little store for the boy 's use , mark he book and linen , talk with he and prepare he for the change -- fondly fancie that he need preparation . so that he have change , what car he ? he be longe for it . by a thousand eager declaration as to what he would do , when he go to live with he grandfather , he have show the poor widow how
how little the idea of parting have cast he down . " he would come and see he mamma often on the pony , " he say . " he would come and fetch she in the carriage ; they would drive in the park , and she should have everything she want . " the poor mother be fain to contend herself with these selfish demonstration of attachment , and try to convince herself how sincerely she son love she . he must love she . all child be so : a little anxious for novelty , and -- no , not selfish , but self - willed . she child must have he enjoyment and ambition in the world . she herself , by she own selfishness and imprudent love for he have deny he he just rights and pleasur hitherto . I know few thing more affect than that timorous debasement and self -humiliation of a woman . how she own that it be she and not the man who be guilty ; how she take all the fault on she side ; how she court in a manner punishment for the wrongs which she have not commit and persist in shield the real culprit ! it be those who injure woman who get the most kindness from they -- they be bear timid and tyrant and maltreat those who be humblest before they . so poor have be get ready in silent misery for she son 's departure , and have pass many and many a long solitary hour in make preparation for the end . stand by he mother , watch she arrangement without the least concern . Tears have fall into he box ; passage have be score in he favourite book ; old toy , relic , treasure have be hoard away for he , and pack with strange neatness and care -- and of all these thing the boy take no note . the child go away smile as the mother break she heart . by heaven it be pitiful , the bootless love of woman for child in . a few day be past , and the great event of 's life be consummate . no angel have intervene . the child be sacrifice and offer up to fate , and the widow be quite alone . the boy come to see she often , to be sure . he ride on a pony with a coachman behind he , to the delight of he old grandfather , , who walk proudly down the lane by he side . she see he , but he be not she boy any more . why , he ride to see the boy at the little school , too , and to show off before they he new wealth and splendour . in two day he have adopt a slightly imperious air and patronizing manner . he be bear to command , he mother think , as he father be before he . it be fine weather now . of evening on the day when he do not come , she take a long walk into -- yes , as far as , and rest on the stone by the railing of the garden opposite 's house . it be so pleasant and cool . she can look up and see the drawing - room window illuminate , and , at about nine o'clock , the chamber in the upper story where sleep . she know -- he have tell she . she pray there as the light go out , pray with a humble heart , and walk home shrinking and silent . she be very tired when she come home . perhaps she will sleep the better for that long weary walk , and she may dream about . one she happen to be walk in , at some distance from 's house ( she could see it from a distance though ) when all the bell of be ring , and and he aunt come out to go to church ; a little sweep ask for charity , and the footman , who carry the book , try to drive he away ; but stop and give he money . 's blessing be on the boy ! run round the square and , come up to the sweep , give he she mite too . all the bell of be ring , and she follow they until she come to the , into which she go . there she sit in a place whence she could see the head of the boy under he father 's tombstone . many hundr fresh child 's voice rise up there and sang hymn to the , and little 's soul thrill with delight at the burst of glorious psalmody . he mother could not see he for awhile , through the mist that dim she eye . in a be act or the 's appearance at my 's private and select party , the claim of that estimable woman as regard fashion be settle , and some of the very greatest and tallest door in the metropolis be speedily open to she -- door so great and tall that the beloved reader and writer hereof may hope in vain to enter at they . dear breth , let we tremble before those august portal . I fancy they guard by grooms of the chamber with flaming silver fork with which they prong all those who have not the right of the entree . they say the honest newspaper - fellow who sit in the hall and take down the name of the great one who be admit to the feast die after a little time . he can not survive the glare of fashion long . it scorch he up , as the presence of in full dress waste that poor imprudent -- a giddy
giddy moth of a creature who ruin herself by venture out of she natural atmosphere . she myth ought to be take to heart amongst the , the -- she story , and perhaps 's too . ah , lady !-- ask the if be not a sound brass and a tinkling cymbal . these be vanity . even these will pass away . and some day or other ( but it will be after we time , thank goodness ) will be no better know than the celebrate horticultural outskirt of , and will be as desolate as , or in the wilderness . lady , be you aware that the great live in ? what would not you grandmother have give to be ask to 's party in that now decay mansion ? I have dine in it -- moi qui vous parle , I people the chamber with ghost of the mighty dead . as we sit soberly drinking claret there with man of to - day , the spirit of the come in and take they place round the darksome board . the pilot who weather the storm toss off great bumper of spiritual port ; the shade of do not leave the ghost of a heeltap . sit bow and smirk in a ghastly manner , and would not be behindhand when the noiseless bottle go round ; , from under bushy eyebrow , wink at the apparition of a beeswing ; 's eye go up to the ceiling , so that he do not seem to know how he glass go up full to he mouth and come down empty ; up to the ceiling which be above we only yesterday , and which the great of the past day have all look at . they let the house as a furnish lodging now . yes , once live in , and lie asleep in the wilderness . see she there -- not in , but in the other solitude . it be all vanity to be sure , but who will not own to like a little of it ? I should like to know what well - constitut mind , merely because it be transitory , dislike roast beef ? that be a vanity , but may every man who read this have a wholesome portion of it through life , I beg : aye , through my reader be five hundred thousand . sit down , gentlemen , and fall to , with a good hearty appetite ; the fat , the lean , the gravy , the horse - radish as you like it -- do not spare it . another glass of wine , , my boy -- a little bit of the side . yes , let we eat we fill of the vain thing and be thankful therefor . and let we make the best of 's aristocratic pleasur likewise -- for these too , like all other mortal delight , be but transitory . the upshot of she visit to be that he Highness the of take occasion to renew he acquaintance with , when they meet on the next day at the , and to compliment in the of with a profound salute of the hat . she and she husband be invite immediately to one of the 's small party at , then occupy by he Highness during the temporary absence from of its noble proprietor . she sang after dinner to a very little comite . the of be present , paternally superintend the progress of he pupil . at meet one of the finest gentleman and greatest minister that have produce -- the , then from the most , and subsequently to that monarch . I declare I swell with pride as these august name be transcribe by my pen , and I think in what brilliant company my dear be move . she become a constant guest at the , where no party be consider to be complete without the presence of the . ( of the family ) and , both attach of the , be straightway smite by the charms of the fair 's wife , and both declare , accord to the wont of they nation ( for who ever yet meet a , come out of , that have not leave half a dozen family miserable , and bring away as many heart in he pocket - book ? ) , both , I say , declare that they be au mieux with the charming . but I doubt the correctness of the assertion . be very fond of ecarte , and make many party with the Colonel of evening , while be singe to in the other room ; and as for , it be a well - know fact that he da not go to the traveller ' , where he owed money to the waiter , and if he have not have the embassy as a dining - place , the worthy young gentleman must have starve . I doubt , I say , that would have select either of these young man as a person on whom she would bestow she special regard . they run of she message , purchase she glove and flower , go in debt for opera - box for she , and make themselves amiable in a thousand way . and they talk with adorable simplicity , and to the constant amusement of and my , she would mimic one or other to he face , and compliment he on he advance in the english language with a gravity which never fail to tickle the , she sardonic old patron . give a shawl by way of win over 's confidante , and ask she to take charge of a letter which the simple spinster hand over in public to the person to whom it be address , and
and the composition of which amuse everybody who read it greatly . read it , everybody but honest , to whom it be not necessary to tell everything that pass in the little house in . here , before long , receive not only " the best " foreigner ( as the phrase be in we noble and admirable society slang ) , but some of the best English people too . I do not mean the most virtuous , or indeed the least virtuous , or the cleverest , or the stupidest , or the richest , or the best bear , but " the best , " -- in a word , people about whom there be no question -- such as the great - , that of 's , the great , the great ( she be , daughter of of ) , and the like . when the Countess of - ( she Ladyship be of the family , see and ) take up a person , he or she be safe . there be no question about they any more . not that my - be any better than anybody else , be , on the contrary , a faded person , fifty - seven year of age , and neither handsome , nor wealthy , nor entertain ; but it be agree on all side that she be of the " best people . " those who go to she be of the best : and from a old grudge probably to ( for whose coronet she ladyship , then the youthful , daughter of the of 's favourite , the of , have once try ) , this great and famous leader of the fashion choose to acknowledge ; make she a most mark curtsey at the assembly over which she preside ; and not only encourage she son , ( he lordship get he place through 's interest ) , to frequent 's house , but ask she to she own mansion and speak to she twice in the most public and condescending manner during dinner . the important fact be know all over that night . people who have be cry fie about be silent . , the wit and lawyer , 's right - hand man , go about everywhere praise she : some who have hesitate , come forward at once and welcome she ; little , who have warn about visit such a abandoned woman , now besotch to be introduce to she . in a word , she be admit to be among the " best " people . ah , my beloved reader and breth , do not envy poor Becky prematurely -- glory like this be say to be fugitive . it be currently report that even in the very inmost circle , they be no happier than the poor wanderer outside the zone ; and , who penetrat into the very centre of fashion and see the great iv face to face , have own since that there too be . we must be brief in descant upon this part of she career . as I can not describe the mystery of freemasonry , although I have a shrewd idea that it be a humbug , so a uninitiated man can not take upon himself to portray the great world accurately , and have best keep he opinion to himself , whatever they be . have often speak in subsequent year of this season of she life , when she move among the very greatest circle of the fashion . she success excite , elate , and then bore she . at first no occupation be more pleasant than to invent and procure ( the latter a work of no small trouble and ingenuity , by the way , in a person of 's very narrow means ) -- to procure , we say , the prettiest new dress and ornament ; to drive to fine dinner party , where she be welcome by great people ; and from the fine dinner party to fine assemblie , whither the same people come with whom she have be dining , whom she have meet the night before , and would see on the morrow -- the young man faultlessly appoint , handsomely cravat , with the neatest glossy boot and white glove -- the elder portly , brass - button , noble - look , polite , and prosy -- the young lady blonde , timid , and in pink -- the mother grand , beautiful , sumptuous , solemn , and in diamonds . they talk in , not in bad , as they do in the novel . they talk about each other ' house , and character , and family -- just as the do about the . 's former acquaintance hate and envie she ; the poor woman herself be yawn in spirit . " I wish I be out of it , " she say to herself . " I would rather be a parson 's wife and teach a school than this ; or a sergeant 's lady and ride in the regimental waggon ; or , oh , how much gayer it would be to wear spangles and trousers and dance before a booth at a fair . " " you would do it very well , " say , laugh . she use to tell the great man she ennuis and perplexity in she artless way -- they amuse he . " would make a very good Ecuyer -- master of the Ceremonies -- what do you call he -- the man in the large boot and the uniform , who go round the ring crack the whip ? he be large , heavy , and of a military figure . I recollect , " continue pensively , " my father take I to see a show at
at when I be a child , and when we come home , I make myself a pair of stilt and dance in the studio to the wonder of all the pupil . " " I should have like to see it , " say . " I should like to do it now , " continue . " how would open she eye , and would stare ! Hush ! silence ! there be begin to s . " always make a point of be conspicuously polite to the professional lady and gentleman who attend at these aristocratic party -- of follow they into the corner where they sit in silence , and shake hand with they , and smile in the view of all persons . she be a artist herself , as she say very truly ; there be a frankness and humility in the manner in which she acknowledge she origin , which provoke , or disarm , or amuse looker - on , as the case might be . " how cool that woman be , " say one ; " what air of independence she assume , where she ought to sit still and be thankful if anybody speak to she ! " " what a honest and good - natured soul she be ! " say another . " what a artful little minx " say a third . they be all right very likely , but go she own way , and so fascinate the professional personage that they would leave off they sore throat in order to s at she party and give she lesson for nothing . yes , she give party in the little house in . many score of carriage , with blazing lamp , block up the street , to the disgust of no. 100 , who could not rest for the thunder of the knocking , and of 102 , who could not sleep for envy . the gigantic footman who accompany the vehicle be too big to be contain in 's little hall , and be billet off in the neighbour public - house , whence , when they be want , call - boy summon they from they beer . score of the great dandy of squeeze and trod on each other on the little stair , laugh to find themselves there ; and many spotless and severe lady of ton be seat in the little drawing - room , listen to the professional singer , who be singe accord to they wont , and as if they wish to blow the window down . and the day after , there appear among the fashionable reunion in the a paragraph to the follow effect : " , and . entertaine a select party at dinner at they house in . they Excellency the and of , . , the ( attend by , dragoman of the mission ) , the of , of , and , , . after dinner have a assembly which be attend by the Duchess ( Dowager ) of , la , of , , , , , Countess of , and , Major- and , and ( 2 ) ; , , . , , " and a & c. , which the reader may fill at he pleasure through a dozen close line of small type . and in she commerce with the great we dear friend show the same frankness which distinguished she transaction with the lowly in station . on one occasion , when out at a very fine house , be ( perhaps rather ostentatiously ) hold a conversation in the french language with a celebrated tenor singer of that nation , while the look over she shoulder scowling at the pair . " how very well you speak french , " say , who herself speak the tongue in a accent most remarkable to hear . " I ought to know it , " modestly say , cast down she eye . " I teach it in a school , and my mother be a Frenchwoman . " be win by she humility and be mollify towards the little woman . she deplor the fatal levelling tendency of the age , which admit person of all class into the society of they superior , but she ladyship own that this one at least be well behave and never forget she place in life . she be a very good woman : good to the poor ; stupid , blameless , unsuspicious . it be not she ladyship 's fault that she fancy herself better than you and I . the skirt of she ancestor 's garment have be kiss for centurie ; it be a thousand year , they say , since the tartan of the head of the family be embrace by the defunct 's lord and councillor , when the great ancestor of the become of . , after the music scene , succumb before , and perhaps be not disinclin to she . the younger lady of the house of be also compelle into submission . once or twice they set people at she , but they fail . the brilliant try a passage of arm with she , but be route with great slaughter by the intrepid little . when attack sometimes , have a knack of adopt a demure ingenue air , under which she be most dangerous . she say the wickedest thing with the most simple unaffected air when in this mood , and would take care artlessly to apologize for she blunder , so that all the world should know that she have make they . , the celebrated wit , and a lead captain and trencher- man of my , be cause by the ladie to charge she ; and the worthy fellow , leer at he patroness and give they a wink , as much
much as to say , " now look out for sport , " one evening begin a assault upon , who be unsuspiciously eat she dinner . the little woman , attack on a sudden , but never without arm , light up in a instant , parry and ripost with a home - thrust , which make 's face tingle with shame ; then she return to she soup with the most perfect calm and a quiet smile on she face . 's great patron , who give he dinner and lent he a little money sometimes , and whose election , newspaper , and other job do , give the luckless fellow such a savage glance with the eyes as almost make he sink under the table and burst into tear . he look piteously at my lord , who never speak to he during dinner , and at the ladie , who disown he . at last herself take compassion upon he and try to engage he in talk . he be not ask to dinner again for six week ; and , my lord 's confidential man , to whom naturally pay a good deal of court , be instruct to tell he that if he ever da to say a rude thing to . again , or make she the butt of he stupid joke , would put every one of he note of hand into he lawyer 's hand and sell he up without mercy . weep before and implor he dear friend to intercede for he . he write a poem in favour of , which appear in the very next number of the , which he conduct . he implor she good - will at party where he meet she . he cringe and coax at the club . he be allow to come back to after a while . be always good to he , always amused , never angry . he lordship 's vizier and chief confidential servant ( with a seat in parliament and at the dinner table ) , , be much more prudent in he behaviour and opinion than . however much he might be dispose to hate all parvenus ( himself be a staunch old true , and he father a small coal - merchant in the north of ) , this aide - de - camp of the never show any sort of hostility to the new favourite , but pursue she with stealthy kindness and a sly and deferential politeness which somehow make more uneasy than other people 's overt hostility . how the get the money which be spend upon the entertainment with which they treat the polite world be a mystery which give rise to some conversation at the time , and probably add zest to these little festivity . some person averr that give he brother a handsome allowance ; if he do , 's power over the Baronet must have be extraordinary indeed , and he character greatly change in he advanced age . other party hint that it be 's habit to levy contribution on all she husband 's friend : go to this one in tear with a account that there be a execution in the house ; fall on she knee to that one and declare that the whole family must go to gaol or commit suicide unless such and such a bill could be pay . , it be say , have be induce to give many hundred through these pathetic representation . yong , of the -- th Dragoons ( and son of the firm of and , hatter and army accoutrement maker ) , and whom the introduce into fashionable life , be also cite as one of 's victim in the pecuniary way . people declare that she get money from various simply dispose person , under pretence of get they confidential appointment under government . who know what story be or be not tell of we dear and innocent friend ? certain it be that if she have have all the money which she be say to have beg or borrowed or steal , she might have capitalize and be honest for life , whereas , -- but this be advancing matters . the truth be , that by economy and good management -- by a spare use of ready money and by pay scarcely anybody -- people can manage , for a time at least , to make a great show with very little mean : and it be we belief that 's much - talk - of party , which be not , after all be say , very numerous , cost this lady very little more than the wax candles which light the wall . and 's suppli she with game and fruit in abundance . 's cellar be at she disposal , and that excellent nobleman 's famous cooks preside over she little kitchen , or send by my lord 's order the rarest delicacy from they own . I protest it be quite shameful in the world to abuse a simple creature , as people of she time abuse , and I warn the public against believe one - tenth of the story against she . if every person be to be banish from society who run into debt and can not pay -- if we be to be pee into everybody 's private life , speculat upon they income , and cut they if we do not approve of they expenditure -- why , what a how wilderness and intolerable dwell would be ! every man 's hand would be against he neighbour in this case , my dear sir , and the benefit of civilization would be do away with . we should be quarrell , abuse , avoid one another . we house would become cavern , and we should go in rag because we
we care for nobody . Rent would go down . party would not be give any more . all the tradesman of the town would be bankrupt . wine , wax - light , comestible , rouge , crinoline - petticoat , diamonds , wig , - gimcrack , and old china , park hack , and splendo high - stepping carriage horse -- all the delight of life , I say ,-- would go to the deuce , if people do but act upon they silly principle and avoid those whom they dislike and abuse . whereas , by a little charity and mutual forbearance , thing be make to go on pleasantly enough : we may abuse a man as much as we like , and call he the greatest rascal unhange -- but do we wish to hang he therefore ? no . we shake hand when we meet . if he cook be good we forgive he and go and dine with he , and we expect he will do the same by we . thus tray flourish --civilization advance ; peace be keep ; new dress be want for new assemblie every week ; and the last year 's vintage of will remunerate the honest proprietor who rear it . at the time whereor we be write , though the be on the throne and lady wore gigot and large comb like tortoise - shell shovel in they hair , instead of the simple sleeve and lovely wreat which be actually in fashion , the manners of the very polite world be not , I take it , essentially different from those of the present day : and they amusement pretty similar . to we , from the outside , gaze over the policeman 's shoulders at the bewildering beauty as they pass into Court or ball , they may seem being of unearthly splendour and in the enjoyment of a exquisite happiness by we unattainable . it be to conseal some of these dissatisfied being that we be narrat we dear 's struggle , and triumph , and disappointment , of all of which , indeed , as be the case with all persons of merit , she have she share . at this time the amiable amusement of acting charade have come among we from , and be considerably in vogue in this country , enable the many lady amongst we who have beauty to display they charms , and the fewer number who have cleverness to exhibit they wit . my be incite by , who perhaps believe herself endow with both the above qualifications , to give a entertainment at , which should include some of these little drama -- and we must take leave to introduce the reader to this brilliant reunion , and , with a melancholy welcome too , for it will be among the very last of the fashionable entertainment to which it will be we fortune to conduct he . a portion of that splendid room , the picture gallery of , be arrange as the charade theatre . it have be so use when be king ; and a picture of the of be still extant , with he hair in powder and a pink ribbon , in a shape , as it be call , enact the part of in 's tragedy of that name , perform before they the of , the of , and , then child like the actor . one or two of the old property be draw out of the garret , where they have lain ever since , and furbish up anew for the present festivity . yong , then a elegant dandy and eastern traveller , be manager of the revel . a eastern traveller be somebody in those day , and the adventurous , who have publish he quarto and pass some month under the tent in the desert , be a personage of no small importance . in he volume there be several picture of Sands in various oriental costume ; and he travel about with a black attendent of most unprepossessing appearance , just like another . , he costume , and black man , be hail at as very valuable acquisition . he lead off the first charade . a turkish officer with a immense plume of feather ( the be suppose to be still in existence , and the tarboosh have not as yet displace the ancient and majestic head - dress of the true believer ) be see couch on a divan , and make believe to puff at a narghile , in which , however , for the sake of the ladie , only a fragrant pastille be allow to smoke . the Turkish dignitary yawn and express sign of weariness and idleness . he clap he hand and Mesrou the Nubian appear , with bare arm , bangles , yataghan , and every eastern ornament -- gaunt , tall , and hideous . he make a salaam before my lord the . a thrill of terror and delight run through the assembly . the lady whisper to one another . the black slave be give to by a egyptian pasha in exchange for three dozen of . he have sew up ever so many odalisque in sack and tilt they into the . " bid the slave - merchant enter , " say the turkish voluptuary with a wave of he hand . Mesrou conduct the slave - merchant into my lord 's presence ; he bring a veile female with he . he remove the veil . a thrill of applause bursts through the house . it be ( she be a ) with the beautiful eye and hair . she be in a gorgeous oriental costume ; the black braided lock be twin with innumerable jewel ; she dress be cover over with gold piastre . the odious
odious express himself charme by she beauty . she fall down on she knee and entreat he to restore she to the mountain where she be bear , and where she Circassian lover be still deplor the absence of he Zuleikah . no entreaty will move the obdurate . he laugh at the notion of the Circassian bridegroom . cover she face with she hand and drop down in a attitude of the most beautiful despair . there seem to be no hope for she , when -- when the appear . the bring a letter from the . receive and place on he head the dread firman . a ghastly terror seize he , while on the 's face ( it be again in another costume ) appear a ghastly joy . " ! mercy ! " cry the Pasha : while the , grinn horribly , pull out - - a bow - string . the curtain draw just as he be go to use that awful weapon . from within bawl out , " first two syllable " -- and , who be go to act in the charade , come forward and compliment on the admirable taste and beauty of she costume . the second part of the charade take place . it be still a eastern scene . , in another dress , be in a attitude by , who be perfectly reconcile to he . the have become a peaceful black slave . it be sunrise on the desert , and the Turk turn they head eastward and bow to the sand . as there be no dromedary at hand , the band facetiously play " the camel be come . " a enormous egyptian head figure in the scene . it be a musical one -- and , to the surprise of the oriental traveller , sing a comic song , compose by . the eastern voyager go off dancing , like and the Moorish King in the magic Flute . " last two syllable , " roar the head . the last act open . it be a Grecian tent this time . a tall and stalwart man repose on a couch there . above he hang he helmet and shield . there be no need for they now . be down . be slain . be a prisoner in he outer halls . the king of man ( it be , who , indeed , have no notion about the sack of or the conquest of ) , the anax andron be asleep in he chamber at Argos . a lamp cast the broad shadow of the sleeping warrior flicker on the wall -- the sword and shield of glitter in its light . the band play the awful music of , before the statue enter . Aegisthus steal in pale and on tiptoe . what be that ghastly face look out balefully after he from behind the arra ? he raise he dagger to strike the sleeper , who turn in he bed , and open he broad chest as if for the blow . he can not strike the noble slumbering chieftain . glide swiftly into the room like a apparition -- she arm be bare and white -- she tawny hair float down she shoulders -- she face be deadly pale -- and she eye be light up with a smile so ghastly that people quake as they look at she . a tremor run through the room . " ! " somebody say , " it be . " Scornfully she snatch the dagger out of 's hand and advance to the bed . you see it shine over she head in the glimmer of the lamp , and -- and the lamp go out , with a groan , and all be dark . the darkness and the scene frightene people . perform she part so well , and with such ghastly truth , that the spectator be all dumb , until , with a burst , all the lamps of the hall blaze out again , when everybody begin to shout applause . " ! brava ! " old 's strident voice be hear roaring over all the rest . " by --, she would do it too , " he say between he tooth . the performer be call by the whole house , which sound with cry of " manager ! ! " could not be get to show in he classical tunic , but stand in the background with and other of the performer of the little play . lead on and . a great personage insist on be present to the . " Heigh ha ? run he through the body . marry somebody else , hay ? " be the apposite remark make by . " be quite kill in the part , " say . laugh , gay and saucy look , and sweep the prettiest little curtsey ever see . Servant bring in salver cover with numerous cool dainty , and the performer disappear to get ready for the second charade-tableau . the three syllable of this charade be to be depict in pantomime , and the performance take place in the follow wise : first syllable . , , with a slouched hat and a staff , a great - coat , and a lantern borrow from the stable , pass across the stage bawl out , as if warn the inhabitant of the hour . in the lower window be see two bagman play apparently at the game of cribbage , over which they yaw much . to they enter one look like ( the ) , which character the young gentleman perform to perfection , and divest they of they lower coverings ; and presently ( the ) with two candlestick , and a warming - pan . she ascend to the upper apartment and warm
warm the bed . she use the warming - pan as a weapon wherewith she ward off the attention of the bagman . she exit . they put on they night - cap and pull down the blind . 's come out and close the shutter of the ground - floor chamber . you hear he bolt and chain the door within . all the light go out . the music play , dormez , cher Amour . a voice from behind the curtain say , " first syllable . " second syllable . the lamp be lighte up all of a sudden . the music play the old air from of , quel plaisir d' etre en voyage . it be the same scene . between the first and second floor of the house represent , you behold a sign on which the Steyne arm be pain . all the bell be ring all over the house . in the lower apartment you see a man with a long slip of paper present it to another , who shake he fists , threaten and vow that it be monstrous . " Ostler , bring round my gig , " cry another at the door . he chuck ( the ) under the ching ; she seem to deplore he absence , as do that of that other eminent traveller Ulyss . boots ( the ) pass with a wooden box , contain silver flagon , and cry " Pot " with such exquisite humour and naturalness that the whole house ring with applause , and a bouquet be throw to he . crack , crack , crack , go the whip . landlord , chambermaid , waiter rush to the door , but just as some distinguished guest be arrive , the curtain close , and the invisible theatrical manager cry out " second syllable . " " I think it must be ' Hotel , ' " say of the ; there be a general laugh at the 's cleverness . he be not very far from the mark . while the third syllable be in preparation , the band begin a nautical medley -- " all in the downs , " " cease rude Boreas , " " rule , " " in the Bay of o ! " -- some maritime event be about to take place . a ben be hear ringing as the curtain draw aside . " now , gent , for the shore ! " a voice exclaim . people take leave of each other . they point anxiously as if towards the cloud , which be represent by a dark curtain , and they nod they head in fear . ( the ) , she lap - dog , she bag , reticule , and husband sit down , and cling hold of some rope . it be evidently a ship . the ( , ) , with a cocked hat and a telescope , come in , hold he hat on he head , and look out ; he coat tails fly about as if in the wind . when he leave go of he hat to use he telescope , he hat fly off , with immense applause . it be blow fresh . the music rise and whistle louder and louder ; the mariner go across the stage staggering , as if the ship be in severe motion . the ( the ) pass reel by , hold six basin . he put one rapidly by -- , give a pinch to she dog , which begin to howl piteously , put she pocket - handkerchief to she face , and rush away as for the cabin . the music rise up to the wildest pitch of stormy excitement , and the third syllable be conclude . there be a little ballet , " , " in which and use to be famous in those day , and which transfer to the stage as a opera , put he verse , of which he be a skilful writer , to the pretty air of the ballet . it be dress in old french costume , and little now appear admirably attired in the disguise of a old woman hobbl about the stage with a faultless crooke stick . Trill of melody be hear behind the scene , and gurgl from a sweet pasteboard cottage cover with rose and ttrellis work . " , , " cry the old woman , and come out . more applause -- it be in powder and patch , the most ravissante little Marquise in the world . she come in laughing , hum , and frisk about the stage with all the innocence of theatrical youth -- she make a curtsey . say " why , child , you be always laugh and singe , " and away she go , with -- the rose upon my balcony the rose upon my balcony the morning air perfume be leafless all the winter time and pining for the spring ; you ask I why she breath be sweet and why she cheek be blooming , it be because the sun be out and bird begin to s . the nightingale , whose melody be through the greenwood ring , be silent when the bough be bare and wind be blow keen : and if , , you ask of I the reason of he singing , it be because the sun be out and all the leave be green . thus each perform he part , , the bird have find they voice , the blowing rise a flush , , she bonny cheek to dye ; and there be sunshine in my heart , , which waken and rejoice , and so I se and blush , , and that be the reason why . during the interval of the stanza of this
this ditty , the good - natured personage address as by the singer , and whose large whisker appear under she cap , see very anxious to exhibit she maternal affection by embrace the innocent creature who perform the daughter 's part . every caress be receive with loud acclamation of laughter by the sympathizing audience . at its conclusion ( while the music be perform a symphony as if ever so many bird be warbl ) the whole house be unanimous for a encore : and applause and bouquet without end be shower upon the Nightingale of the evening . 's voice of applause be loudest of all . , the nightingale , take the flower which he throw to she and press they to she heart with the air of a consummate comedian . be frantic with delight . he guest 's enthusiasm harmonize with he own . where be the beautiful black - ey whose appearance in the first charade have cause such delight ? she be twice as handsome as , but the brilliancy of the latter have quite eclipse she . all voice be for she . , , , people compare she to one or the other , and agree with good reason , very likely , that have she be a actress none on the stage could have surpass she . she have reach she culmination : she voice rise trilling and bright over the storm of applause , and soar as high and joyful as she triumph . there be a ball after the dramatic entertainment , and everybody press round as the great point of attraction of the evening . the declare with a oath that she be perfection , and engage she again and again in conversation . 's soul swell with pride and delight at these honour ; she see fortune , fame , fashion before she . be she slave , follow she everywhere , and scarcely speak to any one in the room beside , and pay she the most mark compliment and attention . she still appear in she Marquise costume and dance a minuet with , 's attache ; and the , who have all the tradition of the ancient court , pronounce that be worthy to have be a pupil of , or to have figure at versaille . only a feeling of dignity , the gout , and the strongest sense of duty and personal sacrifice prevent he Excellency from dancing with she himself , and he declare in public that a lady who could talk and dance like be fit to be ambassadress at any court in . he be only consol when he hear that she be half a Frenchwoman by birth . " none but a compatriot , " he Excellency declare , " could have perform that majestic dance in such a way . " then she figure in a waltz with , the of 's cousin and attache . the delighted , have less retenue than he french diplomatic colleague , insist upon take a turn with the charming creature , and twirl round the ball - room with she , scatter the diamonds out of he boot- tassel and hussar jacket until he Highness be fairly out of breath . himself would have like to dance with she if that amusement have be the custom of he country . the company make a circle round she and applaude as wildly as if she have be a or a Taglioni . everybody be in ecstacy ; and Becky too , you may be sure . she pass by with a look of scorn . she patronize and she astonished and mortify sister - in - law -- she ecrase all rival charmer . as for poor , and she long hair and great eye , which have make such a effect at the commencement of the evening -- where be she now ? nowhere in the race . she might tear she long hair and cry she great eye out , but there be not a person to heed or to deplore the discomfiture . the greatest triumph of all be at supper time . she be place at the grand exclusive table with he the exalt personage before mention , and the rest of the great guest . she be serve on gold plate . she might have have pearl melt into she champagne if she like -- another Cleopatra -- and the potentate of would have give half the brilliant off he jacket for a kind glance from those dazzling eye . write home about she to he government . the lady at the other table , who sup off mere silver and mark 's constant attention to she , vow it be a monstrous infatuation , a gross insult to lady of rank . if sarcasm could have kill , would have slain she on the spot . be scared at these triumph . they seem to separate he wife farther than ever from he somehow . he think with a feeling very like pain how immeasurably she be he superior . when the hour of departure come , a crowd of young man follow she to she carriage , for which the people without bawl , the cry be catch up by the link - man who be station outside the tall gate of , congratulate each person who issue from the gate and hope he Lordship have enjoy this noble party . 's carriage , come up to the gate after due shouting , rattle into the illuminated court - yard and drive up to the covered way . put he wife into the carriage , which drive off . have propose to he to walk home , and offer the the refreshment of a cigar . they lighte they cigar by the lamp of one of the many link - boy outside ,
, and walk on with he friend . two person separate from the crowd and follow the two gentleman ; and when they have walk down a few score of pace , one of the man come up and , touch on the shoulder , say , " beg you pardon , , I vish to speak to you most particular . " this gentleman 's acquaintance give a loud whistle as the latter spoke , at which signal a cab come clatter up from those station at the gate of -- and the aide - de - camp run round and place himself in front of . that gallant officer at once knew what have befall he . he be in the hand of the bailiff . he start back , fal against the man who have first touch he . " we be three on we -- it be no use bolt , " the man behind say . " it be you , , be it ? " say the , who appear to know he interlocutor . " how much be it ? " " only a small thing , " whisper , of , , and assistant officer to the Sheriff of -- " one hundred and sixty - six , six and eight - pence , at the suit of . " " Lend I a hundr , , for 's sake , " poor say --" I have get seventy at home . " " I have not get ten pound in the world , " say poor -- " good night , my dear fellow . " " good night , " say ruefully . and walk away -- and finish he cigar as the cab drive under . in himself in a most be benevolently dispose , he do nothing by halve , and he kindness towards the family do the greatest honour to he benevolent discrimination . he lordship extend he good - will to little : he point out to the boy 's parent the necessity of send he to a public school , that he be of a age now when emulation , the first principles of the language , pugilistic exercise , and the society of he fellow - boy would be of the greatest benefit to the boy . he father object that he be not rich enough to send the child to a good public school ; he mother that be a capital mistress for he , and have bring he on ( as indeed be the fact ) famously in , the Latin rudiment , and in general learn : but all these objection disappear before the generous perseverance of the of . he lordship be one of the governors of that famous old collegiate institution call the Whitefriars . it have be a Cistercian Convent in old day , when the , which be contiguous to it , be a tournament ground . Obstinate heretic use to be bring thither convenient for burn hard by . , the Defender of the , seize upon the monastery and its possession and hang and torture some of the monk who could not accommodate themselves to the pace of he reform . finally , a great merchant buy the house and land adjoin , in which , and with the help of other wealthy endowment of land and money , he establish a famous foundation hospital for old man and child . a extern school grow round the old almost monastic foundation , which subsist still with its middle - age costume and usage -- and all pray that it may long flourish . of this famous house , some of the greatest nobleman , prelate , and dignitary in be governors : and as the boy be very comfortably lod , feed , and educate , and subsequently induct to good scholarship at the and livings in the Church , many little gentleman be devote to the ecclesiastical profession from they tenderest year , and there be considerable emulation to procure nomination for the foundation . it be originally intend for the son of poor and deserve cleric and laic , but many of the noble governors of the Institution , with a enlarge and rather capricious benevolence , select all sort of object for they bounty . to get a education for nothing , and a future livelihood and profession assure , be so excellent a scheme that some of the richest people do not disdain it ; and not only great man 's relation , but great man themselves , send they son to profit by the chance -- right prelate send they own kinsman or the son of they clergy , while , on the other hand , some great nobleman do not disdain to patronize the child of they confidential servants -- so that a lad enter this establishment have every variety of youthful society wherewith to mingle . , though the only book which he study be the , and though he chief recollection of polite learning be connect with the flogging which he receive at in he early youth , have that decent and honest reverence for classical learning which all English gentleman feel , and be glad to think that he son be to have a provision for life , perhaps , and a certain opportunity of become a scholar . and although he boy be he chief solace and companion , and endear to he by a thousand small tie , about which he do not care to speak to he wife , who have all along show the utmost indifference to they son , yet agree at once to part with he and to give up he own greatest comfort and benefit for the sake of the welfare of the little lad . he do not know how fond he be of the child until it become
become necessary to let he go away . when he be go , he feel more sad and downcast than he care to own -- far sadder than the boy himself , who be happy enough to enter a new career and find companion of he own age . burst out laugh once or twice when the , in he clumsy , incoherent way , try to express he sentimental sorrow at the boy 's departure . the poor fellow feel that he dearest pleasure and closest friend be take from he . he look often and wistfully at the little vacant bed in he dressing - room , where the child use to sleep . he miss he sadly of morning and try in vain to walk in the park without he . he do not know how solitary he be until little be gone . he like the people who be fond of he , and would go and sit for long hour with he good - natured sister , and talk to she about the virtue , and good look , and hundred good quality of the child . yong 's aunt , we have say , be very fond of he , as be she little girl , who weep copiously when the time for she cousin 's departure come . the elder be thankful for the fondness of mother and daughter . the very best and honestest feeling of the man come out in these artless outpouring of paternal feeling in which he indulge in they presence , and encourage by they sympathy . he secure not only 's kindness , but she sincere regard , by the feeling which he manifest , and which he could not show to he own wife . the two kinswoman meet as seldom as possible . laugh bitterly at 's feeling and softness ; the other 's kindly and gentle nature could not but revolt at she sister 's callous behaviour . it estrange from he wife more than he know or acknowledge to himself . she do not care for the estrangement . indeed , she do not miss he or anybody . she look upon he as she errand - man and humble slave . he might be ever so depressed or sulky , and she do not mark he demeanour , or only treat it with a sneer . she be busy think about she position , or she pleasure , or she advancement in society ; she ought to have hold a great place in it , that be certain . it be honest Brigg who make up the little kit for the boy which he be to take to school . , the housemaid , blubber in the passage when he go away -- kind and faithful in spite of a long arrear of unpaid wage . could not let she husband have the carriage to take the boy to school . take the horse into the City !--such a thing be never hear of . let a cab be bring . she do not offer to kiss he when he go , nor do the child propose to embrace she ; but give a kiss to old ( whom , in general , he be very shy of caressing ) , and consol she by point out that he be to come home on , when she would have the benefit of see he . as the cab roll towards the , 's carriage rattle off to the park . she be chatter and laugh with a score of young dandy by the as the father and son enter at the old gate of the school -- where leave the child and come away with a sadder purer feeling in he heart than perhaps that poor batter fellow have ever know since he himself come out of the nursery . he walk all the way home very dismally , and dine alone with . he be very kind to she and grateful for she love and watchfulness over the boy . he conscience smote he that he have borrowed 's money and aid in deceive she . they talk about little Rawdon a long time , for only come home to dress and go out to dinner -- and then he go off uneasily to drink tea with , and tell she of what have happen , and how little go off like a trump , and how he be to wear a gown and little knee - breech , and how young , 's son , of the old regiment , have take he in charge and promise to be kind to he . in the course of a week , young have constitute little Rawdon he fag , shoe - black , and breakfast toaster ; initiate he into the mystery of the ; and thrash he three or four time , but not severely . the little chap 's good - natured honest face win he way for he . he only get that degree of beating which be , no doubt , good for he ; and as for blacking shoe , toasting bread , and fagge in general , be these office not deem to be necessary part of every young 's education ? we business do not lie with the second generation and 's life at school , otherwise the present tale might be carry to any indefinite length . the go to see he son a short time afterwards and find the lad sufficiently well and happy , grinn and laugh in he little black gown and little breech . he father sagaciously tip , he master , a sovereign , and secure that young gentleman 's good - will towards he fag . as a protege of the great , the nephew of a member , and son of a and , whose name appear
appear in some of the most fashionable party in the , perhaps the school authority be dispose not to look unkindly on the child . he have plenty of pocket - money , which he spend in treat he comrade royally to raspberry tart , and he be often allow to come home on to he father , who always make a jubilee of that day . when free , would take he to the play , or send he thither with the footman ; and on he go to church with and and he cousin . marvell over he story about school , and fight , and fagge . before long , he know the name of all the master and the principal boy as well as little himself . he invite little 's crony from school , and make both the child sick with pastry , and oyster , and porter after the play . he try to look know over the grammar when little show he what part of that work he be " in . " " stick to it , my boy , " he say to he with much gravity , " there be nothing like a good classical education ! nothing ! " 's contempt for she husband grow greater every day . " do what you like -- dine where you please -- go and have ginger - beer and sawdust at 's , or psalm -singe with -- only do not expect I to busy myself with the boy . I have you interest to attend to , as you can not attend to they yourself . I should like to know where you would have be now , and in what sort of a position in society , if I have not look after you . " indeed , nobody want poor old at the party whither use to go . she be often ask without he now . she talk about great people as if she have the fee - simple of , and when the go into mourning , she always wore black . be dispose of , , who take such a parental interest in the affair of this amiable poor family , think that they expense might be very advantageously curtail by the departure of , and that be quite clever enough to take the management of she own house . it have be narrate in a former chapter how the benevolent nobleman have give he protegee money to pay off she little debt to , who however still remain behind with she friend ; whence my lord come to the painful conclusion that . have make some other use of the money confide to she than that for which she generous patron have give the loan . however , be not so rude as to impart he suspicions upon this head to . , whose feeling might be hurt by any controversy on the money -question , and who might have a thousand painful reason for disposing otherwise of he lordship 's generous loan . but he determine to satisfy himself of the real state of the case , and institute the necessary inquirie in a most cautious and delicate manner . in the first place he take a early opportunity of pumping . that be not a difficult operation . a very little encouragement would set that worthy woman to talk volubly and pour out all within she . and one day when have go out to drive ( as , he lordship 's confidential servant , easily learn at the livery stable where the keep they carriage and horse , or rather , where the livery - man keep a carriage and horse for and ) --my lord drop in upon the house -- ask for a cup of coffee -- tell she that he have good account of the little boy at school -- and in five minute find out from she that have give she nothing except a black silk gown , for which be immensely grateful . he laugh within himself at this artless story . for the truth be , we dear friend have give he a most circumstantial narration of 's delight at receive she money -- eleven hundred and twenty - five pound -- and in what security she have invest it ; and what a pang herself feel in be oblige to pay away such a delightful sum of money . " who know , " the dear woman may have think within herself , " perhaps he may give I a little more ? " my lord , however , make no such proposal to the little schemer -- very likely think that he have be sufficiently generous already . he have the curiosity , then , to ask about the state of she private affair -- and she tell he lordship candidly what she position be -- how have leave she a legacy -- how she relative have have part of it -- how have put out another portion , for which she have the best security and interest -- and how and have kindly busy themselves with , who be to dispose of the remainder most advantageously for she , when he have time . my lord ask how much the have already invest for she , and at once and truly tell he that the sum be six hundred and odd pound . but as soon as she have tell she story , the voluble repent of she frankness and besotch my lord not to tell of the confession which she have make . " the be so kind -- might be offend and pay back the money , for which she could get no such good interest anywhere else . " , laugh , promise he never would divulge they conversation , and when he and part he laugh still more .
. " what a accomplish little devil it be ! " think he . " what a splendid actress and manager ! she have almost get a second supply out of I the other day ; with she coaxing way . she beat all the woman I have ever see in the course of all my well - spend life . they be baby compare to she . I be a greenhorn myself , and a fool in she hand -- a old fool . she be unsurpassable in lie . " he lordship 's admiration for rise immeasurably at this proof of she cleverness . get the money be nothing -- but get double the sum she want , and pay nobody -- it be a magnificent stroke . and , my lord thought -- be not such a fool as he look and seem . he have manage the matter cleverly enough on he side . nobody would ever have suppose from he face and demeanour that he know anything about this money business ; and yet he put she up to it , and have spend the money , no doubt . in this opinion my lord , we know , be mistaken , but it influence a good deal he behaviour towards , whom he begin to treat with even less than that semblance of respect which he have formerly show towards that gentleman . it never enter into the head of . 's patron that the little lady might be make a purse for herself ; and , perhaps , if the truth must be tell , he judge of by he experience of other husband , whom he have know in the course of the long and well - spend life which have make he acquaint with a great deal of the weakness of mankind . my lord have buy so many man during he life that he be surely to be pardon for supposing that he have find the price of this one . he tax upon the point on the very first occasion when he meet she alone , and he compliment she , good - humouredly , on she cleverness in get more than the money which she require . be only a little take aback . it be not the habit of this dear creature to tell falsehood , except when necessity compelle , but in these great emergency it be she practice to lie very freely ; and in a instant she be ready with another neat plausible circumstantial story which she administer to she patron . the previous statement which she have make to he be a falsehood -- a wicked falsehood -- she own it . but who have make she tell it ? " ah , my , " she say , " you do not know all I have to suffer and bear in silence ; you see I gay and happy before you -- you little know what I have to endure when there be no protector near I . it be my husband , by threats and the most savage treatment , force I to ask for that sum about which I deceive you . it be he who , foresee that question might be ask regard the disposal of the money , force I to account for it as I do . he take the money . he tell I he have pay ; I do not want , I do not dare to doubt he . pardon the wrong which a desperate man be force to commit , and pity a miserable , miserable woman . " she burst into tear as she speak . Persecute virtue never look more bewitchingly wretch . they have a long conversation , drive round and round the 's in 's carriage together , a conversation of which it be not necessary to repeat the detail , but the upshot of it be that , when come home , she fly to she dear Briggs with a smiling face and announce that she have some very good news for she . have act in the noblest and most generous manner . he be always think how and when he could do good . now that little be go to school , a dear companion and friend be no longer necessary to she . she be grieve beyond measure to part with , but she mean require that she should practise every retrenchment , and she sorrow be mitigate by the idea that she dear Briggs would be far better provide for by she generous patron than in she humble home . , the housekeeper at , be grow exceedingly old , feeble , and rheumatic : she be not equal to the work of superintending that vast mansion , and must be on the look out for a successor . it be a splendid position . the family do not go to once in two year . at other time the housekeeper be the mistress of the magnificent mansion -- have four cover daily for she table ; be visit by the clergy and the most respectable people of the county -- be the lady of Gauntly , in fact ; and the two last housekeeper before have marry rector of -- but . could not , be the aunt of the present rector . the place be not to be hers yet , but she might go down on a visit to and see whether she would like to succeed she . what word can paint the ecstatic gratitude of ! all she stipulate for be that little should be allow to come down and see she at the Hall . promise this -- anything . she run up to she husband when he come home and tell he the joyful news . be glad , deuce glad ; the weight be off he conscience
conscience about poor 's money . she be provide for , at any rate , but -- but he mind be disquiet . he do not seem to be all right , somehow . he tell little what have do , and the young man eye with a air which surprise the latter . he tell of this second proof of 's bounty , and she , too , look odd and alarmed ; so do . " she be too clever and -- and gay to be allow to go from party to party without a companion , " both say . " you must go with she , , wherever she go , and you must have somebody with she -- one of the girl from 's , perhaps , though they be rather giddy guardian for she . " should have . but in the meantime it be clear that honest Briggs must not lose she chance of settlement for life , and so she and she bag be pack , and she set off on she journey . and so two of 's out - sentinel be in the hand of the enemy . go and expostulate with he sister - in - law upon the subject of the dismissal of Briggs and other matter of delicate family interest . in vain she point out to he how necessary be the protection of for she poor husband ; how cruel it would be on they part to deprive Briggs of the position offer to she . Cajolement , coaxing , smile , tear could not satisfy , and he have something very like a quarrel with he once admire . he speak of the honour of the family , the unsullied reputation of the Crawley ; express himself in indignant tone about she receive those young -- those wild young man of fashion , my himself , whose carriage be always at she door , who pass hour daily in she company , and whose constant presence make the world talk about she . as the head of the house he implor she to be more prudent . be already speak lightly of she . , though a nobleman of the greatest station and talents , be a man whose attention would compromise any woman ; he besotch , he implor , he command he sister - in - law to be watchful in she intercourse with that nobleman . promise anything and everything want ; but come to she house as often as ever , and 's anger increase . I wonder be angry or pleased that she husband at last found fault with he favourite ? 's visit continue , he own cease , and he wife be for refuse all further intercourse with that nobleman and decline the invitation to the charade - night which the marchioness send to she ; but think it be necessary to accept it , as he would be there . although he go to the party in question , quit it very early , and he wife , too , be very glad to come away . Becky hardly so much as speak to he or notice she sister - in - law . declare she behaviour be monstrously indecorous , reprobate in strong term the habit of play -acting and fancy dress as highly unbecom a british female , and after the charade be over , take he brother severely to task for appear himself and allow he wife to join in such improper exhibition . say she should not join in any more such amusement -- but indeed , and perhaps from hint from he elder brother and sister , he have already become a very watchful and exemplary domestic character . he leave off he club and billiards . he never leave home . he take out to drive ; he go laboriously with she to all she party . whenever my call , he be sure to find the Colonel . and when propose to go out without she husband , or receive invitation for herself , he peremptorily order she to refuse they : and there be that in the gentleman 's manner which enforce obedience . , to do she justice , be charme with 's gallantry . if he be surly , she never be . whether friend be present or absent , she have always a kind smile for he and be attentive to he pleasure and comfort . it be the early day of they marriage over again : the same good humour , prevenance , merriment , and artless confidence and regard . " how much pleasanter it be , " she would say , " to have you by my side in the carriage than that foolish old Briggs ! let we always go on so , dear . how nice it would be , and how happy we should always be , if we have but the money ! " he fall asleep after dinner in he chair ; he do not see the face opposite to he , haggard , weary , and terrible ; it light up with fresh candid smile when he wake . it kiss he gaily . he wonder that he have ever have suspicion . no , he never have suspicion ; all those dumb doubt and surly misgiving which have be gather on he mind be mere idle jealousy . she be fond of he ; she always have be . as for she shining in society , it be no fault of hers ; she be form to shine there . be there any woman who could talk , or s , or do anything like she ? if she would but like the boy ! thought . but the mother and son never could be bring together . and it be while 's mind be agitate with
with these doubt and perplexity that the incident occur which be mention in the last chapter , and the unfortunate Colonel find himself a prisoner away from home . and a drive on then to 's mansion in , and be duly induct into that dismal place of hospitality . be break over the cheerful house - top of as the rattling cab wake up the echoe there . a little pink - ey - boy , with a head as ruddy as the rise morn , let the party into the house , and be welcome to the ground - floor apartment by , he travel companion and host , who cheerfully ask he if he would like a glass of something warm after he drive . the be not so depresse as some mortal would be , who , quit a palace and a placen uxor , find themselves barr into a spunging - house ; for , if the truth must be tell , he have be a lodger at 's establishment once or twice before . we have not think it necessary in the previous course of this narrative to mention these trivial little domestic incidents : but the reader may be assure that they can not unfrequently occur in the life of a man who live on nothing a year . upon he first visit to , the , then a bachelor , have be liberate by the generosity of he aunt ; on the second mishap , little , with the greatest spirit and kindness , have borrowed a sum of money from and have coax she husband 's creditor ( who be she shawl , velvet - gown , lace pocket - handkerchief , trinket , and gim - crack purveyor , indeed ) to take a portion of the sum claim and 's promissory note for the remainder : so on both these occasion the capture and release have be conduct with the utmost gallantry on all side , and and the Colonel be therefore on the very best of term . " you will find you old bed , , and everything comfortable , " that gentleman say , " as I may honestly say . you may be pretty sure its kep aire , and by the best of company , too . it be slep in the night afore last by the , of the , whose take he out , after a fortnight , jest to punish he , she say . but , law bless you , I promise you , he punish my champagne , and have a party ere every night -- reglar tip - top swell , down from the club and the -- , the honorable Deuceace , who live in the Temple , and some feller as know a good glass of wine , I warrant you . I have get a Doctor of Diwinity upstairs , five gent in the coffee - room , and have a tably - dy - hoty at half - past five , and a little card or music afterwards , when we shall be most happy to see you . " " I will ring when I want anything , " say and go quietly to he bedroom . he be a old soldier , we have say , and not to be disturb by any little shocks of fate . a weaker man would have send off a letter to he wife on the instant of he capture . " but what be the use of disturb she night 's rest ? " think . " she will not know whether I be in my room or not . it will be time enough to write to she when she have have she sleep out , and I have have mine . it be only a hundred - and - seventy , and the deuce be in it if we can not raise that . " and so , think about little ( whom he would not have know that he be in such a queer place ) , the turn into the bed lately occupy by and fall asleep . it be ten o'clock when he wake up , and the ruddy - head youth bring he , with conscious pride , a fine silver dressing - case , wherewith he might perform the operation of shaving . indeed 's house , though somewhat dirty , be splendo throughout . there be dirty tray , and wine - cooler en permanence on the sideboard , huge dirty gilt cornice , with dingy yellow satin hanging to the barred window which look into -- vast and dirty gilt picture frame surround piece sporting and sacr , all of which work were by the greatest master -- and fetch the greatest price , too , in the bill transaction , in the course of which they be sell and buy over and over again . the 's breakfast be serve to he in the same dingy and gorgeous plate ware . , a dark - eyed maid in curl -paper , appear with the teapot , and , smile , ask the how he have slep ? and she bring he in the , with the name of all the great people who have figure at 's entertainment the night before . it contain a brilliant account of the festivity and of the beautiful and accomplish 's admirable personification . after a lively chat with this lady ( who sit on the edge of the breakfast table in a easy attitude display the drapery of she stocking and a ex-white satin shoe , which be down at heel ) , call for pens and ink , and paper , and be ask how many sheet , chose one which be bring to he between 's own finger and thumb . many a sheet have that dark
dark - eyed damsel bring in ; many a poor fellow have scrawl and blot hurrie line of entreaty and pace up and down that awful room until he messenger bring back the reply . poor man always use messenger instead of the post . who have not have they letter , with the wafer wet , and the announcement that a person be wait in the hall ? now on the score of he application , have not many misgiving . , ( write ) I hope you . do not be Frightened if I do not bring you in you COFFy . last night as I be come home smoaking , I meet with a ACCADENT . I be nab by of -- from whose and I write this -- the same that have I this time two year . brotch in my tea -- she be grow very fat , and , as usual , have she at . it be 's business -- a hundred - and - fifty -- with cost , hundr - and - seventy . please send I my desk and some Cloth -- I be in pump and a white tye ( something like 's stocking ) -- I have seventy in it . and as soon as you get this , drive to 's -- offer he seventy - five down , and to kRenow -- say I will take wine -- we may as well have some dinner sherry ; but not Picturs , they be too dear . if he will not stand it . take my ticker and such of you thing as you can spare , and send they to balls -- we must , of coarse , have the sum to - night . it will not do to let it stand over , as to - morrow 's ; the bed here be not very clean , and there may be other thing out against I -- I be glad it can not 's for come home . bless you . yours in haste , . make haste and come . this letter , seal with a wafer , be dispatch by one of the messenger who be always hang about 's establishment , and , have see he depart , go out in the court - yard and smoke he cigar with a tolerably easy mind -- in spite of the bar overhead -- for 's court - yard be rail in like a cage , lest the gentleman who be board with he should take a fancy to escape from he hospitality . three hour , he calculate , would be the utmost time require , before should arrive and open he prison door , and he pass these pretty cheerfully in smoking , in read the paper , and in the coffee - room with a acquaintance , , who happen to be there , and with whom he cut for sixpence for some hour , with pretty equal luck on either side . but the day pass away and no messenger return -- no . 's tably - dy - hoty be serve at the appointed hour of half - past five , when such of the gentleman lod in the house as could afford to pay for the banquet come and partake of it in the splendid front parlour before describe , and with which 's temporary lodging communicate , when ( , as she papa call she ) appear without the curl - papers of the morning , and . hey do the honour of a prime boiled leg of mutton and turnip , of which the ate with a very faint appetite . ask whether he would " stand " a bottle of champagne for the company , he consent , and the lady drank to he ' ealth , and , in the most polite manner , " look towards he . " in the midst of this repast , however , the doorbell be hear -- young Moss of the ruddy hair rise up with the key and answer the summon , and come back , tell the that the messenger have return with a bag , a desk and a letter , which he give he . " no ceramony , , I beg , " say with a wave of she hand , and he open the letter rather tremulously . it be a beautiful letter , highly scent , on a pink paper , and with a light green seal . Mon , ( write ) I could not sleep one Wink for think of what have become of my odious old monstre , and only get to rest in the morning after send for ( for I be in a fever ) , who give I a composing dratch and leave order with Finette that I should be disturb on no account . so that my poor old man 's messenger , who have bien mauvaise mine say , and sentoit le , remain in the hall for some hour wait my bell . you may fancy my state when I read you poor dear old ill - spelt letter . Ill as I be , I instantly call for the carriage , and as soon as I be dress ( though I could not drink a drop of chocolate -- I assure you I could not without my monstre to bring it to I ) , I drive ventre a terre to 's . I see he -- I weep -- I cry -- I fall at he odious knee . nothing would mollify the horrid man . he would have all the money , he say , or keep my poor monstre in prison . I drive home with the intention of pay that triste visite chez mon oncle ( when every trinket I have should be at you disposal
disposal though they would not fetch a hundred pound , for some , you know , be with ce cher oncle already ) , and find there with the Bulgarian old sheep - face monster , who have come to compliment I upon last night 's performance . come in , too , draw and lisp and twiddl he hair ; so do , and he chef -- everybody with foison of compliment and pretty speech -- plague poor I , who longe to be rid of they , and be think every moment of the time of mon pauvre prisonnier . when they be go , I go down on my knee to ; tell he we be go to pawn everything , and beg and praye he to give I two hundred pound . he pish would and psha would in a fury -- tell I not to be such a fool as to pawn -- and say he would see whether he could lend I the money . at last he go away , promise that he would send it I in the morning : when I will bring it to my poor old monster with a kiss from he affectionate Becky I be write in bed . oh I have such a headache and such a heartache ! when read over this letter , he turn so red and look so savage that the company at the table d'hote easily perceive that bad news have reach he . all he suspicion , which he have be try to banish , return upon he . she could not even go out and sell she trinket to free he . she could laugh and talk about compliment pay to she , whilst he be in prison . who have put he there ? have walk with he . be there .... he could hardly bear to think of what he suspect . leave the room hurriedly , he run into he own -- open he desk , write two hurried line , which he direct to or , and bay the messenger carry they at once to , bid he to take a cab , and promise he a guinea if he be back in a hour . in the note he besotch he dear brother and sister , for the sake of , for the sake of he dear child and he honour , to come to he and relieve he from he difficulty . he be in prison , he want a hundred pound to set he free -- he entreate they to come to he . he go back to the dining - room after dispatch he messenger and call for more wine . he laugh and talk with a strange boisterousness , as the people think . sometimes he laugh madly at he own fear and go on drinking for a hour , listen all the while for the carriage which be to bring he fate back . at the expiration of that time , wheel be hear whir up to the gate -- the young janitor go out with he gate - key . it be a lady whom he let in at the bailiff 's door . " , " she say , trembl very much . he , with a know look , lock the outer door upon she -- then unlock and open the inner one , and call out , " , you be want , " lead she into the back parlour , which he occupi . come in from the dining - parlour where all those people be carouse , into he back room ; a flare of coarse light follow he into the apartment where the lady stood , still very nervous . " it be I , , " she say in a timid voice , which she strove to render cheerful . " it be . " be quite overcome by that kind voice and presence . he run up to she -- catch she in he arm -- gas out some inarticulate word of thanks and fairly sob on she shoulder . she do not know the cause of he emotion . the bills of be quickly settled , perhaps to the disappointment of that gentleman , who have count on have the as he guest over at least ; and , with beam smile and happiness in she eye , carry away from the bailiff 's house , and they go homewards in the cab in which she have hasten to he release . " be go to a parliamentary dinner , " she say , " when 's note come , and so , dear , I -- I come myself " ; and she put she kind hand in he . perhaps it be well for that be away at that dinner . thank he sister a hundred time , and with a ardour of gratitude which touch and almost alarme that soft - hear woman . " oh , " say he , in he rude , artless way , " you -- you do not know how I be change since I have know you , and -- and little . I -- I would like to change somehow . you see I want -- I want -- to be -- " he do not finish the sentence , but she could interpret it . and that night after he leave she , and as she sit by she own little boy 's bed , she pray humbly for that poor way - worn sinner . leave she and walk home rapidly . it be nine o'clock at night . he run across the street and the great square of , and at length come up breathless opposite he own house . he start back and fall against the railing , trembl as he look up . the drawing
drawing - room window be blaze with light . she have say that she be in bed and ill . he stand there for some time , the light from the room on he pale face . he take out he door - key and let himself into the house . he could hear laughter in the upper room . he be in the ball - dress in which he have be capture the night before . he go silently up the stair , lean against the banister at the stair - head . nobody be stirr in the house besides -- all the servants have be send away . hear laughter withing -- laughter and singe . be singe a snatch of the song of the night before ; a hoarse voice shoute " ! ! " -- it be 's . open the door and go in . a little table with a dinner be lay out -- and wine and plate . be hang over the sofa on which sat . the wretched woman be in a brilliant full toilette , she arm and all she finger sparkl with bracelet and ring , and the brilliant on she breast which have give she . he have she hand in he , and be bow over it to kiss it , when start up with a faint scream as she catch sight of 's white face . at the next instant she try a smile , a horrid smile , as if to welcome she husband ; and rise up , grind he tooth , pale , and with fury in he look . he , too , attempt a laugh -- and come forward hold out he hand . " what , come back ! how would 'ye do , ? " he say , the nerve of he mouth twitch as he try to grin at the intruder . there be that in 's face which cause to fl herself before he . " I be innocent , , " she say ; " before , I be innocent . " she cling hold of he coat , of he hand ; she own be all cover with serpent , and ring , and bauble . " I be innocent . say I be innocent , " she say to . he think a trap have be laid for he , and be as furious with the wife as with the husband . " you innocent ! damn you , " he scream out . " you innocent ! why every trinket you have on you body be pay for by I . I have give you thousand of pound , which this fellow have spend and for which he have sell you . innocent , by ---- ! you be as innocent as you mother , the ballet - girl , and you husband the bully . do not think to frighten I as you have do other . make way , sir , and let I pass " ; and seize up he hat , and , with flame in he eye , and look he enemy fiercely in the face , march upon he , never for a moment doubt that the other would give way . but spring out , seize he by the neckcloth , until , almost strangle , writh and bend under he arm . " you lie , you dog ! " say . " you lie , you coward and villain ! " and he struck the peer twice over the face with he open hand and fling he bleed to the ground . it be all do before could interpose . she stand there trembl before he . she admire she husband , strong , brave , and victorious . " come here , " he say . she come up at once . " take off those thing . " she begin , trembl , pull the jewel from she arm , and the ring from she shaking finger , and hold they all in a heap , quiver and look up at he . " throw they down , " he say , and she drop they . he tore the diamond ornament out of she breast and fling it at . it cut he on he bald forehead . wear the scar to he die day . " come upstairs , " say to he wife . " do not kill I , , " she say . he laugh savagely . " I want to see if that man lie about the money as he have about I . have he give you any ? " " no , " say , " that be -- " " give I you key , " answer , and they go out together . give he all the key but one , and she be in hope that he would not have remark the absence of that . it belong to the little desk which have give she in early day , and which she keep in a secret place . but flng open box and wardrobe , throw the multifarious trumpery of they contents here and there , and at last he find the desk . the woman be force to open it . it contain papers , love - letter many year old -- all sort of small trinket and woman 's memoranda . and it contain a pocket - book with bank - note . some of these be date ten year back , too , and one be quite a fresh one -- a note for a thousand pound which have give she . " do he give you this ? " say . " yes , " answer . " I will send it to he to - day , " say ( for day have dawn again , and
and many hour have pass in this search ) , " and I will pay , who be kind to the boy , and some of the debt . you will let I know where I shall send the rest to you . you might have spare I a hundred pound , , out of all this -- I have always share with you . " " I be innocent , " say . and he leave she without another word . what be she thought when he leave she ? she remain for hour after he be go , the sunshine pour into the room , and sit alone on the bed 's edge . the drawer be all open and they contents scatter about -- dress and feather , scarf and trinket , a heap of tumble vanity lie in a wreck . she hair be fall over she shoulders ; she gown be tear where have wrench the brilliant out of it . she hear he go downstairs a few minute after he leave she , and the door slam and close on he . she know he would never come back . he be go forever . would he kill himself ?-- she think -- not until after he have meet . she think of she long past life , and all the dismal incidents of it . ah , how dreary it seem , how miserable , lonely and profitless ! should she take laudanum , and end it , to have do with all hope , scheme , debt , and triumph ? the french maid find she in this position -- sit in the midst of she miserable ruin with clasped hand and dry eye . the woman be she accomplice and in 's pay . " , madame , what have happen ? " she ask . what have happen ? be she guilty or not ? she say not , but who could tell what be truth which come from those lip , or if that corrupt heart be in this case pure ? all she lie and she scheme , a she selfishness and she wile , all she wit and genius have come to this bankruptcy . the woman close the curtain and , with some entreaty and show of kindness , persuade she mistress to lie down on the bed . then she go below and gather up the trinket which have be lie on the floor since drop they there at she husband 's order , and go away . after the the mansion of , in Great , be just begin to dress itself for the day , as , in he evening costume , which he have now wear two day , pass by the scared female who be scour the step and enter into he brother 's study . , in she morning - gown , be up and above stair in the nursery superintend the toilette of she child and listen to the morning prayer which the little creature perform at she knee . every morning she and they perform this duty privately , and before the public ceremonial at which preside and at which all the people of the household be expect to assemble . sit down in the study before the Baronet 's table , set out with the orderly blue book and the letter , the neatly docket bill and symmetrical pamphlet , the locked account - book , desk , and dispatch box , the , the , and the , which all stood as if on parade await the inspection of they chief . a book of family sermon , one of which be in the habit of administer to he family on morning , lay ready on the study table , and await he judicious selection . and by the sermon - book be the newspaper , damp and neatly fold , and for 's own private use . he gentleman alone take the opportunity of peruse the newspaper before he lay it by he master 's desk . before he have bring it into the study that morne , he have read in the journal a flam account of " festivity at , " with the name of all the distinguished personage invite by of to meet he . have make comment upon this entertainment to the housekeeper and she niece as they be take early tea and hot butter toast in the former lady 's apartment , and wonder how the could git on , the valet have damp and fold the paper once more , so that it look quite fresh and innocent against the arrival of the master of the house . poor take up the paper and begin to try and read it until he brother should arrive . but the print fall blank upon he eye , and he do not know in the least what he be read . the government news and appointments ( which as a public man be bound to peruse , otherwise he would by no means permit the introduction of papers into he household ) , the theatrical criticism , the fight for a hundred pound a side between the and the , the chronicle itself , which contain a most complimentary though guard account of the famious charade of which . have be the heroine -- all these pass as in a haze before , as he sit wait the arrival of the chief of the family . Punctually , as the shrill - tone bell of the black marble study clock begin to chime nine , make he appearance , fresh , neat , smugly shave , with a waxy clean face , and stiff shirt collar , he scanty hair comb and oil , trimm he nail as he descende the stair majestically , in a starch cravat and a grey flannel dressing
dressing - gown -- a real old , in a word -- a model of neatness and every propriety . he start when he see poor in he study in tumbled clothes , with blood - shot eye , and he hair over he face . he think he brother be not sober , and have be out all night on some orgy . " good gracious , , " he say , with a blank face , " what bring you here at this time of the morning ? why be not you at home ? " " Home , " say with a wild laugh . " do not be frightened , . I be not drink . shut the door ; I want to speak to you . " close the door and come up to the table , where he sit down in the other arm -chair -- that one place for the reception of the steward , agent , or confidential visitor who come to transact business with the Baronet -- and trim he nail more vehemently than ever . " , it be all over with I , " the say after a pause . " I be done . " " I always say it would come to this , " the Baronet cry peevishly , and beat a tune with he clean - trim nail . " I warn you a thousand time . I can not help you any more . every shilling of my money be tie up . even the hundr pound that take you last night be promise to my lawyer to - morrow morning , and the want of it will put I to great inconvenience . I do not mean to say that I will not assist you ultimately . but as for pay you creditor in full , I might as well hope to pay the . it be madness , sheer madness , to think of such a thing . you must come to a compromise . it be a painful thing for the family , but everybody do it . there be , 's son , go through the last week , and be what they call whitewash , I believe . would not pay a shilling for he , and -- " " it be not money I want , " break in . " I be not come to you about myself . never mind what happen to I . " " what be the matter , then ? " say , somewhat relieve . " it be the boy , " say in a husky voice . " I want you to promise I that you will take charge of he when I be gone . that dear good wife of yours have always be good to he ; and he be fonder of she than he be of he . . .-- damn it . look here , -- you know that I be to have have 's money . I be not bring up like a younger brother , but be always encourage to be extravagant and kep idle . but for this I might have be quite a different man . I do not do my duty with the regiment so bad . you know how I be throw over about the money , and who get it . " " after the sacrifice I have make , and the manner in which I have stand by you , I think this sort of reproach be useless , " say . " you marriage be you own do , not mine . " " that be over now , " say . " that be over now . " and the word be wrench from he with a groan , which make he brother start . " ! be she dead ? " say with a voice of genuine alarm and commiseration . " I wish I be , " reply . " if it be not for little I would have cut my throat this morning -- and that damne villain 's too . " instantly guess the truth and surmise that be the person whose life wish to take . the tell he senior briefly , and in broken accent , the circumstance of the case . " it be a regular plan between that scoundrel and she , " he say . " the bailiff be put upon I ; I be take as I be go out of he house ; when I write to she for money , she say she be ill in bed and put I off to another day . and when I get home I find she in diamonds and sit with that villain alone . " he then go on to describe hurriedly the personal conflict with . to a affair of that nature , of course , he say , there be but one issue , and after he conference with he brother , he be go away to make the necessary arrangement for the meeting which must ensue . " and as it may end fatally with I , " say with a broken voice , " and as the boy have no mother , I must leave he to you and , -- only it will be a comfort to I if you will promise I to be he friend . " the elder brother be much affect , and shake 's hand with a cordiality seldom exhibite by he . pass he hand over he shaggy eyebrow . " thank you , brother , " say he . " I know I can trust you word . " " I will , upon my honour , " the say . and thus , and almost mutely , this bargain be struck between they . then take out of he pocket the little pocket -
- book which he have discover in 's desk , and from which he draw a bundle of the note which it contain . " here be six hundred , " he say --" you do not know I be so rich . I want you to give the money to , who lent it to we -- and who be kind to the boy -- and I have always feel asham of have take the poor old woman 's money . and here be some more -- I have only keep back a few pound -- which may as well have , to get on with . " as he speak he take hold of the other note to give to he brother , but he hand shook , and he be so agitate that the pocket - book fell from he , and out of it the thousand - pound note which have be the last of the unlucky 's winnings . stoop and pick they up , amaze at so much wealth . " not that , " say . " I hope to put a bullet into the man whom that belong to . " he have think to himself , it would be a fine revenge to wrap a ball in the note and kill with it . after this colloquy the brothers once more shook hand and part . have hear of the 's arrival , and be wait for she husband in the adjoin dining - room , with female instinct , augur evil . the door of the dining - room happen to be leave open , and the lady of course be issue from it as the two brothers pass out of the study . she hold out she hand to and say she be glad he be come to breakfast , though she could perceive , by he haggard unshorn face and the dark look of she husband , that there be very little question of breakfast between they . mutter some excuse about a engagement , squeeze hard the timid little hand which he sister - in - law reach out to he . she implor eye could read nothing but calamity in he face , but he go away without another word . do vouchsafe she any explanation . the child come up to salute he , and he kiss they in he usual frigid manner . the mother take both of they close to herself , and hold a hand of each of they as they knelt down to prayer , which read to they , and to the servants in they suits or livery , range upon chair on the other side of the hiss tea - urn . Breakfast be so late that day , in consequence of the delay which have occur , that the church - bell begin to ring whilst they be sit over they meal ; and be too ill , she say , to go to church , though she thought have be entirely astray during the period of family devotion . meanwhile hurry on from , and knock at the great bronze 's head which stand on the portal of , bring out the purple Silenus in a red and silver waistcoat who act as porter of that palace . the man be scared also by the 's dishevell appearance , and barr the way as if afraid that the other be go to force it . but only take out a card and enjoin he particularly to send it in to , and to mark the address write on it , and say that would be all day after one o'clock at the in 's -- not at home . the fat red - face man look after he with astonishment as he strode away ; so do the people in they clothes who be out so early ; the charity - boy with shining face , the greengrocer lol at he door , and the publican shutting he shutter in the sunshine , against service commence . the people joke at the cab - stand about he appearance , as he take a carriage there , and tell the driver to drive he to . all the bell be jangl and toll as he reach that place . he might have see he old acquaintance on she way from to , have he be look out . troops of school be on they march to church , the shiny pavement and outsides of coach in the suburb be thronge with people out upon they pleasure ; but the be much too busy to take any heed of these phenomena , and , arrive at , speedily make he way up to the room of he old friend and comrade , who find , to he satisfaction , be in barrack . , a veteran officer and man , greatly like by he regiment , in which want of money alone prevent he from attaine the highest rank , be enjoy the forenoon calmly in bed . he have be at a fast supper - party , give the night before by the , at he house in , to several young man of the regiment , and a number of lady of the corps de ballet , and old , who be at home with people of all age and rank , and consort with general , dog - fancier , opera-dancer , bruiser , and every kind of person , in a word , be rest himself after the night 's labour , and , not be on duty , be in bed . he room be hang round with boxing , sport , and dancing picture , present to he by comrade as they retire from the regiment , and marry and settle into quiet life . and as he be now nearly fifty year of
of age , twenty - four of which he have pass in the corps , he have a singular museum . he be one of the best shot in , and , for a heavy man , one of the best rider ; indeed , he and have be rival when the latter be in the Army . to be brief , be lie in bed , read in 's a account of that very fight between the and the , which have be before mention -- a venerable bristly warrior , with a little close - shaved grey head , with a silk nightcap , a red face and nose , and a great dyed moustache . when tell the he want a friend , the latter knew perfectly well on what duty of friendship he be call to act , and indeed have conduct score of affair for he acquaintance with the greatest prudence and skill . he the late lament - in - have have the greatest regard for on this account , and he be the common refuge of gentleman in trouble . " what be the row about , , my boy ? " say the old warrior . " no more gambling business , hay , like that when we shot ? " " it be about -- about my wife , " answer , cast down he eye and turn very red . the other give a whistle . " I always say she would throw you over , " he begin -- indeed there be bet in the regiment and at the club regard the probable fate of , so lightly be he wife 's character esteem by he comrade and the world ; but see the savage look with which answer the expression of this opinion , do not think fit to enlarge upon it further . " be there no way out of it , old boy ? " the continue in a grave tone . " be it only suspicion , you know , or -- or what be it ? any letter ? can not you keep it quiet ? best not make any noise about a thing of that sort if you can help it . " " think of he only find she out now , " the think to himself , and remember a hundred particular conversation at the mess - table , in which 's reputation have be tear to shred . " there be no way but one out of it , " reply -- " and there be only a way out of it for one of we , -- do you understand ? I be put out of the way --arrest -- I find th'ey alone together . I tell he he be a liar and a coward , and knock he down and thrash he . " " serve he right , " say . " who be it ? " answer it be . " the deuce ! a ! they say he -- that be , they say you -- " " what the do you mean ? " roar out ; " do you mean that you ever hear a fellow doubt about my wife and do not tell I , ? " " the world 's very censorious , old boy , " the other reply . " what the deuce be the good of my tell you what any tom - fool talk about ? " " it be damn unfriendly , , " say , quite overcome ; and , cover he face with he hand , he give way to a emotion , the sight of which cause the tough old campaigner opposite he to wince with sympathy . " hold up , old boy , " he say ; " great man or not , we will put a bullet in he , damn he . as for woman , they be all so . " " you do not know how fond I be of that one , " say , half - inarticulately . " Damme , I follow she like a footman . I give up everything I have to she . I be a beggar because I would marry she . by , sir , I have pawn my own watch in order to get she anything she fancie ; and she she be be make a purse for herself all the time , and grudge I a hundred pound to get I out of quod . " he then fiercely and incoherently , and with a agitation under which he counsellor have never before see he labour , tell Macmurdue the circumstance of the story . he adviser catch at some stray hint in it . " she may be innocent , after all , " he say . " she say so . have be a hundred time alone with she in the house before . " " it may be so , " answer sadly , " but this do not look very innocent " : and he show the the thousand - pound note which he have find in 's pocket - book . " this be what he give she , , and she kep it unknown to I ; and with this money in the house , she refuse to stand by I when I be lock up . " the could not but own that the secreting of the money have a very ugly look . whilst they be engage in they conference , dispatch 's servant to , with a order to the domestic there to give up a bag of clothes of which the have great need . and during the man 's absence , and with great labour and a 's , which stand they in much stead , and he second compose a letter , which the latter
latter be to send to . have the honour of waiting upon the of , on the part of , and beg to intimate that he be empower by the to make any arrangement for the meeting which , he have no doubt , it be he Lordship 's intention to demand , and which the circumstance of the morning have render inevitable . beg , in the most polite manner , to appoint a friend , with whom he ( ) might communicate , and desire that the meeting might take place with as little delay as possible . in a postscript the state that he have in he possession a bank - note for a large amount , which have reason to suppose be the property of the of . and he be anxious , on the 's behalf , to give up the note to its owner . by the time this note be compose , the 's servant return from he mission to 's house in , but without the carpet - bag and portmanteau , for which he have be send , and with a very puzzled and odd face . " they will not give th'ey up , " say the man ; " there be a regular shinty in the house , and everything at six and seven . the landlord 's come in and take possession . the servant be a drinkin ' up in the drawingroom . they say -- they say you have go off with the plate , " -- the man add after a pause -- " one of the servants be off already . and , the man as be very noisy and drink indeed , say nothing shall go out of the house until he wage be pay up . " the account of this little revolution in astonish and give a little gaiety to a otherwise very triste conversation . the two officer laugh at 's discomfiture . " I be glad the little 'un be not at home , " say , bite he nail . " you remember he , , do not you , in the ? how he sit the kicker to be sure ! do not he ? " " that he do , old boy , " say the good - natured . be then sit , one of fifty gown boy , in the of , think , not about the sermon , but about go home next , when he father would certainly tip he and perhaps would take he to the play . " he be a regular trump , that boy , " the father go on , still muse about he son . " I say , , if anything go wrong -- if I drop -- I should like you to -- to go and see he , you know , and say that I be very fond of he , and that . and -- dash it -- old chap , give he these gold sleeve - button : it be all I have get . " he cover he face with he black hand , over which the tear roll and make furrow of white . have also occasion to take off he silk night - cap and rub it across he eye . " go down and order some breakfast , " he say to he man in a loud cheerful voice . " what will you have , ? some devill kidney and a herring -- let 's say . and , clay , lay out some dress thing for the Colonel : we be always pretty much of a size , , my boy , and neither of we ride so light as we do when we first enter the corps . " with which , and leave the to dress himself , turn round towards the wall , and resume the perusal of 's , until such time as he friend 's toilette be complete and he be at liberty to commence he own . this , as he be about to meet a lord , perform with particular care . he wax he mustachio into a state of brilliant polish and put on a tight cravat and a trim buff waistcoat , so that all the young officer in the mess - room , whither have proceed he friend , compliment on he appearance at breakfast and ask if he be go to be marry that . in the same subject be pursue do not rally from the state of stupor and confusion in which the event of the previous night have plunge she intrepid spirit until the bell of the be ring for afternoon service , and rise from she bed she begin to ply she own bell , in order to summon the french maid who have leave she some hour before . ring many time in vain ; and though , on the last occasion , she ring with such vehemence as to pull down the bell - rope , do not make she appearance -- no , not though she mistress , in a great pet , and with the bell - rope in she hand , come out to the landing - place with she hair over she shoulders and scream out repeatedly for she attendant . the truth be , she have quit the premise for many hour , and upon that permission which be call french leave among we after pick up the trinket in the drawing - room , have ascend to she own apartment , pack and cord she own boxe there , trip out and call a cab for herself , bring down she trunk with she own hand , and without ever so much as ask the aid of any of the other servants , who would probably have refuse it , as they hate she
she cordially , and without wish any one of they good - bye , have make she exit from . the game , in she opinion , be over in that little domestic establishment . Fifine go off in a cab , as we have know more exalted person of she nation to do under similar circumstance : but , more provident or lucky than these , she secure not only she own property , but some of she mistress 's ( if indeed that lady could be say to have any property at all ) -- and not only carry off the trinket before allude to , and some favourite dress on which she have long keep she eye , but four richly gild Quatorze candlestick , six gilt album , keepsake , and of , a gold enamell snuff - box which have once belong to , and the sweetest little inkstand and mother - of - pearl blotting book , which use when she compose she charme little pink note , have vanish from the premise in together with , and all the silver lay on the table for the little festin which interrupt . the plate ware leave behind she be too cumbrous , probably for which reason , no doubt , she also leave the fire iron , the chimney - glass , and the rosewood cottage piano . a lady very like she subsequently keep a milliner 's shop in the at , where she live with great credit and enjoy the patronage of my . this person always speak of as of the most treacherous country in the world , and state to she young pupil that she have be affreusement vole by native of that island . it be no doubt compassion for she misfortune which induce the of to be so very kind to Madame - . may she flourish as she deserve -- she appear no more in we quarter of . hear a buzz and a stir below , and indignant at the impudence of those servants who would not answer she summon , . fling she morning robe round she and descende majestically to the drawing - room , whence the noise proceed . the cook be there with blacken face , seat on the beautiful chintz sofa by the side of , to whom she be administer . the page with the sugar- loaf button , who carry about 's pink note , and jump about she little carriage with such alacrity , be now engage put he finger into a cream dish ; the footman be talk to , who have a face full of perplexity and woe -- and yet , though the door be open , and have be scream a half - dozen of time a few foot off , not one of she attendant have obey she call . " have a little drop , do 'ee now , , " the cook be say as enter , the white cashmere dressing - gown flounce around she . " ! Trotter ! " the mistress of the house cry in great wrath . " how dare you stay here when you hear I call ? how dare you sit down in my presence ? where be my maid ? " the page withdraw he finger from he mouth with a momentary terror , but the cook take off a glass of , of which Mrs . Raggles have have enough , star at over the little gilt glass as she drain its contents . the liquor appear to give the odious rebel courage . " you sofy , indeed ! " say . " I be a settin ' on 's sofy . do not you stir , Raggles , . I be a settin ' on and 's sofy , which they buy with honest money , and very dear it cost th'ey , too . and I be thinkin ' if I set here until I be pay my wage , I shall set a precious long time , Raggles ; and set I will , too -- ha! ha ! " and with this she fill herself another glass of the liquor and drank it with a more hideously satirical air . " Trotter ! ! turn that drunken wretch out , " scream . " I shee not , " say the footman ; " turn out yourself . pay we sellery , and turn I out too . we will go fast enough . " " be you all here to insult I ? " cry in a fury ; " when come home I will - - " at this the servant burst into a horse haw - haw , in which , however , , who still keep a most melancholy countenance , do not join . " he be not a come back , " resume . " he send for he thing , and I would not let them go , although would ; and I do not b'lieve he be no more a Colonel than I be . he be hoff , and I suppose you be a goin ' after he . you be no better than swindler , both on you . do not be a bullying Me . I will not stand it . pay we we sellery , I say . pay we we sellery . " it be evident , from 's flushed countenance and defective intonation , that he , too , have have recourse to vinous stimulus . " , " say in a passion of vexation , " you will not surely let I be insult by that drunken man ? " " hold you noise , Trotter ; do now , " say Simpson the page . he be affect by he mistress 's deplorable situation , and succeed in prevent a outrageous denial
denial of the epithet " drunken " on the footman 's part . " oh , , " say , " I never think to live to see this year day : I have know the family ever since I be bear . I live butler with for thirty year ; and I little think one of that family be a goin ' to rue I -- yes , rue I " -- say the poor fellow with tear in he eye . " Har you a goin ' to pay I ? you have live in this ' ouse four year . you have 'ad my substance : my plate and linning . you ho I a milk and butter bill of two ' undred pound , you must 'ave no laid hegg for you homlet , and cream for you spanil dog . " " she do not care what she own flesh and blood have , " interpose the cook . " many be the time , he would have starve but for I . " " he be a charaty - boy now , , " say , with a drunken " ha ! ha ! " -- and honest Raggles continue , in a lamentable tone , a enumeration of he grief . all he say be true . and she husband have ruin he . he have bill come due next week and no means to meet they . he would be sell up and turn out of he shop and he house , because he have trust to the family . he tear and lamentation make Becky more peevish than ever . " you all seem to be against I , " she say bitterly . " what do you want ? I can not pay you on . come back to - morrow and I will pay you everything . I think have settle with you . he will to - morrow . I declare to you upon my honour that he leave home this morning with fifteen hundred pound in he pocket - book . he have leave I nothing . apply to he . give I a bonnet and shawl and let I go out and find he . there be a difference between we this morning . you all seem to know it . I promise you upon my word that you shall all be pay . he have get a good appointment . let I go out and find he . " this audacious statement cause Raggles and the other personage present to look at one another with a wild surprise , and with it leave they . she go upstairs and dress herself this time without the aid of she french maid . she go into 's room , and there see that a trunk and bag be pack ready for removal , with a pencil direction that they should be give when call for ; then she go into the 's garret ; everything be clean , and all the drawer empty there . she bethotch herself of the trinket which have be leave on the ground and feel certain that the woman have fle . " ! be ever such ill luck as mine ? " she say ; " to be so near , and to lose all . be it all too late ? " no ; there be one chance more . she dress herself and go away unmolested this time , but alone . it be four o'clock . she go swiftly down the street ( she have no money to pay for a carriage ) , and never stop until she come to 's door , in Great . where be ? she be at church . be not sorry . be in he study , and have give order not to be disturb -- she must see he -- she slipp by the sentinel in livery at once , and be in 's room before the astonished Baronet have even laid down the paper . he turn red and start back from she with a look of great alarm and horror . " do not look so , " she say . " I be not guilty , , dear ; you be my friend once . before , I be not guilty . I seem so . everything be against I . and oh ! at such a moment ! just when all my hope be about to be realize : just when happiness be in store for we . " " be this true , what I see in the paper then ? " say -- a paragraph in which have greatly surprise he . " it be true . tell I on night , the night of that fatal ball . he have be promise a appointment any time these six month . , the , tell he yesterday that it be make out . that unlucky arrest ensue ; that horrible meeting . I be only guilty of too much devotedness to 's service . I have receive alone a hundred time before . I confess I have money of which kknow nothing . do not you know how careless he be of it , and could I dare to confide it to he ? " and so she go on with a perfectly connected story , which she pour into the ear of she perplex kinsman . it be to the follow effect . own , and with prefect frankness , but deep contrition , that have remark 's partiality for she ( at the mention of which blush ) , and be secure of she own virtue , she have determine to turn the great peer 's attachment to the advantage of herself and she family . " I look for a peerage for you , , " she say ( the brother -
- in - law again turn red ) . " we have talk about it . you genius and 's interest make it more than probable , have not this dreadful calamity come to put a end to all we hope . but , first , I own that it be my object to rescue my dear husband -- he whom I love in spite of all he ill usage and suspicion of I -- to remove he from the poverty and ruin which be impend over we . I see 's partiality for I , " she say , cast down she eye . " I own that I do everything in my power to make myself pleasing to he , and as far as a honest woman may , to secure he -- he esteem . it be only on mor that the news arrive of the death of the of , and my instantly secure the appointment for my dear husband . it be intend as a surprise for he -- he be to see it in the papers to - day . even after that horrid arrest take place ( the expense of which generously say he would settle , so that I be in a manner prevent from come to my husband 's assistance ) , my be laugh with I , and say that my dearest would be consol when he read of he appointment in the paper , in that shock spun -- bailiff 's house . and then -- then he come home . he suspicion be excited , -- the dreadful scene take place between my and my cruel , -- and , of my , what will happen next ? , dear ! pity I , and reconcile we ! " and as she speak she flng herself down on she knee , and burst into tear , seize hold of 's hand , which she kiss passionately . it be in this very attitude that , who , return from church , run to she husband 's room directly she hear be close there , find the and he sister - in - law . " I be surprise that woman have the audacity to enter this house , " say , trembl in every limb and turn quite pale . ( she Ladyship have send out she maid directly after breakfast , who have communicate with and 's household , who have tell she all , and a great deal more than they know , of that story , and many other besides ) . " how dare to enter the house of -- of a honest family ? " start back , amaze at he wife 's display of vigour . still keep she knee posture and clung to 's hand . " tell she that she do not know all : tell she that I be innocent , dear , " she whimper out . " upon - my word , my love , I think you do injustice , " say ; at which speech be vastly relieved . " indeed I believe she to be -- " " to be what ? " cry out , she clear voice thrilling and , she heart beat violently as she speak . " to be a wicked woman -- a heartless mother , a false wife ? she never love she dear little boy , who use to fly here and tell I of she cruelty to he . she never come into a family but she strove to bring misery with she and to weaken the most sacred affections with she wicked flattery and falsehood . she have deceive she husband , as she have deceive everybody ; she soul be black with vanity , worldliness , and all sort of crime . I tremble when I touch she . I keep my child out of she sight . " " ! " cry , start up , " this be really language -- " " I have be a true and faithful wife to you , , " continue , intrepidly ; " I have keep my marriage vow as i make it to and have be obedient and gentle as a wife should . but righteous obedience have its limit , and I declare that I will not bear that -- that woman again under my roof ; if she enter it , I and my child will leave it . she be not worthy to sit down with people . you -- you must choose , sir , between she and I " ; and with this my sweep out of the room , flutter with she own audacity , and leave and not a little astonished at it . as for , she be not hurt ; nay , she be pleased . " it be the diamond - clasp you give I , " she say to , reach he out she hand ; and before she leave he ( for which event you may be sure my be look out from she dressing - room window in the upper story ) the have promise to go and seek out he brother , and endeavou to bring about a reconciliation . find some of the young fellow of the regiment seat in the mess - room at breakfast , and be induce without much difficulty to partake of that meal , and of the devilled leg of fowl and soda -water with which these young gentleman fortify themselves . then they have a conversation befitt the day and they time of life : about the next pigeon - match at , with relative bet upon and ; about of the , and who have leave she , and how she be console by ; and about the fight between the and the pet , and the probability that it be a
a cross . yong , a hero of seventeen , laboriously endeavour to get up a pair of mustachio , have see the fight , and speak in the most scientific manner about the battle and the condition of the man . it be he who have drive the on to the ground in he drag and pass the whole of the previous night with he . have there not be foul play he must have win it . all the old file of the be in it ; and would not pay ; no , dammy , he would not pay . it be but a year since the young Cornet , now so know a hand in 's parlour , have a still lingering like for toffy , and use to be birch at . so they go on talk about dancers , fight , drink , demireps , until come down and join the boy and the conversation . he do not appear to think that any especial reverence be due to they boyhood ; the old fellow cut in with story , to the full as choice as any the youngest rake present have to tell -- nor do he own grey hair nor they smooth face detain he . be famous for he good story . he be not exactly a lady 's man ; that be , men ask he to dine rather at the house of they mistress than of they mother . there can scarcely be a life lower , perhaps , than he , but he be quite contente with it , such as it be , and lead it in perfect good nature , simplicity , and modesty of demeanour . by the time have finish a copious breakfast , most of the other have conclude they meal . yong be smoke a immense Meerschaum pipe , while be employ with a cigar : that violent little , with he little bull - terrier between he leg , be tossing for shilling with all he might ( that fellow be always at some game or other ) against ; and and walk off to the club , neither , of course , have give any hint of the business which be occupy they mind . both , on the other hand , have join pretty gaily in the conversation , for why should they interrupt it ? Feasting , drink , ribaldry , laughter , go on alongside of all sort of other occupations in -- the crowd be pour out of church as and he friend pass down 's and enter into they club . the old buck and habitue , who ordinarily stand gaping and grinn out of the great front window of the , have not arrive at they post as yet -- the newspaper - room be almost empty . one man be present whom do not know ; another to whom he owe a little score for whist , and whom , in consequence , he do not care to meet ; a third be read the Royalist ( a periodical famous for its scandal and its attachment to and ) paper at the table , and look up at with some interest , say , " Crawley , I congratulate you . " " what do you mean ? " say the . " it be in the and the too , " say . " what ? " cry , turn very red . he think that the affair with be already in the public print . look up wonder and smile at the agitation which the exhibit as he take up the paper and , trembl , begin to read . and ( the gentleman with whom have the outstanding whist account ) have be talk about the Colonel just before he come in . " it be come just in the nick of time , " say . " I suppose have not a shilling in the world . " " it be a wind that blow everybody good , " say . " he can not go away without pay I a pony he owe I . " " what be the salary ? " ask . " two or three thousand , " answer the other . " but the climate 's so infernal , they do not enjoy it long . die after eighteen month of it , and the man before go off in six week , I hear . " " some people say he brother be a very clever man . I always find he a d ------ bore , " ejaculate . " he must have good interest , though . he must have get the the place . " " he ! " say , with a sneer . " Pooh . it be get it . " how do you mean ? " " a virtuous woman be a crown to she husband , " answer the other enigmatically , and go to read he papers . , for he part , read in the Royalist the follow astonishing paragraph : Governorship of , , have bring letter and papers from . h . have fall a victim to the prevailing fever at . he loss be deeply feel in the flourishing colony . we hear that the Governorship have be offer to , , a distinguished officer . we need not only man of acknowledged bravery , but man of administrative talents to superintend the affair of we colony , and we have no doubt that the gentleman select by the to fill the lamented vacancy which have occur at be admirably calculate for the post which he be about to occupy . " ! where be it ? who have appoint he to the government ? you must take I out as you secretary , old boy , " say laugh
laugh ; and as and he friend sit wonder and perplex over the announcement , the waiter bring in to the a card on which the name of be engrave , who beg to see . the and he aide - de - camp go out to meet the gentleman , rightly conjectur that he be a emissary of . " how would 'ye do , ? I be glad to see you , " say with a bland smile , and grasp 's hand with great cordiality . " you come , I suppose , from -- " " exactly , " say . " then this be my friend , of the . " " delighte to know , I be sure , " say and tender another smile and shake of the hand to the second , as he have do to the principal . put out one finger , arm with a buckskin glove , and make a very frigid bow to over he tight cravat . he be , perhaps , discontent at be put in communication with a pekin , and think that should have send he a Colonel at the very least . " a act for I , and know what I mean , " Crawley say , " I have better retire and leave you together . " " of course , " say . " by no means , my dear Colonel , " say ; " the interview which I have the honour of requesting be with you personally , though the company of can not fail to be also most pleasing . in fact , , I hope that we conversation will lead to none but the most agreeable result , very different from those which my friend appear to anticipate . " " Humph ! " say . be hang to these civilian , he think to himself , they be always for arrange and speechify . take a chair which be not offer to he -- take a paper from he pocket , and resume -- " you have see this gratify announcement in the papers this morning , ? government have secure a most valuable servant , and you , if you accept office , as I presume you will , a excellent appointment . three thousand a year , delightful climate , excellent government - house , all you own way in the , and a certain promotion . I congratulate you with all my heart . I presume you know , gentlemen , to whom my friend be indebt for this piece of patronage ? " " Hange if I know , " the say ; he principal turn very red . " to one of the most generous and kindest man in the world , as he be one of the greatest -- to my excellent friend , the of . " " I will see he would ---- before I take he place , " grow out . " you be irritate against my noble friend , " calmly resum ; " and now , in the name of common sense and justice , tell I why ? " " why ? " cry in surprise . " why ? ! " say the , ring he stick on the ground . " Dammy , indeed , " say with the most agreeable smile ; " still , look at the matter as a man of the world -- as a honest man -- and see if you have not be in the wrong . you come home from a journey , and find -- what ?-- my supp at you house in with . be the circumstance strange or novel ? have he not be a hundred time before in the same position ? upon my honour and word as a gentleman " -- here put he hand on he waistcoat with a parliamentary air --" I declare I think that you suspicion be monstrous and utterly unfounded , and that they injure a honourable gentleman who have prove he good - will towards you by a thousand benefaction -- and a most spotless and innocent lady . " " you do not mean to say that -- that 's mistaken ? " say . " I believe that . be as innocent as my wife , , " say with great energy . " I believe that , misl by a infernal jealousy , my friend here strike a blow against not only a infirm and old man of high station , he constant friend and benefactor , but against he wife , he own dearest honour , he son 's future reputation , and he own prospects in life . " " I will tell you what happen , " continue with great solemnity ; " I be send for this morning by my , and find he in a pitiable state , as , I need hardly inform , any man of age and infirmity would be after a personal conflict with a man of you strength . I say to you face ; it be a cruel advantage you take of that strength , . it be not only the body of my noble and excellent friend which be wounded -- he heart , sir , be bleed . a man whom he have load with benefit and regard with affection have subject he to the foulest indignity . what be this very appointment , which appear in the journal of to - day , but a proof of he kindness to you ? when I see he Lordship this morning I find he in a state pitiable indeed to see , and as anxious as you be to revenge the outrage commit upon he , by blood . you know he have give he proof , I presume , ? " " he have plenty of
of pluck , " say the . " nobody ever say he have not . " " he first order to I be to write a letter of challenge , and to carry it to . one or other of we , " he say , " must not survive the outrage of last night . " nod . " you be come to the point , , " he say . " I try my utmost to calm . ! sir , " I say , " how I regret that and myself have not accept 's invitation to sup with she ! " " she ask you to sup with she ? " say . " after the opera . here be the note of invitation -- stop -- no , this be another paper -- I think I have h , but it be of no consequence , and I pledge you my word to the fact . if we have come -- and it be only one of 's headach which prevent we -- she suffer under they a good deal , especially in the spring -- if we have come , and you have return home , there would have be no quarrel , no insult , no suspicion -- and so it be positively because my poor wife have a headache that you be to bring death down upon two man of honour and plunge two of the most excellent and ancient family in the kingdom into disgrace and sorrow . " look at he principal with the air of a man profoundly puzzl , and feel with a kind of rage that he prey be escape he . he do not believe a word of the story , and yet , how discredit or disprove it ? continue with the same fluent oratory , which in he place in parliament he have so often practise --" I sit for a hour or more by 's bedside , beseech , implor to forego he intention of demand a meeting . I point out to he that the circumstance be after all suspicious -- they be suspicious . I acknowledge it -- any man in you position might have be take in -- I say that a man furious with jealousy be to all intent and purpose a madman , and should be as such regard -- that a duel between you must lead to the disgrace of all party concerned -- that a man of he Lordship 's exalt station have no right in these day , when the most atrocious revolutionary principle , and the most dangerous levelling doctrine be preach among the vulgar , to create a public scandal ; and that , however innocent , the common people would insist that he be guilty . in fine , I implor he not to send the challenge . " " I do not believe one word of the whole story , " say , grind he tooth . " I believe it a d ------ lie , and that you be in it , . if the challenge do not come from he , by it shall come from I . " turn deadly pale at this savage interruption of the and look towards the door . but he find a champion in . that gentleman rise up with a oath and rebuk for he language . " you put the affair into my hand , and you shall act as I think fit , by , and not as you do . you have no right to insult with this sort of language ; and dammy , , you deserve a apology . and as for a challenge to , you may get somebody else to carry it , I will not . if my lord , after be thrash , choose to sit still , dammy let he . and as for the affair with -- with , my belief be , there be nothing prove at all : that you wife 's innocent , as innocent as say she be ; and at any rate that you would be a -- fool not to take the place and hold you tongue . " " , you speak like a man of sense , " cry out , immensely relieve -- " I forget any word that have use in the irritation of the moment . " " I think you would , " say with a sneer . " shut you mouth , you old stoopid , " the say good - naturedly . " be not a fighte man ; and quite right , too . " " this matter , in my belief , " the emissary cry , " ink to be bury in the most profound oblivion . a word concern it should never pass these door . I speak in the interest of my friend , as well as of , who persist in consider I he enemy . " " I suppose will not talk about it very much , " say ; " and I do not see why we side should . the affair be not a very pretty one , any way you take it , and the less say about it the better . it be you be thrash , and not we ; and if you be satisfied , why , I think , we should be . " take he hat , upon this , and follow he to the door , shut it upon himself and 's agent , leave chaf within . when the two be on the other side , look hard at the other ambassador and with a expression of anything but respect on he round jolly face . " you do not stick at a trifle , , " he say . " you flatter I , , " answer the other with
with a smile . " upon my honour and conscience now , do ask we to sup after the opera . " " of course ; and have one of she head - ach . I say , I have get a thousand - pound note here , which I will give you if you will give I a receipt , please ; and I will put the note up in a envelope for . my man sha not fight he . but we have rather not take he money . " " it be all a mistake -- all a mistake , my dear sir , " the other say with the utmost innocence of manner ; and be bow down the step by , just as ascend they . there be a slight acquaintance between these two gentleman , and the captain , go back with the Baronet to the room where the latter 's brother be , tell , in confidence , that he have make the affair all right between and the Colonel . be well pleased , of course , at this intelligence , and congratulate he brother warmly upon the peaceful issue of the affair , make appropriate moral remark upon the evils of duelling and the unsatisfactory nature of that sort of settlement of dispute . and after this preface , he try with all he eloquence to effect a reconciliation between and he wife . he recapitulate the statement which have make , point out the probability of they truth , and assert he own firm belief in she innocence . but would not hear of it . " she have kep money conceal from I these ten year , " he say " she swore , last night only , she have none from . she know it be all up , directly I find it . if she be not guilty , , she be as bad as guilty , and I will never see she again -- never . " he head sank down on he chest as he speak the word , and he look quite broken and sad . " poor old boy , " say , shak he head . resist for some time the idea of take the place which have be procure for he by so odious a patron , and be also for remove the boy from the school where 's interest have place he . he be induced , however , to acquiesce in these benefit by the entreaty of he brother and , but mainly by the latter , point out to he what a fury would be in to think that he enemy 's fortune be make through he means . when the of come abroad after he accident , the bow up to he and congratulate himself and the service upon have make so excellent a appointment . these congratulation be receive with a degree of gratitude which may be imagine on the part of . the secret of the rencontre between he and be bury in the profoundest oblivion , as Wenhbe say ; that be , by the seconds and the principal . but before that evening be over it be talk of at fifty dinner - table in . himself go to seven evening party and tell the story with comment and emendation at each place . how revell in it ! the Bishopess of be shocke beyond expression ; the go and write he name down in the visiting - book at that very day . be sorry ; so you may be sure be he sister , very sorry . write it off to she other daughter at the cape of . it be town - talk for at least three day , and be only keep out of the newspaper by the exertion of , act upon a hint from . the bailiff and broker seize upon poor Raggles in , and the late fair tenant of that poor little mansion be in the meanwhile -- where ? who care ! who ask after a day or two ? be she guilty or not ? we all know how charitable the world be , and how the verdict of Vanity fair go when there be a doubt . some people say she have go to Naples in pursuit of , whilst other averr that he Lordship quit that city and fle to on hearing of 's arrival ; some say she be live in , and have become a dame d'honneur to the of ; some that she be at ; and other , at a boarding - house at . make she a tolerable annuity , and we may be sure that she be a woman who could make a little money go a great way , as the saying be . he would have pay he debt on leave , could he have get any to take he life , but the climate of be so bad that he could borrow no money on the strength of he salary . he remit , however , to he brother punctually , and write to he little boy regularly every mail . he keep in cigar and send over quantity of shells , cayenne pepper , hot pickle , guava jelly , and colonial produce to . he send he brother home the , in which the new be praise with immense enthusiasm ; whereas the , whose wife be not ask to , declare that he Excellency be a tyrant , compare to whom be a enlightened philanthropist . use to like to get the papers and read about he Excellency . he mother never make any movement to see the child . he go home to he aunt for Sunday and holiday ; he soon know every bird 's nest about 's , and ride out with 's hound , which he
he admire so on he first well - remember visit to . be a be now fairly establish in he grandfather 's mansion in , occupant of he father 's room in the house and here apparent of all the splendour there . the good look , gallant bear , and gentlemanlike appearance of the boy win the grandsire 's heart for he . be as proud on he as ever he have be of the elder . the child have many more luxuries and indulgence than have be award he father . 's commerce have prosper greatly of late year . he wealth and importance in the have very much increase . he have be glad enough in former day to put the elder to a good private school ; and a commission in the army for he son have be a source of no small pride to he ; for little and he future prospect the old man look much higher . he would make a gentleman of the little chap , be 's constant say regard little . he see he in he mind 's eye , a collegian , a parliament man , a Baronet , perhaps . the old man think he would die contente if he could see he grandson in a fair way to such honour . he would have none but a tip - top college man to educate he -- none of you quack and pretender -- no , no . a few year before , he use to be savage , and inveigh against all parson , scholar , and the like declaring that they be a pack of humbug , and quack that be not fit to get they living but by grind and , and a set of supercilious dog that pretend to look down upon british merchant and gentleman , who could buy up half a hundred of th'ey . he would mourn now , in a very solemn manner , that he own education have be neglect , and repeatedly point out , in pompous oration to , the necessity and excellence of classical acquirement . when they meet at dinner the grandsire use to ask the lad what he have be read during the day , and be greatly interested at the report the boy give of he own study , pretend to understand little when he speak regard they . he make a hundred blunder and show he ignorance many a time . it do not increase the respect which the child have for he senior . a quick brain and a better education elsewhere show the boy very soon that he grandsire be a dullard , and he begin accordingly to command he and to look down upon he ; for he previous education , humble and contract as it have be , have make a much better gentleman of than any plan of he grandfather could make he . he have be bring up by a kind , weak , and tender woman , who have no pride about anything but about he , and whose heart be so pure and whose bearing be so meek and humble that she could not but need be a true lady . she busy herself in gentle office and quiet duty ; if she never say brilliant thing , she never speak or think unkind one ; guileless and artless , loving and pure , indeed how could we poor little be other than a real gentlewoman ! yong lord over this soft and yield nature ; and the contrast of its simplicity and delicacy with the coarse pomposity of the dull old man with whom he next come in contact make he lord over the latter too . if he have be a he could not have be better bring up to think well of himself . whilst he mother be year after he at home , and I do believe every hour of the day , and during most hour of the sad lonely night , think of he , this young gentleman have a number of pleasure and consolation administer to he , which make he for he part bear the separation from very easily . little boy who cry when they be go to school cry because they be go to a very uncomfortable place . it be only a few who weep from sheer affection . when you think that the eye of you childhood dry at the sight of a piece of gingerbread , and that a plum cake be a compensation for the agony of part with you mamma and sister , oh my friend and brother , you need not be too confident of you own fine feeling . well , then , have every comfort and luxury that a wealthy and lavish old grandfather think fit to provide . the coachman be instruct to purchase for he the handsomest pony which could be buy for money , and on this be teach to ride , first at a riding - school , whence , after have perform satisfactorily without stirrup , and over the leaping - bar , he be conduct through the to 's , and then to , where he ride in state with the coachman behind he . , who take matter more easily in the City now , where he leave he affair to he junior partner , would often ride out with in the same fashionable direction . as little come canter up with he dandified air and he heel down , he grandfather would nudge the lad 's aunt and say , " look , miss o . " and he would laugh , and he face would grow red with pleasure , as he nod out of the window to the boy , as the groom salute the carriage , and the footman salute . here too he aunt ,
, ( whose chariot might daily be see in the , with bullock or emblazon on the panel and harness , and three pasty - face little Bullocks , cover with cockade and feather , stare from the window ) , I say , fling glance of the bitterest hatre at the little upstart as he ride by with he hand on he side and he hat on one ear , as proud as a lord . though he be scarcely eleven year of age , wear strap and the most beautiful little boot like a man . he have gilt spur , and a gold - headed whip , and a fine pin in he handkerchief , and the neatest little kid glove which 's could furnish . he mother have give he a couple of neckcloth , and carefully hem and make some little shirts for he ; but when she come to see the widow , they be replace by much finer linen . he have little jewelled buttons in the lawn shirt fronts . she humble present have be put aside -- I believe have give they to the coachman 's boy . try to think she be pleased at the change . indeed , she be happy and charme to see the boy look so beautiful . she have have a little black profile of he do for a shilling , and this be hang up by the side of another portrait over she bed . one day the boy come on he accustomed visit , gallop down the little street at , and bring , as usual , all the inhabitant to the window to admire he splendour , and with great eagerness and a look of triumph in he face , he pull a case out of he great - coat -- it be a natty white great - coat , with a cape and a velvet collar -- pull out a red morocco case , which he give she . " I buy it with my own money , , " he say . " I think you would like it . " open the case , and give a little cry of delighted affection , seize the boy and embrace he a hundred time . it be a miniature - of himself , very prettily done ( though not half handsome enough , we may be sure , the widow thought ) . he grandfather have wish to have a picture of he by a artist whose work , exhibit in a shop - window , in , have catch the old gentleman 's eye ; and , who have plenty of money , bethotch he of ask the painter how much a copy of the little portrait would cost , say that he would pay for it out of he own money and that he want to give it to he mother . the pleased painter execute it for a small price , and old himself , when he hear of the incident , grow out he satisfaction and give the boy twice as many sovereign as he pay for the miniature . but what be the grandfather 's pleasure compare to 's ecstacy ? that proof of the boy 's affection charme she so that she think no child in the world be like hers for goodness . for long week after , the thought of he love make she happy . she sleep better with the picture under she pillow , and how many many time do she kiss it and weep and pray over it ! a small kindness from those she love make that timid heart grateful . since she part with she have have no such joy and consolation . at he new home master rule like a lord ; at dinner he invite the lady to drink wine with the utmost coolness , and take off he champagne in a way which charme he old grandfather . " look at he , " the old man would say , nudg he neighbour with a delighted purple face , " do you ever see such a chap ? , ! he will be order a dressing - case next , and razor to shave with ; I be bless if he will not . " the antic of the lad do not , however , delight 's friend so much as they please the old gentleman . it give Coffin no pleasure to hear cut into the conversation and spoil he story . be not interested in see the little boy half tipsy . 's lady feel no particular gratitude , when , with a twist of he elbow , he tilt a glass of port -wine over she yellow satin and laugh at the disaster ; nor be she better please , although old be highly delighted , when " whop " she third boy ( a young gentleman a year older than , and by chance home for the holiday from 's at ) in . 's grandfather give the boy a couple of sovereign for that feat and promise to reward he further for every boy above he own size and age whom he whop in a similar manner . it be difficult to say what good the old man see in these combat ; he have a vague notion that quarrell make boy hardy , and that tyranny be a useful accomplishment for they to learn . English youth have be so educated time out of mind , and we have hundred of thousand of apologist and admirer of injustice , misery , and brutality , as perpetrate among child . Flush with praise and victory over , wish naturally to pursue he conquest further , and one day as he be strutt about in prodigiously dandify new clothes , near , and a young baker 's boy make sarcastic comment upon
upon he appearance , the youthful patrician pull off he dandy jacket with great spirit , and give it in charge to the friend who accompany he ( master , of Great , , son of the junior partner of the house of and ) , try to whop the little baker . but the chance of war be unfavourable this time , and the little baker whop , who come home with a rueful black eye and all he fine shirt frill dabble with the claret draw from he own little nose . he tell he grandfather that he have be in combat with a giant , and frightene he poor mother at with long , and by no means authentic , account of the battle . this young , of , , be 's great friend and admirer . they both have a taste for painting theatrical character ; for hardbake and raspberry tart ; for sliding and skat in the 's and the , when the weather permit ; for go to the play , whither they be often conduct , by 's order , by , 's appoint body - servant , with whom they sit in great comfort in the pit . in the company of this gentleman they visit all the principal theatre of the metropolis ; kknow the name of all the actor from to 's Wells ; and perform , indeed , many of the play to the family and they youthful friend , with 's famous character , on they pasteboard theatre . , the footman , who be of a generous disposition , would not unfrequently , when in cash , treat he young master to oyster after the play , and to a glass of rum-shrub for a night - cap . we may be pretty certain that profit in he turn by he young master 's liberality and gratitude for the pleasure to which the footman induct he . a famous tailor from the of the town -- would have none of you City or Holborn bungler , he say , for the boy ( though a tailor be good enough for ) -- be summon to ornament little 's person , and be tell to spare no expense in so do . so , , of , give a loose to he imagination and send the child home fancy trousers , fancy waistcoat , and fancy jacket enough to furnish a school of little dandy . have little white waistcoat for evening party , and little cut velvet waistcoat for dinner , and a dear little darling shawl dressing - gown , for all the world like a little man . he dress for dinner every day , " like a regular swell , " as he grandfather remark ; one of the domestic be affect to he special service , attend he at he toilette , answer he bell , and bring he he letter always on a silver tray . Georgy , after breakfast , would sit in the arm -chair in the dining - room and read the , just like a grow - up man . " how he do dam and swear , " the servants would cry , delighte at he precocity . those who remember the he father , declare be he pa , every inch of he . he make the house lively by he activity , he imperiousness , he scolding , and he good - nature . 's education be confide to a neighbour scholar and private pedagogue who " prepare young nobleman and gentleman for the , the senate , and the learn profession : whose system do not embrace the degrading corporal severity still practise at the ancient place of education , and in whose family the pupil would find the elegance of refin society and the confidence and affection of a home . " it be in this way that the of , , and domestic to the of , strove with . he wife to entice pupil . by thus advertising and push sedulously , the domestic and he generally succeed in have one or two scholar by they -- who pay a high figure and be think to be in uncommonly comfortable quarter . there be a large west indian , whom nobody come to see , with a mahogany complexion , a woolly head , and a exceedingly dandyfied appearance ; there be another hulk boy of three - and - twenty whose education have be neglect and whom and . be to introduce into the polite world ; there be two son of of the 's service : these four sit down to dinner at . 's genteel board , when be introduce to she establishment . be , like some dozen other pupil , only a day boy ; he arrive in the morning under the guardianship of he friend , and if it be fine , would ride away in the afternoon on he pony , follow by the groom . the wealth of he grandfather be report in the school to be prodigious . the use to compliment upon it personally , warn he that he be destin for a high station ; that it become he to prepare , by sedulity and docility in , for the lofy duty to which he would be call in mature age ; that obedience in the child be the best preparation for command in the man ; and that he therefore beg would not bring toffee into the school and ruin the health of the , who have everything they want at the elegant and abundant table of . with respect to learn , " the Curriculum , " as love to call it , be of prodigious extent , and the young gentleman in might learn a something of every know science . the have a orrery , a
a electrifying machine , a turning lato , a theatre ( in the wash - house ) , a chemical apparatus , and what he call a select library of all the work of the best author of ancient and modern time and language . he take the boy to the and descant upon the antiquities and the specimen of natural history there , so that audience would gather round he as he speak , and all highly admire he as a prodigiously well - inform man . and whenever he speak ( which he do almost always ) , he take care to produce the very finest and longest word of which the vocabulary give he the use , rightly judge that it be as cheap to employ a handsome , large , and sonorous epithet , as to use a little stingy one . thus he would say to George in school , " I observe on my return home from take the indulgence of a evening 's scientific conversation with my excellent friend -- a true archaeologian , gentlemen , a true archaeologian -- that the window of you venerated grandfather 's almost princely mansion in be illuminate as if for the purpose of festivity . be I right in my conjecture that entertaine a society of chosen spirit round he sumptuous board last night ? " , who have considerable humour , and use to to he face with great spirit and dexterity , would reply that be quite correct in he surmise . " then those friend who have the honour of partaking of 's hospitality , gentlemen , have no reason , I will lay any wager , to complain of they repast . I myself have be more than once so favoured . ( by the way , master , you come a little late this morning , and have be a defaulter in this respect more than once . ) I myself , I say , gentlemen , humble as I be , have be find not unworthy to share 's elegant hospitality . and though I have feast with the great and noble of the world -- for I presume that I may call my excellent friend and patron , the of , one of the number -- yet I assure you that the board of the british merchant be to the full as richly serve , and he reception as gratifying and noble . , sir , we will resume , if you please , that passage of , which be interrupt by the late arrival of . " to this great man 's education be for some time entrust . be bewilder by he phrase , but think he a prodigy of learning . that poor widow make friend of , for reason of she own . she like to be in the house and see come to school there . she like to be ask to 's conversazioni , which take place once a month ( as you be inform on pink card , with AOHNH engrave on they ) , and where the professor welcome he pupil and they friend to weak tea and scientific conversation . poor little never miss one of these entertainment and think they delicious so long as she might have sit by she . and she would walk from in any weather , and embrace Mr . Veal with tearful gratitude for the delightful evening she have pass , when , the company have retire and go off with , he attendant , poor put on she cloak and she shawl preparatory to walk home . as for the learning which imbibe under this valuable master of a hundred sciences , to judge from the weekly report which the lad take home to he grandfather , he progress be remarkable . the name of a score or more of desirable branch of knowledge be print in a table , and the pupil 's progress in each be mark by the professor . in be pronounce aristos , in optimus , in french tr bien , and so forth ; and everybody have prize for everything at the end of the year . even , the woolly - head young gentleman , and half - brother to the , and , the neglected young pupil of three - and - twenty from the agricultural district , and that idle young scapegrace of a master before mention , receive little eighteen - penny book , with " " engrave on they , and a pompous latin inscription from the professor to he young friend . the family of this master be hanger - on of the house of . the old gentleman have advance from be a clerk to be a junior partner in he establishment . be the godfather of young master ( who in subsequent life write on he card and become a man of decided fashion ) , while have accompany to the font , and give she protegee a prayer - book , a collection of tract , a volume of very low church poetry , or some such memento of she goodness every year . drive the Todd out in she carriage now and then ; when they be ill , she footman , in large plush smalls and waistcoat , bring jelly and delicacies from to . tremble and look up to indeed , and . , who have a pretty hand at cutting out paper trimming for haunch of mutton , and could make flower , duck , & c. , out of turnip and carrot in a very creditable manner , would go to " the , " as it be call , and assist in the preparation incident to a great dinner , without even so much as think of sit down to the banquet . if any guest fail at the eleventh hour , be
be ask to dine . and come across in the evening , slipp in with a muffled knock , and be in the drawing - room by the time and the lady under she convoy reach that apartment -- and ready to fire off duet and s until the gentleman come up . poor ; poor young lady ! how she have to work and thrum at these duet and sonata in the , before they appear in public in the ! thus it seem to be decree by fate that be to domineer over everybody with whom he come in contact , and that friend , relative , and domestic be all to bow the knee before the little fellow . it must be own that he accommodate himself very willingly to this arrangement . most people do so . and like to play the part of master and perhaps have a natural aptitude for it . in everybody be afraid of , and be afraid of . the boy 's dashing manners , and offhand rattle about book and learn , he likeness to he father ( dead unreconcile in ) aw the old gentleman and give the young boy the mastery . the old man would start at some hereditary feature or tone unconsciously use by the little lad , and fancy that 's father be again before he . he try by indulgence to the grandson to make up for harshness to the elder . people be surprise at he gentleness to the boy . he grow and swore at as usual , and would smile when come down late for breakfast . , 's aunt , be a fade old spinster , break down by more than forty year of dulness and coarse usage . it be easy for a lad of spirit to master she . and whenever want anything from she , from the jam - pots in she cupboard to the cracked and dry old colour in she paint - box ( the old paint - box which she have have when she be a pupil of and be still almost young and blooming ) , take possession of the object of he desire , which obtain , he take no further notice of he aunt . for he friend and crony , he have a pompous old schoolmaster , who flatter he , and a toady , he senior , whom he could thrash . it be dear . 's delight to leave he with she youngest daughter , , a darl child of eight year old . the little pair look so well together , she would say ( but not to the folk in " the , " we may be sure ) " who know what might happen ? do not they make a pretty little couple ? " the fond mother think . the break -spirited , old , maternal grandfather be likewise subject to the little tyrant . he could not help respect a lad who have such fine clothes and rode with a groom behind he . Georgy , on he side , be in the constant habit of hearing coarse abuse and vulgar satire level at by he pitiless old enemy , . use to call the other the old pauper , the old coal -man , the old bankrupt , and by many other such name of brutal contumely . how be little to respect a man so prostrate ? a few month after he be with he paternal grandfather , die . there have be little love between she and the child . he do not care to show much grief . he come down to visit he mother in a fine new suit of mourning , and be very angry that he could not go to a play upon which he have set he heart . the illness of that old lady have be the occupation and perhaps the safeguard of . what do man know about woman 's martyrdom ? we should go mad have we to endure the hundredth part of those daily pain which be meekly borne by many woman . ceaseless slavery meet with no reward ; constant gentleness and kindness meet by cruelty as constant ; love , labour , patience , watchfulness , without even so much as the acknowledgement of a good word ; all this , how many of they have to bear in quiet , and appear abroad with cheerful face as if they feel nothing . Tender slave that they be , they must need be hypocrite and weak . from she chair 's mother have take to she bed , which she have never leave , and from which . herself be never absent except when she run to see . the old lady grudge she even those rare visit ; she , who have be a kind , smile , good - natured mother once , in the day of she prosperity , but whom poverty and infirmity have break down . she illness or estrangement do not affect . they rather enable she to support the other calamity under which she be suffer , and from the thought of which she be keep by the ceaseless call of the invalid . bear she harshness quite gently ; smoothe the uneasy pillow ; be always ready with a soft answer to the watchful , querulous voice ; soothe the sufferer with word of hope , such as she pious simple heart could best feel and utter , and close the eye that have once look so tenderly upon she . then all she time and tenderness be devote to the consolation and comfort of the bereaved old father , who be stun by the blow which have befall he , and stand utterly alone in the world . he wife , he honour , he fortune , everything he love
love best have fall away from he . there be only to stand by and support with she gentle arm the tottering , heart - break old man . we be not go to write the history : it would be too dreary and stupid . I can see yawn over it d'avance . one day as the young gentleman be assemble in the study at the 's , and the domestic chaplain to the the of be spout away as usual , a smart carriage drive up to the door decorate with the statue of , and two gentleman step out . the young Masters Bangles rush to the window with a vague notion that they father might have arrive from . the great hulking scholar of three - and - twenty , who be cry secretly over a passage of , flatten he neglect nose against the pane and look at the drag , as the laquais de place spring from the box and let out the persons in the carriage . " it be a fat one and a thing one , " say as a thundering knock come to the door . everybody be interested , from the domestic chaplain himself , who hope he see the fathers of some future pupil , down to , glad of any pretext for lay he book down . the boy in the shabby livery with the fade copper button , who always thrust himself into the tight coat to open the door , come into the study and say , " two gentleman want to see . " the professor have have a trifling altercation in the morning with that young gentleman , owe to a difference about the introduction of cracker in school - time ; but he face resume its habitual expression of bland courtesy as he say , " master , I give you full permission to go and see you carriage friend -- to whom I beg you to convey the respectful compliment of myself and . " go into the reception - room and see two strangers , whom he look at with he head up , in he usual haughty manner . one be fat , with mustachio , and the other be lean and long , in a blue frock - coat , with a brown face and a grizzl head . " my , how like he be ! " say the long gentleman with a start . " can you guess who we be , ? " the boy 's face flush up , as it do usually when he be move , and he eye brighten . " I do not know the other , " he say , " but I should think you must be Major . " indeed it be we old friend . he voice tremble with pleasure as he greet the boy , and take both the other 's hand in he own , draw the lad to he . " you mother have talk to you about I -- have she ? " he say . " that she have , " answer , " hundred and hundred of time . " it be one of the many cause for personal pride with which old choose to recreate himself that , he ancient rival , enemy , and benefactor , be in he last day so utterly defeat and humiliate as to be force to accept pecuniary obligation at the hand of the man who have most injured and insult he . the successful man of the world curse the old pauper and relieve he from time to time . as he furnish with money for he mother , he give the boy to understand by hint , deliver in he brutal , coarse way , that 's maternal grandfather be but a wretch old bankrupt and dependant , and that might thank the man to whom he already owed ever so much money for the aid which he generosity now choose to administer . carry the pompous supplies to he mother and the shatte old widower whom it be now the main business of she life to tend and comfort . the little fellow patronize the feeble and disappoint old man . it may have show a want of " proper pride " in that she choose to accept these money benefit at the hand of she father 's enemy . but proper pride and this poor lady have never have much acquaintance together . a disposition naturally simple and demand protection ; a long course of poverty and humility , of daily privation , and hard word , of kind office and no return , have be she lot ever since womanhood almost , or since she luckless marriage with . you who see you better bear up under this shame every day , meekly suffer under the slights of fortune , gentle and unpitied , poor , and rather despise for they poverty , do you ever step down from you prosperity and wash the foot of these poor weary beggar ? the very thought of they be odious and low . " there must be class -- there must be rich and poor , " Dive say , smack he claret ( it be well if he even send the broken meat out to sit under the window ) . very true ; but think how mysterious and often unaccountable it be -- that lottery of life which give to this man the purple and fine linen and send to the other rag for garment and dog for comforter . so I must own that , without much repining , on the contrary with something akin to gratitude , take the crumb that she father - in - law let drop now and then , and with they feed she own parent . directly she understand it to be
be she duty , it be this young woman 's nature ( lady , she be but thirty still , and we choose to call she a young woman even at that age ) it be , I say , she nature to sacrifice herself and to fl all that she have at the foot of the beloved object . during what long thankless night have she work out she finger for little whilst at home with she ; what buffet , scorn , privation , povertie have she endure for father and mother ! and in the midst of all these solitary resignation and unseen sacrifice , she do not respect herself any more than the world respect she , but I believe think in she heart that she be a poor -spirited , despicable little creature , whose luck in life be only too good for she merit . of you poor woman ! of you poor secret martyr and victim , whose life be a torture , who be stretch on rack in you bedroom , and who lay you head down on the block daily at the drawing - room table ; every man who watch you pain , or peer into those dark place where the torture be administer to you , must pity you -- and -- and thank that he have a beard . I recollect see , year ago , at the prison for idiot and madman at , near , a poor wretch bend down under the bondage of he imprisonment and he personal infirmity , to whom one of we party give a halfpenny worth of snuff in a cornet or " screw " of paper . the kindness be too much for the poor epileptic creature . he cry in a anguish of delight and gratitude : if anybody give you and I a thousand a year , or save we life , we could not be so affect . and so , if you properly tyrannize over a woman , you will find a h 'p' orth of kindness act upon she and bring tear into she eye , as though you be a angel benefit she . some such boon as these be the best which allot to poor little . she life , begin not unprosperously , have come down to this - - to a mean prison and a long , ignoble bondage . visit she captivity sometimes and consol it with feeble gleam of encouragement . be the boundary of she prison : she might walk thither occasionally , but be always back to sleep in she cell at night ; to perform cheerless duty ; to watch by thankless sick - bed ; to suffer the harassment and tyranny of querulous disappointed old age . how many thousand of people be there , woman for the most part , who be doom to endure this long slavery ?-- who be hospital nurse without wage --sister of , if you like , without the romance and the sentiment of sacrifice -- who strive , fast , watch , and suffer , unpitied , and fake away ignobly and unknown . the hidden and awful wisdom which apportion the destiny of mankind be pleased so to humiliate and cast down the tender , good , and wise , and to set up the selfish , the foolish , or the wicked . oh , be humble , my brother , in you prosperity ! be gentle with those who be less lucky , if not more deserve . think , what right have you to be scornful , whose virtue be a deficiency of temptation , whose success may be a chance , whose rank may be a ancestor 's accident , whose prosperity be very likely a satire . they bury 's mother in the churchyard at , upon just such a rainy , dark day as recollect when first she have be there to marry . she little boy sit by she side in pompous new sable . she remember the old pew-woman and clerk . she thought be away in other time as the parson read . but that she hold 's hand in she own , perhaps she would have like to change place with .... then , as usual , she feel asham of she selfish thought and praye inwardly to be strengthen to do she duty . so she determine with all she might and strength to try and make she old father happy . she slave , toil , patch , and mende , sang and play backgammon , read out the newspaper , cook dish , for old , walk he out sedulously into or the , listen to he story with untiring smile and affectionate hypocrisy , or sit musing by he side and commun with she own thought and reminiscence , as the old man , feeble and querulous , sunn himself on the garden benche and prattle about he wrongs or he sorrow . what sad , unsatisfactory thought those of the widow be ! the child run up and down the slope and broad path in the garden remind she of , who be take from she ; the first be take from she ; she selfish , guilty love , in both instance , have be rebuk and bitterly chastise . she strove to think it be right that she should be so punished . she be such a miserable wicked sinner . she be quite alone in the world . I know that the account of this kind of solitary imprisonment be insufferably tedious , unless there be some cheerful or humorous incident to enlive it -- a tender gaoler , for instance , or a waggish commandant of the fortress , or a mouse to come out and play about 's beard and whisker , or a subterranean passage under the
the castle , dug by with he nails and a toothpick : the historian have no such enlivening incident to relate in the narrative of 's captivity . Fancy she , if you please , during this period , very sad , but always ready to smile when speak to ; in a very mean , poor , not to say vulgar position of life ; singe song , make pudding , play card , mende stocking , for she old father 's benefit . so , never mind , whether she be a heroine or no ; or you and I , however old , scolding , and bankrupt -- may we have in we last day a kind soft shoulder on which to lean and a gentle hand to soothe we gouty old pillow . grow very fond of he daughter after he wife 's death , and have she consolation in do she duty by the old man . but we be not go to leave these two people long in such a low and ungenteel station of life . better day , as far as worldly prosperity go , be in store for both . perhaps the ingenious reader have guess who be the stout gentleman who call upon at he school in company with we old friend major . it be another old acquaintance return to , and at a time when he presence be likely to be of great comfort to he relative there . major Dobbin have easily succeed in get leave from he good - natured commandant to proceed to , and thence probably to , on urgent private affair , never cease travel night and day until he reach he journey 's end , and have direct he march with such celerity that he arrive at in a high fever . he servant who accompany he bring he to the house of the friend with whom he have resolve to stay until he departure for in a state of delirium ; and it be think for many , many day that he would never travel farther than the burying - ground of the church of 's , where the troops should fire a salvo over he grave , and where many a gallant officer lie far away from he home . here , as the poor fellow lay tossing in he fever , the people who watch he might have hear he rave about . the idea that he should never see she again depresse he in he lucid hour . he think he last day be come , and he make he solemn preparation for departure , set he affair in this world in order and leave the little property of which he be possess to those whom he must desire to benefit . the friend in whose house he be locate witness he testament . he desire to be bury with a little brown hair - chain which he wear round he neck and which , if the truth must be know , he have get from 's maid at , when the young widow 's hair be cut off , during the fever which prostrate she after the death of on the plateau at . he recover , rally , relapse again , have undergone such a process of blood - letting and calomel as show the strength of he original constitution . he be almost a skeleton when they put he on board the , , from , touch at , and so weak and prostrate that he friend who have tend he through he illness prophesy that the honest major would never survive the voyage , and that he would pass some morning , shroude in flag and hammock , over the ship 's side , and carry down to the sea with he the relic that he wear at he heart . but whether it be the sea air , or the hope which spring up in he afresh , from the day that the ship spread she canva and stand out of the roads towards home , we friend begin to amend , and he be quite well ( though as gaunt as a greyhound ) before they reach the cape . " will be disappointed of he majority this time , " he say with a smile ; " he will expect to find himself gazet by the time the regiment reach home . " for it must be premise that while the major be lie ill at , have make such prodigious haste to go thither , the gallant -- th , which have pass many year abroad , which after its return from the West Indies have be baulk of its stay at home by the campaign , and have be order from Flander to , have receive order home ; and the major might have accompany he comrade , have he choose to wait for they arrival at . perhaps he be not inclin to put himself in he exhausted state again under the guardianship of . " I think would have do for I , " he say laughingly to a fellow - passenger , " if we have have she on board , and when she have sink I , she would have fall upon you , depend upon it , and carry you in as a prize to , , my boy . " for indeed it be no other than we stout friend who be also a passenger on board the Ramchunder . he have pass ten year in . constant dinner , tiffin , pale ale and claret , the prodigious labour of cutcherry , and the refreshment of brandy - pawnee which he be force to take there , have they effect upon . a voyage to be pronounce necessary for he -- and have serve he full time in and have fine appointment which
which have enable he to lay by a considerable sum of money , he be free to come home and stay with a good pension , or to return and resume that rank in the service to which he seniority and he vast talents entitle he . he be rather thinner than when we last see he , but have gain in majesty and solemnity of demeanour . he have resume the mustachio to which he service at entitle he , and swagger about on deck in a magnificent velvet cap with a gold band and a profuse ornamentation of pin and jewellery about he person . he take breakfast in he cabin and dress as solemnly to appear on the quarter - deck as if he be go to turn out for , or the course at . he bring a native servant with he , who be he valet and pipe - bearer and who wear the crest in silver on he turban . that oriental menial have a wretched life under the tyranny of . be as vain of he person as a woman , and take as long a time at he toilette as any fading beauty . the youngster among the passenger , young Chaffer of the 150th , and poor little Ricketts , come home after he third fever , use to draw out at the cuddy - table and make he tell prodigious story about himself and he exploit against tiger and . he be great when he visit the 's tomb at , when to these gentleman and the young officer of the ship , major not be by , he describe the whole battle of and all but announce that never would have go to at all but for he , . after leave he become very generous , disposing of a great quantity of ship store , claret , preserve meat , and great cask pack with soda -water , bring out for he private delectation . there be no lady on board ; the major give the pa of precedency to the civilian , so that he be the first dignitary at table , and treat by and the officer of the with the respect which he rank warrant . he disappear rather in a panic during a two - day ' gale , in which he have the porthole of he cabin batten down , and remain in he cot read the of , leave on board the by the the , wife of the , when on they passage out to the cape , where the be a missionary ; but , for common reading , he have bring a stock of novel and play which he lent to the rest of the ship , and render himself agreeable to all by he kindness and condescension . many and many a night as the ship be cut through the roaring dark sea , the moon and star shin overhead and the bell singe out the watch , and the major would sit on the quarter - deck of the vessel talk about home , as the smoke he cheroot and the civilian puffe at the hookah which he servant prepare for he . in these conversation it be wonderful with what perseverance and ingenuity major would manage to bring the talk round to the subject of and she little boy . , a little testy about he father 's misfortune and unceremonious application to he , be soothe down by the major , who point out the elder 's ill fortune and old age . he would not perhaps like to live with the old couple , whose way and hour might not agree with those of a younger man , accustom to different society ( bow at this compliment ) ; but , the major point out , how advantageous it would be for to have a house of he own in , and not a mere bachelor 's establishment as before ; how he sister would be the very person to preside over it ; how elegant , how gentle she be , and of what refin good manners . he recount story of the success which have have in former day at , and in , where she be much admired by people of very great fashion ; and he then hint how become it would be for to send to a good school and make a man of he , for he mother and she parent would be sure to spoil he . in a word , this artful major make the civilian promise to take charge of and she unprotected child . he do not know as yet what event have happene in the little family , and how death have remove the mother , and riche have carry off from . but the fact be that every day and always , this love -smitten and middle - aged gentleman be think about , and he whole heart be bent upon do she good . he coax , wheedle , cajol , and compliment with a perseverance and cordiality of which he be not aware himself , very likely ; but some man who have unmarried sister or daughter even , may remember how uncommonly agreeable gentleman be to the male relation when they be court the female ; and perhaps this rogue of a be urge by a similar hypocrisy . the truth be , when major come on board the Ramchumder , very sick , and for the three day she lay in the , he do not begin to rally , nor do even the appearance and recognition of he old acquaintance , , on board much cheer he , until after a conversation which they have one day , as the major be laid languidly on the deck . he say then he think he be doom ; he
he have leave a little something to he godson in he will , and he trust . Osborne would remember he kindly and be happy in the marriage she be about to make . " ? not the least , " answer ; " he have hear from she : she make no mention of the marriage , and by the way , it be curiious , she write to say that be go to be married , and hope that he would be happy . " what be the date of 's letter from ? the civilian fetch they . they be two month later than the major 's ; and the ship 's surgeon congratulate himself upon the treatment adopt by he towards he new patient , who have be consign to shipboard by the practitioner with very small hope indeed ; for , from that day , the very day that he change the dratch , major begin to mmend . and thus it be that deserive officer , , be disappointed of he majority . after they pass , 's gaiety and strength be such as to astonish all he fellow passenger . he lark with the midshipman , play single - stick with the mate , run up the shroud like a boy , sang a comic song one night to the amusement of the whole party assemble over they grog after supper , and render himself so gay , lively , and amiable that even , who think there be nothing in he passenger , and consider he be a poor -spirited feller at first , be constrain to own that the major be a reserved but well - inform and meritorious officer . " he be not get distangy manners , dammy , " observe to he first mate ; " he would not do at , , where he and be as kind to I , and shake hand with I before the whole company , and ask I at dinner to take beer with he , before the - in - himself ; he be not get manners , but there be something about he -- " and thus show that he possess discrimination as a man , as well as ability as a commander . but a calm take place when the be within ten day ' sail of , become so impatient and ill - humoured as to surprise those comrade who have before admire he vivacity and good temper . he do not recover until the breeze spring up again , and be in a highly excited state when the pilot come on board . , how he heart beat as the two friendly spire of come in sight . we friend the major Our major have render himself so popular on board the Ramchunder that when he and descend into the welcome shore - boat which be to take they from the ship , the whole crew , man and officer , the great captain Bragg himself lead off , give three cheer for major , who blush very much and duck he head in token of thanks . , who very likely think the cheer be for himself , take off he gold - lace cap and wave it majestically to he friend , and they be pull to shore and land with great dignity at the pier , whence they proceed to the . although the sight of that magnificent round of beef , and the silver tankard suggestive of real british home - brew ale and porter , which perennially greet the eye of the traveller return from foreign part who enter the coffee - room of the , be so invigorating and delightful that a man enter such a comfortable snug homely might well like to stop some day there , yet begin to talk about a post -chaise instantly , and be no sooner at than he wish to be on the road to . , however , would not hear of move that evening . why be he to pass a night in a post-chaise instead of a great large undulating downy feather - bed which be there ready to replace the horrid little narrow crib in which the portly Bengal gentleman have be confine during the voyage ? he could not think of move till he baggage be cleared , or of travel until he could do so with he chillum . so the major be force to wait over that night , and dispatch a letter to he family announce he arrival , entreat from a promise to write to he own friend . Jos promise , but do not keep he promise . the , the surgeon , and one or two passenger come and dine with we two gentleman at the inn , exert himself in a sumptuous way in order the dinner and promise to go to town the next day with the major . the landlord say it do he eye good to see take off he first pint of porter . if I have time and da to enter into digression , I would write a chapter about that first pint of porter drink upon English ground . ah , how good it be ! it be worth - while to leave home for a year , just to enjoy that one dratch . major Dobbin make he appearance the next morning very neatly shave and dress , accord to he will not . indeed , it be so early in the morning that nobody be up in the house except that wonderful boot of a inn who never seem to want sleep ; and the major could hear the snore of the various inmate of the house roar through the corridor as he creak about in those dim passage . then the sleepless go shirk round from door to door , gather up at
at each the Blucher , Wellingtons , , which stand outside . then 's native servant arise and begin to get ready he master 's ponderous dressing apparatus and prepare he hookah ; then the maidservant get up , and meet the dark man in the passage , shriek , and mistake he for the devil . he and stumble over they pail in the passage as they be scour the deck of the . when the first unshorn waiter appear and unbar the door of the inn , the major think that the time for departure be arrive , and order a post -chaise to be fetch instantly , that they might set off . he then direct he step to 's room and open the curtain of the great large family be wherein be snor . " come , up ! , " the major say , " it be time to be off ; the chaise will be at the door in half a hour . " grow from under the counterpane to know what the time be ; but when he at last extort from the blushing major ( who never tell fib , however they might be to he advantage ) what be the real hour of the morning , he break out into a volley of bad language , which we will not repeat here , but by which he give to understand that he would jeopardy he soul if he get up at that moment , that the major might go and be hang , that he would not travel with , and that it be most unkind and ungentlemanlike to disturb a man out of he sleep in that way ; on which the discomfit major be oblige to retreat , leave to resume he interrupted slumber . the chaise come up presently , and the major would wait no longer . if he have be a english nobleman travel on a pleasure tour , or a newspaper courier bear dispatch ( government message be generally carry much more quietly ) , he could not have travel more quickly . the post -boy wonder at the fee he fling amongst they . how happy and gre the country look as the chaise whir rapidly from mile - stone to mile - stone , through neat country town where landlords come out to welcome he with smile and bow ; by pretty roadside inns , where the sign hang on the elm , and horse and waggoner be drink under the cheque shadow of the tree ; by old hall and park ; rustic hamlet cluster round ancient grey church -- and through the charming friendly English landscape . be there any in the world like it ? to a traveller return home it look so kind -- it seem to shake hand with you as you pass through it . well , pass through all this from to , and without no much beyond the milestone along the road . you see he be so eager to see he parent at . he grudge the time lose between and he old haunt at the ' , whither he drive faithfully . long year have pass since he see it last , since he and , as young man , have enjoy many a feast , and hold many a revel there . he have now pass into the stage of old - fellow - hood . he hair be grizzl , and many a passion and feeling of he youth have grow grey in that interval . there , however , stand the old waiter at the door , in the same greasy black suit , with the same double ching and flaccid face , with the same huge bunch of seal at he fob , ratt he money in he pocket as before , and receive the major as if he have go away only a week ago . " put the major 's thing in twenty - three , that be he room , " say , exhibit not the least surprise . " roast fowl for you dinner , I suppose . you be not get married ? they say you be marry -- the surgeon of yours be here . no , it be of the thirty - third , as be quarter with the -- th in . like any warm water ? what do you come in a chay for -- be not the coach good enough ? " and with this , the faithful waiter , who know and remember every officer who use the house , and with whom ten year were but as yesterday , lead the way up to 's old room , where stand the great moreen bed , and the shabby carpet , a think more dingy , and all the old black furniture cover with fad chintz , just as the major recollect they in he youth . he remember pace up and down the room , and bite he nail , and swear that the must come round , and that if he do not , he do not care a straw , on the day before he be marry . he could fancy he walk in , bang the door of 's room , and he own hard by -- " you be not get young , " say , calmly survey he friend of former day . laugh . " ten year and a fever do not make a man young , , " he say . " it be you that be always young -- no , you be always old . " " what become of 's widow ? " say . " young fellow that . , how he use to spend he money . he never come back after that day he be march from here . he owe I three pound at
at this minute . look here , I have it in my book . ' 10 , 1815 , : ' 3 pound . ' I wonder whether he father would pay I , " and so say , of the ' pull out the very morocco pocket - book in which he have not he loan to the , upon a greasy faded page still extant , with many other scrawle memoranda regard the bygone frequenter of the house . have induct he customer into the room , retire with perfect calmness ; and , not without a blush and a grin at he own absurdity , choose out of he kit the very smartest and most become civil costume he possess , and laugh at he own tan face and grey hair , as he survey they in the dreary little toilet - glass on the dressing - table . " I be glad old do not forget I , " he think . " she will know I , too , I hope . " and he sally out of the inn , bend he step once more in the direction of . every minute incident of he last meeting with be present to the constant man 's mind as he walk towards she house . the arch and the Achille statue be up since he have last be in ; a hundred change have occur which he eye and mind vaguly no . he begin to tremble as he walk up the lane from , that well - remember lane lead to the street where she liv . be she go to be marry or not ? if he be to meet she with the little boy -- , what should he do ? he see a woman come to he with a child of five year old -- be that she ? he begin to shake at the mere possibility . when he come up to the row of house , at last , where she liv , and to the gate , he catch hold of it and pause . he might have hear the thumping of he own heart . " bless she , whatever have happen , " he think to himself . " ! she may be go from here , " he say and go in through the gate . the window of the parlour which she use to occupy be open , and there be no inmate in the room . the major think he recognize the piano , though , with the picture over it , as it use to be in former day , and he perturbation be renew . 's brass plate be still on the door , at the knocker of which perform a summon . a buxom - look lass of sixteen , with bright eye and purple cheek , come to answer the knock and look hard at the major as he lean back against the little porch . he be as pale as a ghost and could hardly falter out the word -- " do live here ? " she look he hard in the face for a moment -- and then turn white too --said , " bless I -- it be major . " she hold out both she hand shak -- " do not you remember I ? " she say . " I use to call you major Sugarplums . " on which , and I believe it be for the first time that he ever so conduct himself in he life , the major take the girl in he arm and kiss she . she begin to laugh and cry hysterically , and call out " ma , ! " with all she voice , bring up those worthy people , who have already be survey the major from the casement of the ornamental kitchen , and be astonished to find they daughter in the little passage in the embrace of a great tall man in a blue frock - coat and white duck trousers . " I be a old friend , " he say -- not without blush though . " do not you remember I , , and those good cake you use to make for tea ? do not you recollect I , ? I be 's godfather , and just come back from . " a great shaking of hand ensue -- . be greatly affect and delight ; she call upon heaven to interpose a vast many time in that passage . the landlord and landlady of the house lead the worthy major into the ' room ( wherehave he remember every single article of furniture , from the old brass ornament piano , once a natty little instrument , maker , to the screen and the alabaster miniature tombstone , in the midst of which tick 's gold watch ) , and there , as he sit down in the lodger 's vacant arm - chair , the father , the mother , and the daughter , with a thousand ejaculatory break in the narrative , inform major Dobbin of what we know already , but of particular in 's history of which he be not aware -- namely of 's death , of 's reconcilement with he grandfather , of the way in which the widow take on at leave he , and of other particulars of she life . twice or thrice he be go to ask about the marriage question , but he heart fail he . he do not care to lay it bear to these people . finally , he be inform that . o . be gone to walk with she pa in , whither she always go with the old gentleman ( who be very weak and peevish now , and lead she a sad life , though she behave to he like a
a angel , to be sure ) , of a fine afternoon , after dinner . " I be very much presse for time , " the major say , " and have business to - night of importance . I should like to see tho ' . suppose Polly would come with I and show I the way ? " be charme and astonished at this proposal . she know the way . she would show Major . she have often be with when be gone -- be gone way -- and know the bench where he like to sit . she bounce away to she apartment and appear presently in she best bonnet and she mamma 's yellow shawl and large pebble brooch , of which she assume the loan in order to make herself a worthy companion for the major . that officer , then , in he blue frock - coat and buckskin glove , give the young lady he arm , and they walk away very gaily . he be glad to have a friend at hand for the scene which he dread somehow . he ask a thousand more question from he companion about : he kind heart grieve to think that she should have have to part with she son . how do she bear it ? do she see he often ? be pretty comfortable now in a worldly point of view ? Polly answer all these question of major Sugarplum to the very best of she power . and in the midst of they walk a incident occur which , though very simple in its nature , be productive of the greatest delight to major . a pale young man with feeble whisker and a stiff white neckcloth come walk down the lane , en sandwich -- have a lady , that be , on each arm . one be a tall and commande middle - aged female , with feature and a complexion similar to those of the clergyman of the of by whose side she march , and the other a stunt little woman with a dark face , ornament by a fine new bonnet and white ribbon , and in a smart pelisse , with a rich gold watch in the midst of she person . the gentleman , pinion as he be by these two lady , carry further a parasol , shawl , and basket , so that he arm be entirely engage , and of course he be unable to touch he hat in acknowledgement of the curtsey with which greet he . he merely bow he head in reply to she salutation , which the two lady return with a patronizing air , and at the same time look severely at the individual in the blue coat and bamboo cane who accompany . " who be that ? " ask the major , amuse by the group , and after he have make way for the three to pass up the lane . look at he rather roguishly . " that be we curate , the ( a twitch from ) , and he sister . bless we , how she do use to worret we at - school ; and the other lady , the little one with a cast in she eye and the handsome watch , be -- Grits that be ; she pa be a grocer , and keep the in . they be marry last month , and be just come back from . she be five thousand pound to she fortune ; but she and , who make the match , have quarrell already . " if the major have twitch before , he start now , and slap the bamboo on the ground with a emphasis which make cry , " law , " and laugh too . he stand for a moment , silent , with open mouth , look after the retreating young couple , while tell they history ; but he do not hear beyond the announcement of the reverend gentleman 's marriage ; he head be swim with felicity . after this rencontre he begin to walk double quick towards the place of he destination -- and yet they be too soon ( for he be in a great tremor at the idea of a meeting for which he have be long any time these ten year ) -- through the lane , and enter at the little old portal in wall . " there they be , " say , and she feel he again start back on she arm . she be a confidante at once of the whole business . she know the story as well as if she have read it in one of she favourite novel - book -- , or the . " suppose you be to run on and tell she , " the major say . Polly run forward , she yellow shawl streame in the breeze . be seat on a bench , he handkerchief place over he knee , prattl away , accord to he wont , with some old story about old time to which have listen and award a patient smile many a time before . she could of late think of she own affair , and smile or make other mark of recognition of she father 's story , scarcely hear a word of the old man 's tale . as come bouncing along , and catch sight of she , she start up from she bench . she first thought be that something have happene to , but the sight of the messenger 's eager and happy face dissipate that fear in the timorous mother 's bosom . " news ! news ! " cry the emissary of major . " he be come ! he be come ! " " who be come ? " say , still think
think of she son . " look there , " answer , turn round and point ; in which direction look , see 's lean figure and long shadow stalk across the grass . start in she turn , blush up , and , of course , begin to cry . at all this simple little creature 's fete , the grande eaux be accustom to play . he look at she -- oh , how fondly -- as she come run towards he , she hand before she , ready to give they to he . she be not change . she be a little pale , a little stouter in figure . she eye be the same , the kind trustful eye . there be scarce three line of silver in she soft brown hair . she give he both she hand as she look up flushing and smile through she tear into he honest homely face . he take the two little hand between he two and hold they there . he be speechless for a moment . why do he not take she in he arm and swear that he would never leave she ? she must have yield : she could not but have obey he . " I -- I have another arrival to announce , " he say after a pause . " ? " say , make a movement back -- why do not he speak ? " no , " he say , let she hand go : " who have tell you those lie ? I mean , you brother come in the same ship with I , and be come home to make you all happy . " " , ! " Emmy cry out , " here be news ! my brother be in . he be come to take care of you . here be major . " start up , shake a great deal and gather up he thought . then he step forward and make a old - fashioned bow to the major , whom he call , and hope he worthy father , , be quite well . he propose to call upon , who have do he the honour of a visit a short time ago . have not call upon the old gentleman for eight year -- it be that visit he be think of return . " he be very much shaken , " whisper as go up and cordially shook hand with the old man . although he have such particular business in that evening , the major consent to forego it upon 's invitation to he to come home and partake of tea . put she arm under that of she young friend with the yellow shawl and head the party on they return homeward , so that fell to 's share . the old man walk very slowly and tell a number of ancient histories about himself and he poor Bessy , he former prosperity , and he bankruptcy . he thought , as be usual with fail old man , be quite in former time . the present , with the exception of the one catastrophe which he feel , he know little about . the major be glad to let he talk on . he eye be fix upon the figure in front of he -- the dear little figure always present to he imagination and in he prayer , and visit he dream wakeful or slumber . be very happy , smile , and active all that evening , perform she duty as hostess of the little entertainment with the utmost grace and propriety , as think . he eye follow she about as they sit in the twilight . how many a time have he longe for that moment and think of she far away under hot wind and in weary march , gentle and happy , kindly ministere to the wants of old age , and decorate poverty with sweet submission -- as he see she now . I do not say that he taste be the highest , or that it be the duty of great intellect to be content with a bread - and - butter paradise , such as suffice we simple old friend ; but he desire be of this sort , whether for good or bad , and , with to help he , he be as ready to drink as many cup of tea as . see this propensity , laughingly encourage it and look exceedingly roguish as she administer to he cup after cup . it be true she do not know that the major have have no dinner and that the cloth be laid for he at the ' , and a plate laid thereon to mark that the table be retain , in that very box in which the major and have sit many a time carousing , when she be a child just come home from 's school . the first thing show the major be 's miniature , for which she run upstairs on she arrival at home . it be not half handsome enough of course for the boy , but be not it noble of he to think of bring it to he mother ? whilst she papa be awake she do not talk much about . to hear about and be not agreeable to the old man , who very likely be unconscious that he have be live for some month past mainly on the bounty of he richer rival , and lose he temper if allusion be make to the other . tell he all , and a little more perhaps than all , that have happen on board the Ramchunder , and exaggerate 's benevolent disposition towards he father and resolution to make he comfortable in he old day . the truth be that during the voyage the
the major have impress this duty most strongly upon he fellow - passenger and extort promise from he that he would take charge of he sister and she child . he soothe 's irritation with regard to the bill which the old gentleman have draw upon he , give a laugh account of he own suffering on the same score and of the famious consignment of wine with which the old man have favour he , and bring , who be by no means a ill - natured person when well - pleased and moderately flatter , to a very good state of feeling regard he relative in . and in fine I be asham to say that the major stretch the truth so far as to tell old that it be mainly a desire to see he parent which bring once more to . at he accustomed hour begin to doze in he chair , and then it be 's opportunity to commence she conversation , which she do with great eagerness -- it relate exclusively to . she do not talk at all about she own suffering at breaking from he , for indeed , this worthy woman , though she be half - kill by the separation from the child , yet think it be very wicked in she to repine at lose he ; but everything concern he , he virtue , talents , and prospect , she pour out . she describe he angelic beauty ; narrate a hundred instance of he generosity and greatness of mind whilst live with she ; how a have stop and admire he in ; how splendidly he be care for now , and how he have a groom and a pony ; what quickness and cleverness he have , and what a prodigiously well - read and delightful person the be , 's master . " he know everything , " say . " he have the most delightful party . you who be so learn yourself , and have read so much , and be so clever and accomplish -- do not shake you head and say no -- he always use to say you be -- you will be charme with 's party . the last in every month . he say there be no place in the bar or the senate that may not aspire to . look here , " and she go to the piano - drawer and draw out a theme of 's composition . this great effort of , which be still in the possession of 's mother , be as follow : on Selfishness -- of all the vice which degrade the human character , Selfishness be the most odious and contemptible . a undue love of self lead to the most monstrous crime and occasion the greatest misfortune both in and . as a selfish man will impoverish he family and often bring they to ruin , so a selfish king bring ruin on he people and often plunge they into war . example : the selfishness of Achille , as remark by the poet Homer , occasion a thousand woe to the Greeks --muri Achaiois alge etheke -- ( . . A . 2 ) . the selfishness of the late occasion innumerable wars in and cause he to perish , himself , in a miserable island -- that of in the . we see by these example that we be not to consult we own interest and ambition , but that we be to consider the interest of other as well as we own . , 24 , 1827 " think of he write such a hand , and quote too , at he age , " the delighted mother say . " oh , , " she add , hold out she hand to the major , " what a treasure have give I in that boy ! he be the comfort of my life -- and he be the image of -- of he that have go ! " " ought I to be angry with she for be faithful to he ? " thought . " ought I to be jealous of my friend in the grave , or hurt that such a heart as 's can love only once and for ever ? oh , , , how little you know the prize you have , though . " this sentiment pass rapidly through 's mind as he be hold 's hand , whilst the handkerchief be veil she eye . " dear friend , " she say , presse the hand which hold hers , " how good , how kind you always have be to I ! see ! be stirr . you will go and see tomorrow , will not you ? " " not to - morrow , " say poor old . " I have business . " he do not like to own that he have not as yet be to he parent ' and he dear sister -- a remissness for which I be sure every well - regulate person will blame the major . and presently he take he leave , leave he address behind he for , against the latter 's arrival . and so the first day be over , and he have see she . when he get back to the ' , the roast fowl be of course cold , in which condition he eat it for supper . and know what early hour he family keep , and that it would be needless to disturb they slumber at so late a hour , it be on record , that major Dobbin treat himself to half - price at the theatre that evening , where let we hope he enjoy himself . the the major 's visit leave old in a great state of agitation and excitement . he daughter could not
not induce he to settle down to he customary occupations or amusement that night . he pass the evening fumbl amongst he box and desk , unty he papers with trembling hand , and sort and arrange they against 's arrival . he have they in the greatest order -- he tap and he file , he receipt , and he letter with lawyer and correspondent ; the document relative to the wine project ( which fail from a most unaccountable accident , after commence with the most splendid prospect ) , the coal project ( which only a want of capital prevent from become the most successful scheme ever put before the public ) , the patent saw- mill and sawdust consolidation project , & c. , &c . all night , until a very late hour , he pass in the preparation of these document , trembl about from one room to another , with a quivering candle and shaky hand . here be the wine papers , here be the sawdust , here be the coal ; here be my letter to and , and reply from major , , and to the same . " he shall find no irregularity about , , " the old gentleman say . smile . " I do not think will care about see those papers , , " she say . " you do not know anything about business , my dear , " answer the sire , shak he head with a important air . and it must be confess that on this point be very ignorant , and that be a pity some people be so knowe . all these twopenny document arrange on a side table , old cover they carefully over with a clean bandan to handkerchief ( one out of 's lot ) and enjoin the maid and landlady of the house , in the most solemn way , not to disturb those papers , which be arrange for the arrival of the next morning , " of the 's . " find he up very early the next morning , more eager , more hectic , and more shaky than ever . " I do not sleep much , , my dear , " he say . " I be think of my poor Bessy . I wish she be alive , to ride in 's carriage once again . she keep she own and become it very well . " and he eye fill with tear , which trickl down he furrow old face . wip they away , and smilingly kiss he , and tie the old man 's neckcloth in a smart bow , and put he brooch into he best shirt frill , in which , in he suit of mourning , he sit from six o'clock in the morning await the arrival of he son . however , when the postman make he appearance , the little party be put out of suspense by the receipt of a letter from to he sister , who announce that he feel a little fatigue after he voyage , and should not be able to move on that day , but that he would leave early the next morning and be with he father and mother at evening . , as she read out the letter to she father , pause over the latter word ; she brother , it be clear , do not know what have happene in the family . could he , for the fact be that , though the major rightly suspect that he travel companion never would be get into motion in so short a space as twenty - four hour , and would find some excuse for delaying , yet have not write to to inform he of the calamity which have befall the family , be occupy in talk with until long after post-hour . there be some splendid tailor 's shop in the of , in the fine plate - glass window of which hang gorgeous waistcoat of all sort , of silk and velvet , and gold and crimson , and picture of the last new fashions , in which those wonderful gentleman with quizzing glass , and hold on to little boy with the exceed large eye and curly hair , ogle lady in riding habits prance by the statue of Achilles at . , although provide with some of the most splendid vest that could furnish , think he could not go to town until he be supply with one or two of these garment , and select a crimson satin , embroider with gold butterfly , and a black and red velvet tartan with white stripe and a rolling collar , with which , and a rich blue satin stock and a gold pin , consist of a five - barr gate with a horseman in pink enamel jump over it , he think he might make he entry into with some dignity . for 's former shyness and blunder blushing timidity have give way to a more candid and courageous self - assertion of he worth . " I do not care about own it , " would say to he friend , " I be a dressy man " ; and though rather uneasy if the lady look at he at the government House ball , and though he blush and turn away alarme under they glance , it be chiefly from a dread lest they should make love to he that he avoid they , be averse to marriage altogether . but there be no such swell in as , I have hear say , and he have the handsomest turn - out , give the best bachelor dinner , and have the finest plate in the whole place . to make these waistcoat for a man of he size and dignity take at least a
a day , part of which he employ in hire a servant to wait upon he and he native and in instruct the agent who clear he baggage , he box , he book , which he never read , he chest of mangoe , chutney , and curry -powder , he shawl for present to people whom he do not know as yet , and the rest of he apparatus . at length , he drive leisurely to on the third day and in the new waistcoat , the native , with chatter tooth , shudder in a shawl on the box by the side of the new european servant ; puffe he pipe at interval within and look so majestic that the little boy cry Hooray , and many people think he must be a governor- General . he , I promise , do not decline the obsequious invitation of the landlord to alight and refresh himself in the neat country town . have partaken of a copious breakfast , with fish , and rice , and hard egg , at , he have so far rally at as to think a glass of sherry necessary . at he step out of the carriage at he servant 's request and imbibe some of the ale for which the place be famous . at he stop to view the 's and to partake of a light dinner of stew eel , veal cutlet , and french bean , with a bottle of claret . he be cold over , where the native chatter more and more , and take some brandy - and - water ; in fact , when he drive into town he be as full of wine , beer , meat , pickle , cherry - brandy , and tobacco as the steward 's cabin of a steam - packet . it be eve when he carriage thunder up to the little door in , whither the affectionate fellow drive first , and before hie to the apartment secure for he by at the ' . all the face in the street be in the window ; the little maidservant flew to the wicket - gate ; the look out from the casement of the ornamented kitchen ; , in a great flutter , be in the passage among the hat and coat ; and old in the parlour inside , shak all over . descend from the post-chaise and down the creaking sway step in awful state , support by the new valet from and the shuddering native , whose brown face be now livid with cold and of the colour of a turkey 's gizzard . he create a immense sensation in the passage presently , where and , come perhaps to listen at the parlour door , find shak upon the hall - bench under the coat , moan in a strange piteous way , and show he yellow eyeball and white tooth . for , you see , we have adroitly shut the door upon the meeting between and the old father and the poor little gentle sister inside . the old man be very much affected ; so , of course , be he daughter ; nor be without feel . in that long absence of ten year , the most selfish will think about home and early tie . distance sanctify both . long brooding over those lose pleasure exaggerate they charm and sweetness . be unaffectedly glad to see and shake the hand of he father , between whom and himself there have be a coolness -- glad to see he little sister , whom he remember so pretty and smile , and pain at the alteration which time , grief , and have make in the shattered old man . Emmy have come out to the door in she black clothes and whisper to he of she mother 's death , and not to speak of it to they father . there be no need of this caution , for the elder himself begin immediately to speak of the event , and prattle about it , and wept over it plenteously . it shocke the indian not a little and make he think of himself less than the poor fellow be accustom to do . the result of the interview must have be very satisfactory , for when have reascend he post-chaise and have drive away to he hotel , embrace she father tenderly , appeal to he with a air of triumph , and ask the old man whether she do not always say that she brother have a good heart ? indeed , , affect by the humble position in which he find he relation , and in the expansiveness and overflow of heart occasion by the first meeting , declare that they should never suffer want or discomfort any more , that he be at home for some time at any rate , during which he house and everything he have should be theirs : and that would look very pretty at the head of he table -- until she would accept one of she own . she shook she head sadly and have , as usual , recourse to the waterwork . she know what he mean . she and she young confidante , , have talk over the matter most fully , the very night of the major 's visit , beyond which time the impetuous could not refrain from talk of the discovery which she have make , and describe the start and tremor of joy by which betraye himself when pass with he bride and the major learn that he have no longer a rival to fear . " do not you see how he shook all over when you ask if he be marry and he say , ' who tell you those lie ? ' oh , , " Polly
Polly say , " he never keep he eye off you , and I be sure he be grow grey athinking of you . " but , look up at she bed , over which hng the portrait of she husband and son , tell she young protegee never , never , to speak on that subject again ; that major Dobbin have be she husband 's dearest friend and she own and 's most kind and affectionate guardian ; that she love he as a brother -- but that a woman who have be marry to such a angel as that , and she point to the wall , could never think of any other union . poor Polly sigh : she think what she should do if young , at the surgery , who always look at she so at church , and who , by those mere aggressive glance have put she timorous little heart into such a flutter that she be ready to surrender at once , -- what she should do if he be to die ? she know he be consumptive , he cheek be so red and he be so uncommon thing in the waist . not that , be make aware of the honest major 's passion , rebuff he in any way , or felt displease with he . such a attachment from so true and loyal a gentleman could make no woman angry . be not angry with , though there be very little doubt she see the 's partiality for she ( and I for my part believe that many more thing take place in that sad affair than the worthy Moorish officer ever know of ) ; why , be even very kind to , and we may be pretty sure for the same reason . not that she would encourage he in the least -- the poor uncouth monster -- of course not . no more would Emmy by any means encourage she admirer , the major . she would give he that friendly regard , which so much excellence and fidelity merit ; she would treat he with perfect cordiality and frankness until he make he proposal , and then it would be time enough for she to speak and to put a end to hope which never could be realize . she sleep , therefore , very soundly that even , after the conversation with , and be more than ordinarily happy , in spite of 's delaying . " I be glad he be not go to marry that , " she think . " never could have a sister fit for such a accomplished man as major . " who be there amongst she little circle who would make he a good wife ? not , she be too old and ill - tempered ; ? too old too . be too young . could not find anybody to suit the major before she go to sleep . the same morning bring major Dobbin a letter to the 's coffee - house from he friend at , begge dear Dob to excuse for be in a rage when awaken the day before ( he have a confounded headache , and be just in he first sleep ) , and entreat to engage comfortable room at the ' for and he servants . the major have become necessary to during the voyage . he be attach to he , and hang upon he . the other passenger be away to . yong Ricketts and little Chaffers go away on the coach that day -- Ricketts on the box , and take the rein from ; the Doctor be off to he family at ; go to town to he co-partner ; and the first mate busy in the unloading of the . be very lonely at , and get the landlord of the to take a glass of wine with he that day , at the very hour at which major Dobbin be seat at the table of he father , , where he sister find out ( for it be impossible for the major to tell fib ) that he have be to see . be so comfortably situate in 's , he could enjoy he hookah there with such perfect ease , and could swagger down to the theatre , when minded , so agreeably , that , perhaps , he would have remain altogether at the ' have not he friend , the major , be at he elbow . that gentleman would not let the rest until he have execute he promise of have a home for and he father . be a soft fellow in anybody 's hand , Dobbin most active in anybody 's concern but he own ; the civilian be , therefore , a easy victim to the guileless art of this good - natured diplomatist and be ready to do , to purchase , hire , or relinquish whatever he friend think fit . , of whom the boy about 's use to make cruel fun whenever he show he dusky countenance in the street , be send back to in the , in which have a share , have previously teach 's the art of prepare curry , pilaus , and pipe . it be a matter of great delight and occupation to to superintend the building of a smart chariot which he and the major order in the neighbour : and a pair of handsome horse be job , with which drive about in state in the park , or to call upon he indian friend . be not seldom by he side on these excursion , when also major would be see in the back seat of the carriage . at other time old and he daughter take advantage of it , and , who frequently accompany she friend , have great pleasure
pleasure in be recognize as she sit in the carriage , dress in the famious yellow shawl , by the young gentleman at the surgery , whose face might commonly be see over the window - blind as she pass . shortly after 's first appearance at , a dismal scene , indeed , take place at that humble cottage at which the have pass the last ten year of they life . 's carriage ( the temporary one , not the chariot under construction ) arrive one day and carry off old and he daughter -- to return no more . the tear that be shed by the landlady and the landlady 's daughter at that event be as genuine tear of sorrow as any that have be outpoure in the course of this history . in they long acquaintanceship and intimacy they could not recall a harsh word that have be utter by she have be all sweetness and kindness , always thankful , always gentle , even when lose she own temper and press for the rent . when the kind creature be go away for good and all , the landlady reproach herself bitterly for ever have use a rough expression to she -- how she weep , as they stick up with wafer on the window , a paper notify that the little room so long occupy were to let ! they never would have such lodger again , that be quite clear . after - life prove the truth of this melancholy prophecy , and . revenge herself for the deterioration of mankind by levy the most savage contribution upon the tea - caddy and leg of mutton of she locataire . most of they scolde and grumble ; some of they do not pay ; none of they stay . the landlady might well regret those old , old friend , who have leave she . as for , she sorrow at 's departure be such as I shall not attempt to depict . from childhood upwards she have be with she daily and have attach herself so passionately to that dear good lady that when the grand barouche come to carry she off into splendour , she faint in the arm of she friend , who be indeed scarcely less affect than the good - natured girl . love she like a daughter . during eleven year the girl have be she constant friend and associate . the separation be a very painful one indeed to she . but it be of course arrange that be to come and stay often at the grand new house whither be go , and where be sure she would never be so happy as she have be in they humble cot , as call it , in the language of the novel which she love . let we hope she be wrong in she judgement . 's day of happiness have be very few in that humble cot . a gloomy Fate have oppress she there . she never like to come back to the house after she have leave it , or to face the landlady who have tyrannize over she when ill - humoured and unpaid , or when please have treat she with a coarse familiarity scarcely less odious . she servility and fulsome compliment when be in prosperity be not more to that lady have like . she cast about note of admiration all over the new house , extoll every article of furniture or ornament ; she finger 's dress and calculate they price . nothing could be too good for that sweet lady , she vow and protest . but in the vulgar sycophant who now pay court to she , always remember the coarse tyrant who have make she miserable many a time , to whom she have be force to put up petition for time , when the rent be overdue ; who cry out at she extravagance if she buy delicacies for she ailing mother or father ; who have see she humble and trample upon she . nobody ever hear of these grief , which have be part of we poor little woman 's lot in life . she keep they secret from she father , whose improvidence be the cause of much of she misery . she have to bear all the blame of he misdoing , and indeed be so utterly gentle and humble as to be make by nature for a victim . I hope she be not to suffer much more of that hard usage . and , as in all grief there be say to be some consolation , I may mention that poor , when leave at she friend 's departure in a hysterical condition , be place under the medical treatment of the young fellow from the surgery , under whose care she rally after a short period . , when she go away from , endow with every article of furniture that the house contain , only take away she picture ( the two picture over the bed ) and she piano -- that little old piano which have now pass into a plaintive jingling old age , but which she love for reason of she own . she be a child when first she play on it , and she parent give it she . it have be give to she again since , as the reader may remember , when she father 's house be gone to ruin and the instrument be recovere out of the wreck . major be exceedingly pleased when , as he be superintend the arrangement of 's new house -- which the major insist should be very handsome and comfortable -- the cart arrive from , bring the trunk and bandbox of the emigrant from that village , and with they the old piano . would have it up in she
she sitting - room , a neat little apartment on the second floor , adjoin she father 's chamber , and where the old gentleman sit commonly of evening . when the man appear then bear this old music - box , and give order that it should be place in the chamber aforesay , be quite elated . " I be glad you have keep it , " he say in a very sentimental manner . " I be afraid you do not care about it . " " I value it more than anything I have in the world , " say . " do you , ? " cry the major . the fact be , as he have buy it himself , though he never say anything about it , it never enter into he head to suppose that should think anybody else be the purchaser , and as a matter of course he fancie that she know the gift come from he . " do you , ? " he say ; and the question , the great question of all , be trembl on he lip , when reply -- " can I do otherwise ?-- do not he give it I ? " " I do not know , " say poor old , and he countenance fell . do not note the circumstance at the time , nor take immediate heed of the very dismal expression which honest Dobbin 's countenance assume , but she think of it afterwards . and then it strike she , with inexpressible pain and mortification too , that it be who be the giver of the piano , and not , as she have fancie . it be not 's gift ; the only one which she have receive from she lover , as she think -- the thing she have cherish beyond all other -- she dearest relic and prize . she have speak to it about ; play he favourite air upon it ; sit for long evening hour , touching , to the best of she simple art , melancholy harmoney on the key , and weep over they in silence . it be not 's relic . it be valueless now . the next time that old ask she to play , she say it be shockingly out of tune , that she have a headache , that she could not play . then , accord to she custom , she rebuk herself for she pettishness and ingratitude and determined to make a reparation to honest for the slight she have not express to he , but have felt for he piano . a few day afterwards , as they be seat in the drawing - room , where have fall asleep with great comfort after dinner , say with rather a falter voice to -- " I have to beg you pardon for something . " " about what ? " say he . " about -- about that little square piano . I never thank you for it when you give it I , many , many year ago , before I be marry . I think somebody else have give it . thank you , . " she hold out she hand , but the poor little woman 's heart be bleed ; and as for she eye , of course they be at they work . but could hold no more . " , , " he say , " I do buy it for you . I love you then as I do now . I must tell you . I think I love you from the first minute that I see you , when bring I to you house , to show I the whom he be engage to . you be but a girl , in white , with large ringlet ; you come down singing -- do you remember ?-- and we go to . since then I have think of but one woman in the world , and that be you . I think there be no hour in the day have pass for twelve year that I have not think of you . I come to tell you this before I go to , but you do not care , and I have not the heart to speak . you do not care whether I stay or go . " " I be very ungrateful , " say . " no , only indifferent , " continue desperately . " I have nothing to make a woman to be otherwise . I know what you be feel now . you be hurt in you heart at the discovery about the piano , and that it come from I and not from . I forget , or I should never have speak of it so . it be for I to ask you pardon for be a fool for a moment , and think that year of constancy and devotion might have plead with you . " " it be you who be cruel now , " say with some spirit . " be my husband , here and in heaven . how could I love any other but he ? I be he now as when you first see I , dear . it be he who tell I how good and generous you be , and who teach I to love you as a brother . have you not be everything to I and my boy ? we dearest , truest , kindest friend and protector ? have you come a few month sooner perhaps you might have spare I that -- that dreadful parting . oh , it nearly kill I , -- but you do not come , though I wish and pray for you to come , and they take he too away from I . be not he
he a noble boy , ? be he friend still and mine " -- and here she voice break , and she hide she face on he shoulder . the major fold he arm round she , hold she to he as if she be a child , and kiss she head . " I will not change , dear , " he say . " I ask for no more than you love . I think I would not have it otherwise . only let I stay near you and see you often . " " yes , often , " say . and so be at liberty to look and long -- as the poor boy at school who have no money may sigh after the contents of the tart - woman 's tray . return to the now begin to smile upon . we be glad to get she out of that low sphere in which she have be creep hithertoo and introduce she into a polite circle -- not so grand and refin as that in which we other female friend , , have appear , but still have no small pretension to gentility and fashion . 's friend be all from the three presidency , and he new house be in the comfortable Anglo- indian district of which be the centre . , , , , , , ( " garden " be a felicitous word not apply to stucco house with asphalt terrace in front , so early as 1827 ) -- who do not know these respectable abode of the retire indian aristocracy , and the quarter which call the , in a word ? 's position in life be not grand enough to entitle he to a house in , where none can live but retire member of , and partner of indian firm ( who break , after have settle a hundred thousand pound on they wife , and retire into comparative penury to a country place and four thousand a year ) ; he engage a comfortable house of a second - or third - rate order in , purchase the carpet , costly mirror , and handsome and appropriate plan furniture by Seddons from the assignee of , lately admit partner into the great of , , and , in which poor have embark seventy thousand pound , the earning of a long and honourable life , take 's place , who retire to a princely park in ( the Fogles have be long out of the firm , and be about to be raise to the peerage as ) --admit , I say , partner into the great agency house of Fogle and fake two year before it fail for a million and plunge half the indian public into misery and ruin . Scape , ruin , honest , and break - heart at sixty - five year of age , go out to to wind up the affair of the house . be withdraw from and put into a merchant 's house . , , and they mother fade away to , and will be hear of no more . to be brief , step in and buy they carpet and sideboard and admire himself in the mirror which have reflecte they kind handsome face . the tradesman , all honourably pay , leave they card , and be eager to supply the new household . the large man in white waistcoat who wait at 's dinner , greengrocer , bank - porter , and milkman in they private capacity , leave they address and ingratiate themselves with the butler . , the chimney - purifier , who have sweep the last three family , try to coax the butler and the boy under he , whose duty it be to go out cover with button and with stripe down he trousers , for the protection of whenever she choose to walk abroad . it be a modest establishment . the butler be 's valet also , and never be more drunk than a butler in a small family should be who have a proper regard for he master 's wine . be supply with a maid , grow on 's suburban estate ; a good girl , whose kindness and humility disarm , who be at first terrify at the idea of have a servant to wait upon herself , who do not in the least know how to use one , and who always speak to domestic with the most reverential politeness . but this maid be very useful in the family , in dexterously tend old , who keep almost entirely to he own quarter of the house and never mix in any of the gay doings which take place there . number of people come to see . and daughter be delighte at she change of fortune , and wait upon she . from come in she grand chariot with the flaming hammer - cloth emblazon with the arm . be report to be immensely rich . have no objection that should inherit he uncle 's property as well as he own . " damn it , we will make a man of the feller , " he say ; " and I will see he in parliament before I die . you may go and see he mother , , though I will never set eye on she " : and come . Emmy , you may be sure , be very glad to see she , and so be bring nearer to . that young fellow be allow to come much more frequently than before to visit he mother . he dine once or twice a week in and bully the servants and he relation there , just as he do in . he be always respectful to major , however , and more modest in he demeanour when that gentleman be
be present . he be a clever lad and afraid of the major . could not help admir he friend 's simplicity , he good humour , he various learning quietly impart , he general love of truth and justice . he have meet no such man as yet in the course of he experience , and he have a instinctive liking for a gentleman . he hing fondly by he godfather 's side , and it be he delight to walk in the park and hear Dobbin talk . tell about he father , about and , about everything but himself . when be more than usually pert and conceit , the major make joke at he , which think very cruel . one day , take he to the play , and the boy decline to go into the pit because it be vulgar , the major take he to the box , leave he there , and go down himself to the pit . he have not be seat there very long before he feel a arm thrust under he and a dandy little hand in a kid glove squeeze he arm . have see the absurdity of he way and come down from the upper region . a tender laugh of benevolence lighte up old 's face and eye as he look at the repentant little prodigal . he love the boy , as he do everything that belong to . how charme she be when she hear of this instance of 's goodness ! she eye look more kindly on than they ever have done . she blush , he think , after look at he so . never tire of he praise of the major to he mother . " I like he , , because he know such lot of thing ; and he be not like old , who be always brag and use such long word , do not you know ? the chap call he ' Longtail ' at school . I give he the name ; be not it capital ? but read like , and french and that ; and when we go out together he tell I story about my , and never about himself ; though I hear , at 's , say that he be one of the bravest officer in the army , and have distinguished himself ever so much . be quite surprised , and say , 'that feller ! why , I do not think he could say Bo to a goose '-- but I know he could , could not he , ? " laugh : she think it be very likely the major could do thus much . if there be a sincere liking between and the major , it must be confess that between the boy and he uncle no great love exist . have get a way of blow out he cheek , and put he hand in he waistcoat pocket , and say , " bless my soul , you do not say so , " so exactly after the fashion of old Jos that it be impossible to refrain from laughter . the servant would explode at dinner if the lad , ask for something which be not at table , put on that countenance and use that favourite phrase . even would shoot out a sudden peal at the boy 's mimicry . if do not mimic he uncle to he face , it be only by 's rebuke and 's terrify entreaty that the little scapegrace be induce to desist . and the worthy civilian be haunte by a dim consciousness that the lad think he a ass , and be inclin to turn he into ridicule , use to be extremely timorous and , of course , doubly pompous and dignify in the presence of . when it be announce that the young gentleman be expect in to dine with he mother , commonly find that he have a engagement at the club . perhaps nobody be much grieve at he absence . on those day would commonly be induce to come out from he place of refuge in the upper story , and there would be a small family party , whereon major Dobbin pretty generally form one . he be the ami de la maison -- old 's friend , 's friend , 's friend , 's counsel and adviser . " he might almost as well be at for anything we see of he , " remark at . ah ! , do it not strike you that it be not you whom the major want to marry ? then lead a life of dignified otiosity such as become a person of he eminence . he very first point , of course , be to become a member of the , where he spend he morning in the company of he brother , where he dine , or whence he bring home man to dine . have to receive and entertain these gentleman and they lady . from these she hear how soon would be in ; how many lac have bring home with he , how 's in have refuse the bill draw by , , and , the , and how it be think the must go too ; how very imprudent , to say the least of it , 's conduct ( wife of of the ) have be with young Swankey of the , sit up with he on deck until all hour , and lose themselves as they be ride out at the cape ; how have have out she thirteen sister , daughter of a country curate , the Rev : Felix rabbit , and marry eleven of they , seven high up in the service ; how be wild because he wife would stay in , and be appoint Collector at . this and
and similar talk take place at the grand dinner all round . they have the same conversation ; the same silver dish ; the same saddle of mutton , boiled turkey , and entree . politics set in a short time after dessert , when the lady retire upstairs and talk about they complaint and they child . nomine , it be all the same . do not the barrister 's wife talk about ? do not the soldier 's lady gossip about the Regiment ? do not the clergyman 's lady discourse about - school and who take whose duty ? do not the very greatest lady of all talk about that small clique of person to whom they belong ? and why should we indian friend not have they own conversation ?--only I admit it be slow for the layman whose fate it sometimes be to sit by and listen . before long have a visiting - book , and be drive about regularly in a carriage , call upon ( wife of major- , , ) ; , wife of , ditto ; , the of the director , &c . we be not long in use ourselves to change in life . that carriage come round to every day ; that buttony boy spring up and down from the box with and 's visiting - card ; at state hour and the carriage go for to the and take he a airing ; or , put old into the vehicle , she drive the old man round the 's . the lady 's maid and the chariot , the visit - book and the buttony page , become soon as familiar to as the humble routine of . she accommodate herself to one as to the other . if have ordain that she should be a Duchess , she would even have do that duty too . she be vote , in 's female society , rather a pleasing young person -- not much in she , but pleasing , and that sort of thing . the man , as usual , like she artless kindness and simple refin demeanour . the gallant yong indian dandy at home on furlough -- immense dandy these -- chain and moustach --drive in tearing cab , the pillars of the theatre , live at hotel -- nevertheless admire , like to bow to she carriage in the park , and to be admit to have the honour of pay she a morning visit . Swankey of the himself , that dangerous youth , and the greatest buck of all the indian army now on leave , be one day discover by major tete - a - tete with , and describe the sport of pig - stick to she with great humour and eloquence ; and he speak afterwards of a --d king 's officer that be always hang about the house -- a long , thing , queer - look , oldish fellow -- a dry fellow though , that take the shine out of a man in the talking line . have the major possess a little more personal vanity he would have be jealous of so dangerous a young buck as that fascinate . but be of too simple and generous a nature to have any doubt about . he be glad that the young man should pay she respect , and that other should admire she . ever since she womanhood almost , have she not be persecute and undervalue ? it please he to see how kindness buy out she good quality and how she spirits gently rise with she prosperity . any person who appreciate she pay a compliment to the major 's good judgement -- that be , if a man may be say to have good judgement who be under the influence of 's delusion . after go to , which we may be sure he do as a loyal subject of he Sovereign ( show himself in he full court suit at the , whither come to fetch he in a very shabby old uniform ) he who have always be a staunch Loyalist and admirer of , become such a tremendous Tory and pillar of the state that he be for have to go to a Drawing - room , too . he somehow have work himself up to believe that he be implicate in the maintenance of the public welfare and that the would not be happy unless and he family appear to rally round he at 's . laugh . " shall I wear the family diamonds , ? " she say . " I wish you would let I buy you some , " think the major . " I should like to see any that be too good for you . " in two light be put out there come a day when the round of decorous pleasure and solemn gaiety in which 's family indulge be interrupt by a event which happen in most house . as you ascend the staircase of you house from the draw towards the bedroom floors , you may have remark a little arch in the wall right before you , which at once give light to the stair which lead from the second story to the third ( where the nursery and servants ' chamber commonly be ) and serve for another purpose of utility , of which the undertaker 's man can give you a notion . they rest the coffin upon that arch , or pass they through it so as not to disturb in any unseemly manner the cold tenant slumber within the black ark . that second - floor arch in a house , look up and down the well of the staircase and command the main thoroughfare by which the inhabitant be pass ; by which cook lurk down before daylight to scour she
she pots and pans in the kitchen ; by which young master stealthily ascend , have leave he boot in the hall , and let himself in after daw from a jolly night at the club ; down which miss come rust in fresh ribbon and spread muslin , brilliant and beautiful , and prepare for conquest and the ball ; or slide , prefer the banister for a mode of conveyance , and disdain danger and the stair ; down which the mother be fondly carry smile in she strong husband 's arm , as he step steadily step by step , and follow by the monthly nurse , on the day when the medical man have pronounce that the charming patient may go downstairs ; up which lurk to bed , yawn , with a sputtering tallow candle , and to gather up before sunrise the boot which be await he in the passage -- that stair , up or down which baby be carry , old people be help , guest be marshall to the ball , the parson walk to the christening , the doctor to the sick - room , and the undertaker 's man to the upper floor -- what a memento of , , and it be -- that arch and stair -- if you choose to consider it , and sit on the landing , look up and down the well ! the doctor will come up to we too for the last time there , my friend in motley . the nurse will look in at the curtain , and you take no notice -- and then she will fl open the window for a little and let in the air . then they will pull down all the front blind of the house and live in the back room -- then they will send for the lawyer and other man in black , &c . you comedy and mine will have be play then , and we shall be remove , oh , how far , from the trumpet , and the shouting , and the posture -mak . if we be gentlefolk they will put hatchment over we late domicile , with gilt cherubim , and motto state that there be " in . " you son will know furnish the house , or perhaps let it , and go into a more modern quarter ; you name will be among the " " in the list of you club next year . however much you may be mourn , you widow will like to have she weed neatly make -- the cook will send or come up to ask about dinner -- the survivor will soon bear to look at you picture over the mantelpiece , which will presently be depose from the place of honou , to make way for the portrait of the son who reign . which of the dead be most tenderly and passionately deplor ? those who love the survivor the least , I believe . the death of a child occasion a passion of grief and frantic tear , such as you end , brother reader , will never inspire . the death of a infant which scarce know you , which a week 's absence from you would have cause to forget you , will strike you down more than the loss of you closest friend , or you first - bear son -- a man grow like yourself , with child of he own . we may be harsh and stern with and -- we love and pity gush out for , the little one . and if you be old , as some reader of this may be or shall be old and rich , or old and poor -- you may one day be think for yourself -- " these people be very good round about I , but they will not grieve too much when I be go . I be very rich , and they want my inheritance -- or very poor , and they be tired of support I . " the period of mourning for 's death be only just conclude , and scarcely have have time to cast off he black and appear in the splendid waistcoat which he love , when it become evident to those about that another event be at hand , and that the old man be about to go seek for he wife in the dark land whither she have proceed he . " the state of my father 's health , " solemnly remark at the , " prevent I from give any large party this season : but if you will come in quietly at half - past six , , my boy , and fake a homely dinner with one or two of the old set -- I shall be always glad to see you . " so and he acquaintance dine and drank they claret among themselves in silence , whilst the sand of life be run out in the old man 's glass upstairs . the velvet - foote butler bring they they wine , and they compose themselves to a rubber after dinner , at which major Dobbin would sometimes come and take a hand ; and would occasionally descmend , when she patient above be settle for the night , and have commence one of those lightly trouble slumber which visit the pillow of old age . the old man cling to he daughter during this sickness . he would take he broth and medicine from scarcely any other hand . to tend he become almost the sole business of she life . she bed be place close by the door which open into he chamber , and she be alive at the slightest noise or disturbance from the couch of the querulous invalid . though , to do he justice ,
, he lay awake many a hour , silent and without stirring , unwill to awake he kind and vigilant nurse . he love he daughter with more fondness now , perhaps , than ever he have do since the day of she childhood . in the discharge of gentle office and kind filial duty , this simple creature shone most especially . " she walk into the room as silently as a sunbeam , " think as he see she passing in and out from she father 's room , a cheerful sweetness light up she face as she move to and fro , graceful and noiseless . when woman be brood over they child , or busy in a sick - room , who have not see in they face those sweet angelic beam of love and pity ? a secret feud of some year 's standing be thus heale , and with a tacit reconciliation . in these last hour , and touch by she love and goodness , the old man forget all he grief against she , and wrongs which he and he wife have many a long night debate : how she have give up everything for she boy ; how she be careless of she parent in they old age and misfortune , and only think of the child ; how absurdly and foolishly , impiously indeed , she take on when be remove from she . forget these charge as he be make up he last account , and do justice to the gentle and uncomplaining little martyr . one night when she steal into he room , she find he awake , when the broken old man make he confession . " oh , , I have be think we be very unkind and unjust to you , " he say and put out he cold and feeble hand to she . she knelt down and pray by he bedside , as he do too , have still hold of she hand . when we turn come , friend , may we have such company in we prayer ! perhaps as he be lie awake then , he life may have pass before he -- he early hopeful struggle , he manly success and prosperity , he downfall in he declining year , and he present helpless condition -- no chance of revenge against , which have have the better of he -- neither name nor money to bequeath -- a spent - out , bootless life of defeat and disappointment , and the end here ! which , I wonder , brother reader , be the better lot , to die prosperous and famous , or poor and disappoint ? to have , and to be force to yield ; or to sink out of life , have play and lose the game ? that must be a strange feeling , when a day of we life come and we say , " to - morrow , success or failure will not matter much , and the sun will rise , and all the myriad of mankind go to they work or they pleasure as usual , but I shall be out of the turmoil . " so there come one morning and sunrise when all the world get up and set about its various work and pleasure , with the exception of old , who be not to fight with fortune , or to hope or scheme any more , but to go and take up a quiet and utterly unknown residence in a churchyard at by the side of he old wife . major , , and follow he remains to the grave , in a black cloth coach . come on purpose from the and at , whither he retreat after the deplorable event . he do not care to remain in the house , with the -- under the circumstance , you understand . but stay and do she duty as usual . she be bow down by no especial grief , and rather solemn than sorrowful . she pray that she own end might be as calm and painless , and think with trust and reverence of the word which she have hear from she father during he illness , indicative of he faith , he resignation , and he future hope . yes , I think that will be the better ending of the two , after all . suppose you be particularly rich and well - to - do and say on that last day , " I be very rich ; I be tolerably well know ; I have liv all my life in the best society , and thank , come of a most respectable family . I have serve my King and country with honour . I be in parliament for several year , where , I may say , my speech be listen to and pretty well receive . I do not owe any man a shilling : on the contrary , I lent my old college friend , , fifty pound , for which my executor will not press he . I leave my daughter with ten thousand pound apiece -- very good portion for girl ; I bequeath my plate and furniture , my house in , with a handsome jointure , to my widow for she life ; and my landed property , besides money in the fund , and my cellar of well - select wine in , to my son . I leave twenty pound a year to my valet ; and I defy any man after I have go to find anything against my character . " or suppose , on the other hand , you swan sings quite a different sort of dirge and you say , " I be a poor blighted , disappointed old fellow , and have make a utter
utter failure through life . I be not endow either with brain or with good fortune , and confess that I have commit a hundred mistake and blunder . I own to have forget my duty many a time . I can not pay what I owe . on my last bed I lie utterly helpless and humble , and I pray forgiveness for my weakness and throw myself , with a contrite heart , at the foot of the . " which of these two speech , think you , would be the best oration for you own funeral ? make the last ; and in that humble frame of mind , and hold by the hand of he daughter , life and disappointment and vanity sank away from under he . " you see , " say old to , " what come of merit , and industry , and judicious speculation , and that . look at I and my banker 's account . look at you poor and he failure . and yet he be a better man than I be , this day twenty year -- a better man , I should say , by ten thousand pound . " beyond these people and 's family , who come over from to pay a visit of condolence , not a single soul alive ever care a penny piece about old , or remember the existence of such a person . when old first hear from he friend ( as little have already inform we ) how distinguished a officer major Dobbin be , he exhibit a great deal of scornful incredulity and express he surprise how ever such a feller as that should possess either brain or reputation . but he hear of the major 's fame from various member of he society . have a great opinion of he son and narrate many story illustrative of the major 's learn , valour , and estimation in the world 's opinion . finally , he name appear in the list of one or two great party of the nobility , and this circumstance have a prodigious effect upon the old aristocrat of . the major 's position , as guardian to , whose possession have be ced to he grandfather , render some meeting between the two gentleman inevitable ; and it be in one of these that old , a keen man of business , look into the major 's account with he ward and the boy 's mother , get a hint , which stagger he very much , and at once pain and pleas he , that it be out of 's own pocket that a part of the fund have be supply upon which the poor widow and the child have subsist . when press upon the point , , who could not tell lie , blush and stammer a good deal and finally confess . " the marriage , " he say ( at which he interlocutor 's face grow dark ) " be very much my do . I think my poor friend have go so far that retreat from he engagement would have be dishonour to he and death to , and I could do no less , when she be leave without resource , than give what money I could spare to maintain she . " " major , " say , look hard at he and turn very red too --" you do I a great injury ; but give I leave to tell you , sir , you be a honest feller . there be my hand , sir , though I little think that my flesh and blood be live on you -- " and the pair shook hand , with great confusion on major 's part , thus find out in he act of charitable hypocrisy . he strove to soften the old man and reconcile he towards he son 's memory . " he be such a noble fellow , " he say , " that all of we love he , and would have do anything for he . I , as a young man in those day , be flatter beyond measure by he preference for I , and be more pleased to be see in he company than in that of the - in - . I never see he equal for pluck and daring and all the qualitie of a soldier " ; and tell the old father as many story as he could remember regard the gallantry and achievement of he son . " and be so like he , " the major add . " he be so like he that he make I tremble sometimes , " the grandfather say . on one or two evening the come to dine with ( it be during the time of the sickness of ) , and as the two sat together in the evening after dinner , all they talk be about the departed hero . the father boast about he accord to he wont , glorify himself in recount he son 's feat and gallantry , but he mood be at any rate better and more charitable than that in which he have be dispose until now to regard the poor fellow ; and the Christian heart of the kind major be pleased at these symptom of return peace and good - will . on the second evening old call , just as he use to do at the time when and be boy together , and the honest gentleman be pleased by that mark of reconciliation . on the next day at breakfast , when , with the asperity of she age and character , venture to make some remark reflect slightingly upon the major 's appearance or behaviour -- the master of the house interrupt she . " you would have be glad enough to
to git he for yourself , o . but they grape be sour . ! ha ! major be a fine feller . " " that he be , , " say approvingly ; and go up close to the old gentleman , he take a hold of he large grey whisker , and laugh in he face good - humouredly , and kiss he . and he tell the story at night to he mother , who fully agree with the boy . " indeed he be , " she say . " you dear father always say so . he be one of the best and most upright of man . " happen to drop in very soon after this conversation , which make blush perhaps , and the young scapegrace increase the confusion by tell Dobbin the other part of the story . " I say , , " he say , " there be such a uncommon nice girl want to marry you . she be plenty of tin ; she wear a front ; and she scold the servants from morning till night . " " who be it ? " ask . " it be , " the boy answer . " say so . and I say , , how prime it would be to have you for my uncle . " 's quaver voice from the next room at this moment weakly call for , and the laughing end . that old 's mind be change be pretty clear . he ask about he uncle sometimes , and laugh at the boy 's imitation of the way in which say " - bless - my - soul " and gobble he soup . then he say , " it be not respectful , sir , of you younker to be imitat of you relation . , when you go out adrive to - day , leave my card upon , do you hear ? there be no quarrel betwigst I and he anyhow . " the card be return , and and the major be ask to dinner -- to a dinner the most splendid and stupid that perhaps ever give ; every inch of the family plate be exhibit , and the best company be ask . take down to dinner , and she be very gracious to he ; whereas she hardly speak to the major , who sit apart from she , and by the side of , very timid . say , with great solemnity , it be the best turtle soup he have ever taste in he life , and ask where he get he . " it be some of 's wine , " whisper the butler to he master . " I have have it a long time , and pay a good figure for it , too , " say aloud to he guest , and then whisper to he right - hand neighbour how he have get it " at the old chap 's sale . " more than once he ask the major about -- about -- a theme on which the major could be very eloquent when he choose . he tell of she suffering -- of she passionate attachment to she husband , whose memory she worship still -- of the tender and dutiful manner in which she have support she parent , and give up she boy , when it seem to she she duty to do so . " you do not know what she endure , sir , " say honest Dobbin with a tremor in he voice , " and I hope and trust you will be reconcile to she . if she take you son away from you , she give hers to you ; and however much you love you , depend on it , she love hers ten time more . " " by , you be a good feller , sir , " be all say . it have never struck he that the widow would feel any pain at part from the boy , or that he have a fine fortune could grieve she . a reconciliation be announce as speedy and inevitable , and 's heart already begin to beat at the notion of the awful meeting with 's father . it be never , however , destin to take place . 's lingering illness and death superven , after which a meeting be for some time impossible . that catastrophe and other event may have work upon . he be much shaken of late , and a , and he mind be work inwardly . he have send for he lawyer , and probably change something in he will . the medical man who look in pronounce he shaky , agitate , and talk of a little blood and the seaside ; but he take neither of these remedy . one day when he should have come down to breakfast , he servant miss he , go into he dressing - room and find he lie at the foot of the dressing - table in a fit . Osborne be apprise ; the doctor be send for ; stop away from school ; the bleeder and cupper come . Osborne partially regain cognizance , but never could speak again , though he try dreadfully once or twice , and in four day he die . the doctor go down , and the undertaker 's man go up the stair , and all the shutter be shut towards the garden in . Bullock rush from the City in a hurry . " how much money have he leave to that boy ? not half , surely ? surely share and share alike between the three ? " it be a agitat moment . what be it that poor old man try once or twice in vain to say ? I hope
hope it be that he want to see and be reconcile before he leave the world to one dear and faithful wife of he son : it be most likely that , for he will show that the hatred which he have so long cherish have go out of he heart . they find in the pocket of he dressing - gow the letter with the great red seal which have write he from . he have look at the other papers too , relative to he son , for the key of the box in which he keep they be also in he pocket , and it be find the seal and envelope have be break -- very likely on the night before the seizure -- when the butler have take he tea into he study , and find he read in the great red family . when they will be open , it be find that half the property be leave to , and the remainder between the two sister . to continue , for they jous not benefit , the affair of the commercial house , or to go out , as he think fit . a annuity of five hundred pound , chargeable on 's property , be leave to he mother , " the widow of my beloved son , , " who be to resume the guardianship of the boy . " major , my beloved son 's friend , " be appoint executor ; " and as out of he kindness and bounty , and with he own private fund , he maintain my grandson and my son 's widow , when they be otherwise without means of support " ( the testator go on to say ) " I hereby thank he heartily for he love and regard for they , and beseech he to accept such a sum as may be sufficient to purchase he commission as a - , or to be dispose of in any way he may think fit . " when hear that she father - in - law be reconcile to she , she heart melte , and she be grateful for the fortune leave to she . but when she hear how be restore to she , and know how and by whom , and how it be 's bounty that support she in poverty , how it be who give she she husband and she son -- oh , then she sank on she knee , and pray for blessing on that constant and kind heart ; she bow down and humble herself , and kiss the foot , as it be , of that beautiful and generous affection . and gratitude be all that she have to pay back for such admirable devotion and benefit -- only gratitude ! if she think of any other return , the image of stand up out of the grave and say , " you be mine , and mine only , now and forever . " know she feeling : have he not pass he whole life in divine they ? when the nature of 's will become known to the world , it be edify to remark how rise in the estimation of the people form she circle of acquaintance . the servant of 's establishment , who use to question she humble order and say they would " ask master " whether or not they could obey , never think now of that sort of appeal . the cook forget to sneer at she shabby old gowns ( which , indeed , be quite eclipse by that lady 's finery when she be dress to go to church of a evening ) , the other no longer grumble at the sound of she bell , or delay to answer that summon . the coachman , who grumble that he ' oss should be bring out and he carriage make into a hospital for that old feller and , drive she with the utmost alacrity now , and trembl lest he should be supersed by 's coachman , ask " what they there coachman know about town , and whether they be fit to sit on a box before a lady ? " 's friend , male and female , suddenly become interested about , and card of condolence multiply on she hall table . himself , who have look on she as a good - natured harmless pauper , to whom it be he duty to give victual and shelter , pay she and the rich little boy , he nephew , the greatest respect -- be anxious that she should have change and amusement after she trouble and trial , " poor dear girl " -- and begin to appear at the breakfast - table , and most particularly to ask how she would like to dispose of the day . in she capacity of guardian to , she , with the consent of the major , she fellow - trustee , beg to live in the house as long as ever she choose to dwell there ; but that lady , with thanks , declare that she never could think of remain alone in that melancholy mansion , and depart in deep mourning to , with a couple of she old domestic . the rest be liberally pay and dismiss , the faithful old butler , whom propose to retain , resign and prefer to invest he savings in a public - house , where , let we hope , he be not unprosperous . not choose to live in , also , after consultation , decline to occupy the gloomy old mansion there . the house be dismantle ; the rich furniture and effect , the awful chandelier and dreary blank mirror pack away and hide , the rich rosewood drawing - room suite be muff in straw , the carpet be
be roll up and cord , the small select library of well - bound book be stow into two wine - chest , and the whole paraphernalia roll away in several enormous van to the , where they be to lie until 's majority . and the great heavy dark plate - chest go off to . and , to lie in the cellar of those eminent banker until the same period should arrive . one day , with in she hand and clad in deep sable , go to visit the desert mansion which she have not enter since she be a girl . the place in front be litter with straw where the van have be laden and roll off . they go into the great blank room , the wall of which bear the mark where the picture and mirror have hang . then they go up the great blank stone staircase into the upper room , into that where grandpapa die , as say in a whisper , and then higher still into 's own room . the boy be still cling by she side , but she think of another besides he . she know that it have be he father 's room as well as he own . she go up to one of the open window ( one of those at which she use to gaze with a sick heart when the child be first take from she ) , and thence as she look out she could see , over the tree of , the old house in which she herself be bear , and where she have pass so many happy day of sacred youth . they all come back to she , the pleasant holiday , the kind face , the careless , joyful past time , and the long pain and trial that have since cast she down . she think of these and of the man who have be she constant protector , she good genius , she sole benefactor , she tender and generous friend . " look here , mother , " say , " here be a scratch on the glass with a diamond , I never see it before , I never do it . " " it be you father 's room long before you be bear , , " she say , and she blush as she kiss the boy . she be very silent as they drive back to , where they have take a temporary house : where the smiling lawyer use to come bustl over to see she ( and we may be sure note the visit in the bill ) : and where of course there be a room for major too , who ride over frequently , have much business to transact on behalf of he little ward . Georgy at this time be remove from 's on a unlimited holiday , and that gentleman be engage to prepare a inscription for a fine marble slab , to be place up in the Foundling under the monument of . the female Bullock , aunt of , although despoil by that little monster of one - half of the sum which she expect from she father , nevertheless show she charitableness of spirit by be reconcile to the mother and the boy . be not far from , and one day the chariot , with the golden bullock emblazon on the panel , and the flaccid child withing , drive to 's house at ; and the family make a irruption into the garden , where be read a book , be in a arbour placidly dip strawberry into wine , and the major in one of he indian jacket be give a back to , who choose to jump over he . he go over he head and bound into the little advance of , with immense black bow in they hat , and huge black sash , accompany they mourning mamma . " he be just of the age for , " the fond parent think , and glance towards that dear child , a unwholesome little miss of seven year of age . " Rosa , go and kiss you dear cousin , " say . " do not you know I , ? I be you aunt . " " I know you well enough , " say ; " but I do not like kissing , please " ; and he retreat from the obedient caress of he cousin . " take I to you dear mamma , you droll child , " say , and those lady accordingly meet , after a absence of more than fifteen year . during 's care and poverty the other have never once think about come to see she , but now that she be decently prosperous in the world , she sister - in - law come to she as a matter of course . so do number more . we old friend , , and she husband come thunder over from , with flam yellow livery , and be as impetuously fond of as ever . would have like she always if she could have see she . one must do she that justice . but , que voulez vous ?-- in this vast town one have not the time to go and seek one 's friend ; if they drop out of the rank they disappear , and we march on without they . who be ever miss in ? but so , in a word , and before the period of grief for 's death have subside , find herself in the centre of a very genteel circle indeed , the member of which could not conceive that anybody belong to it be not very lucky . there be scarce one of the ladie that have not a relation a peer , though
though the husband might be a drysalter in the City . some of the ladie be very blue and well inform , read and frequent the Institution ; other be severe and Evangelical , and hold by . Emmy , it must be owned , find herself entirely at a loss in the midst of they claver , and suffer woefully on the one or two occasion on which she be compelle to accept 's hospitality . that lady persist in patronize she and determine most graciously to form she . she find 's milliner for she and regulate she household and she manners . she drive over constantly from and entertaine she friend with faint fashionable fiddle - faddle and feeble slip - slop . like to hear it , but the major use to go off grow at the appearance of this woman , with she twopenny gentility . he go to sleep under 's bald head , after dinner , at one of the banker 's best party ( be still anxious that the balance of the Osborne property should be transfer from and 's to they ) , and whilst , who do not know , or who write the last crack article in the , and do not in the least deplore , or otherwise , 's late extraordinary tergiversation on the fatal , sit dumb amongst the ladie in the grand draw - room , look out upon velvet lawn , trim gravel walk , and glisten hot - house . " she seem good - natured but insipid , " say ; " that major seem to be particularly epris . " " she want ton sadly , " say . " my dear creature , you never will be able to form she . " " she be dreadfully ignorant or indifferent , " say with a voice as if from the grave , and a sad shake of the head and turban . " I ask she if she think that it be in 1836 , accord to , or in 1839 , accord to , that the Pope be to fall : and she say -- ' poor Pope ! I hope not -- what have he do ? ' " " she be my brother 's widow , my dear friend , " reply , " and as such I think we be all bound to give she every attention and instruction on entering into the world . you may fancy there can be no mercenary motives in those whose Disappointment be well kny . " " that poor dear , " say to , as they drive away together --" she be always scheme and manage . she want 's account to be take from we house to hers -- and the way in which she coax that boy and make he sit by that blear - eye little be perfectly ridiculous . " " I wish be chok with she man of and she of , " cry the other , and the carriage roll away over . but this sort of society be too cruelly genteel for , and all jump for joy when a foreign tour be propose . the above every day event have occur , and a few week have pass , when on one fine morning , parliament be over , the summer advanced , and all the good company in about to quit that city for they annual tour in search of pleasure or health , the steamboat leave the - stair laden with a goodly company of English fugitive . the quarter - deck awning be up , and the bench and gangway crowd with score of rosy child , bust nursemaid ; lady in the prettiest pink bonnet and summer dress ; gentleman in travelling cap and linen - jacket , whose mustachio have just begin to sprout for the ensue tour ; and stout trim old veteran with starch neckcloth and neat - brush hat , such as have invade any time since the conclusion of the war , and carry the national Goddem into every city of the continent . the congregation of hat - box , and desk , and dress - case be prodigious . there be jaunty young Cambridge - man travel with they tutor , and go for a reading excursion to or ; there be irish gentleman , with the most dashing whisker and jewellery , talk about horse incessantly , and prodigiously polite to the young lady on board , whom , on the contrary , the Cambridge lad and they pale - face tutor avoid with maiden coyness ; there be old Pall mall lounger bound for and and a course of water to clear off the dinner of the season , and a little roulette and trent - et - quarante to keep the excitement go ; there be old , who have marry he young wife , with of the Guard hold she parasol and guide - book ; there be young who be carry off he bride on a pleasure tour ( . that be , and who have be at school with 's grandmother ) ; there be and my lady with a dozen child , and correspond nursemaid ; and the great grandee Bareacres family that sit by themselves near the wheel , stare at everybody , and speak to no one . they carriage , emblazon with coronet and heape with shining imperial , be on the foredeck , lock in with a dozen more such vehicle : it be difficult to pass in and out amongst they ; and the poor inmate of the fore - cabin have scarcely any space for locomotion . these consist of a few magnificently attire gentleman from , who bring they own provision , and could have buy half the gay people in the grand saloon ; a
a few honest fellow with mustachio and portfolio , who set to sketch before they have be half a hour on board ; one or two french femme de chambre who begin to be dreadfully ill by the time the boat have pass ; a groom or two who lounge in the neighbourhood of the horse - box under they charge , or lean over the side by the paddle - wheel , and talk about who be good for the , and what they stand to win or lose for the cup . all the courier , when they have do plunge about the ship and have settle they various master in the cabin or on the deck , congregate together and begin to chatter and smoke ; the Hebrew gentleman join they and look at the carriage . there be 's great carriage that would hold thirteen people ; my 's carriage , my ' chariot , britzska , and fourgon , that anybody might pay for who like . it be a wonder how my get the ready money to pay for the expense of the journey . the gentleman know how he get it . they know what money he Lordship have in he pocket at that instant , and what interest he pay for it , and who give it he . finally there be a very neat , handsome travel carriage , about which the gentleman speculate . " a qui cette voiture la ? " say one gentleman - courier with a large morocco money - bag and ear - ring to another with ear - ring and a large morocco money - bag . " C'est a je bense -- je l 'ai vu toute a l'heure -- qui brenoit des sangvich dan la voiture , " say the courier in a fine german . emerge presently from the neighbourhood of the hold , where he have be bellow instruction intermingle with polyglot oath to the ship 's man engage in secret the passenger ' luggage , come to give a account of himself to he brother interpreter . he inform they that the carriage belong to a from and enormously rich , and with whom he be engage to travel ; and at this moment a young gentleman who have be warn off the bridge between the paddle - box , and who have drop thence on to the roof of 's carriage , from which he make he way over other carriage and imperial until he have clamber on to he own , descende thence and through the window into the body of the carriage , to the applause of the courier look on . " Nous allon avoir une belle traversee , , " say the courier with a grin , as he lift he gold - lace cap . " d ---- you french , " say the young gentleman , " where be the biscuit , ay ? " answer he in the english language or in such a imitation of it as he could command -- for though he be familiar with all language , be not acquaint with a single one , and speak all with indifferent volubility and incorrectness . the imperious young gentleman who gobble the biscuit ( and indeed it be time to refresh himself , for he have breakfast at full three hour before ) be we young friend . uncle and he mamma be on the quarter - deck with a gentleman of whom they use to see a good deal , and the four be about to make a summer tour . be seat at that moment on deck under the awning , and pretty nearly opposite to the of and he family , whose proceedings absorb the almost entirely . both the noble couple look rather younger than in the eventful year ' 15 , when remember to have see they at Brussels ( indeed , he always give out in that he be intimately acquaint with they ) . 's hair , which be then dark , be now a beautiful golden auburn , whereas 's whisker , formerly red , be at present of a rich black with purple and green reflection in the light . but change as they be , the movement of the noble pair occupy 's mind entirely . the presence of a fascinate he , and he could look at nothing else . " those people seem to interest you a good deal , " say , laugh and watch he . too laugh . she be in a straw bonnet with black ribbon , and otherwise dress in mourning , but the little bustle and holiday of the journey please and excit she , and she look particularly happy . " what a heavenly day ! " say and add , with great originality , " I hope we shall have a calm passage . " wav he hand , scornfully glance at the same time under he eyelid at the great folk opposite . " if you have make the voyage we have , " he say , " you would not much care about the weather . " but nevertheless , traveller as he be , he pass the night direfully sick in he carriage , where he courier ten he with brandy - and - water and every luxury . in due time this happy party land at the quay of , whence they be transport by another steamer to the city of . here the carriage and the family take to the shore , and be not a little gratify to see he arrival announce in the newspaper as " nebst Begleitng aus . " he have he court dress with he ; he have insist that should bring he regimental paraphernalia ; he announce that it be he intention to be present at some foreign court
court , and pay he respects to the of the country which he honoure with a visit . wherever the party stop , and a opportunity be offer , leave he own card and the major 's upon " Our . " it be with great difficulty that he could be restrain from put on he cocked hat and tight to wait upon the english consul at the free City of , when that hospitable functionary ask we traveller to dinner . he keep a journal of he voyage and no elaborately the defect or excellence of the various inns at which he put up , and of the wine and dish of which he partake . as for , she be very happy and pleased . use to carry about for she she stool and sketch - book , and admire the drawing of the good - natured little artist as they never have be admire before . she sit upon steamer 's deck and drew crag and castle , or she mount upon donkey and ascend to ancient robber - towers , attend by she two aide - de- camp , and . she laugh , and the major do too , at he droll figure on donkey - back , with he long leg touch the ground . he be the interpreter for the party ; have a good military knowledge of the german language , and he and the delighted fight the campaigns of the and the Palatinate . in the course of a few week , and by assiduously conversing with on the box of the carriage , make prodigious advance in the knowledge of , and could talk to hotel waiter and postilion in a way that charme he mother and amuse he guardian . do not much engage in the afternoon excursion of he fellow - traveller . he sleep a good deal after dinner , or bask in the arbour of the pleasant inn -garden . pleasant Rhine garden ! fair scene of peace and sunshine -- noble purple mountain , whose crest be reflect in the magnificent stream -- who have ever see you that have not a grateful memory of those scene of friendly repose and beauty ? to lay down the pen and even to think of that beautiful make one happy . at this time of summer evening , the cow be troo down from the hill , low and with they bell tinkling , to the old town , with its old moat , and gate , and spire , and chestnut - tree , with long blue shadow stretch over the grass ; the sky and the river below flame in crimson and gold ; and the moon be already out , look pale towards the sunset . the sun sink behind the great castle - crest mountain , the night fall suddenly , the river grow darker and darker , light quiver in it from the window in the old rampart , and twinkle peacefully in the villag under the hill on the opposite shore . so use to go to sleep a good deal with he bandan na over he face and be very comfortable , and read all the news , and every word of 's admirable newspaper ( may the blessing of all who have ever be abroad rest on the founder and proprietor of that piratical print ! ) and whether he wake or sleep , he friend do not very much miss he . yes , they be very happy . they go to the opera often of evening -- to those snug , unassuming , dear old opera in the german town , where the noblesse sit and cry , and knit stocking on the one side , over against the bourgeoisie on the other ; and he Transparency the and he transparent family , all very fat and good - natured , come and occupy the great box in the middle ; and the pit be full of the most elegant slim -waisted officer with straw - colou mustachio , and twopence a day on full pay . here it be that find she delight , and be introduce for the first time to the wonder of and . the major 's musical taste have be before allude to , and he performance on the flute commend . but perhaps the chief pleasure he have in these opera be in watch 's rapture while listen to they . a new world of love and beauty break upon she when she be introduce to those divine composition ; this lady have the keenest and finest sensibility , and how could she be indifferent when she hear ? the tender part of " " awaken in she rapture so exquisite that she would ask herself when she go to say she prayer of a night whether it be not wick to feel so much delight as that with which " " and " " fill she gentle little bosom ? but the major , whom she consult upon this head , as she theological adviser ( and who himself have a pious and reverent soul ) , say that for he part , every beauty of art or nature make he thankful as well as happy , and that the pleasure to be have in listening to fine music , as in look at the star in the sky , or at a beautiful landscape or picture , be a benefit for which we might thank as sincerely as for any other worldly blesse . and in reply to some faint objection of 's ( take from certain theological work like the of and other of that school , with which have be furnish during she life at ) he tell she a eastern fable of the Owl who think that the sunshine be unbearable for the eyes and that the
the Nightingale be a most overrated bird . " it be one be nature to s and the other 's to hoet , " he say , laugh , " and with such a sweet voice as you have yourself , you must belong to the faction . " I like to dwell upon this period of she life and to think that she be cheerful and happy . you see , she have not have too much of that sort of existence as yet , and have not fall in the way of means to educate she taste or she intelligence . she have be domineer over hitherto by vulgar intellect . it be the lot of many a woman . and as every one of the dear sex be the rival of the rest of she kind , timidity pass for folly in they charitable judgment ; and gentleness for dulness ; and silence -- which be but timid denial of the unwelcome assertion of rule folk , and tacit protestantism -- above all , find no mercy at the hand of the female Inquisition . thus , my dear and civilized reader , if you and I be to find ourselves this evening in a society of greengrocer , let we say , it be probable that we conversation would not be brilliant ; if , on the other hand , a greengrocer should find himself at you refined and polite tea - table , where everybody be say witty thing , and everybody of fashion and repute tear she friend to piece in the most delightful manner , it be possible that the stranger would not be very talkative and by no means interesting or interested . and it must be remember that this poor lady have never meet a gentleman in she life until this present moment . perhaps these be rarer personage than some of we think for . which of we can point out many such in he circle -- man whose aim be generous , whose truth be constant , and not only constant in its kind but elevate in its degree ; whose want of meanness make they simple ; who can look the world honestly in the face with a equal manly sympathy for the great and the small ? we all know a hundr whose coat be very well make , and a score who have excellent manners , and one or two happy being who be what they call in the inner circle , and have shot into the very centre and bull 's - eye of the fashion ; but of gentleman how many ? let we take a little scrap of paper and each make out he list . my friend the major I write , without any doubt , in mine . he have very long legs , a yellow face , and a slight lisp , which at first be rather ridiculous . but he thought be just , he brain be fairly good , he life be honest and pure , and he heart warm and humble . he certainly have very large hand and foot , which the two use to caricature and laugh at ; and they jeer and laughter perhaps lead poor little Emmy astray as to he worth . but have we not all be misl about we heroe and change we opinion a hundred time ? Emmy , in this happy time , find that hers undergo a very great change in respect of the merit of the major . perhaps it be the happiest time of both they life , indeed , if they do but know it -- and who do ? which of we can point out and say that be the culmination -- that be the summit of human joy ? but at all event , this couple be very decently contente , and enjoy as pleasant a summer tour as any pair that leave that year . be always present at the play , but it be the major who put 's shawl on after the entertainment ; and in the walk and excursion the young lad would be on ahead , and up a tower - stair or a tree , whilst the soberer couple be below , the major smoke he cigar with great placidity and constancy , whilst sketch the site or the ruin . it be on this very tour that I , the present writer of a history of which every word be true , have the pleasure to see they first and to make they acquaintance . it be at the little comfortable Ducal town of ( that very place where have be so distinguished as a attache ; but that be in early early day , and before the news of the of send all the english diplomatist in to the right about ) that I first see and he party . they have arrive with the carriage and courier at the , the best of the town , and the whole party dine at the table d'hote . everybody remarke the majesty of and the know way in which he sip , or rather suck , the , which he order for dinner . the little boy , too , we observ , have a famous appetite , and consum schinken , and braten , and kartoffeln , and cranberry jam , and salad , and pudd , and roast fowl , and sweetmeat , with a gallantry that do honou to he nation . after about fifteen dish , he conclude the repast with dessert , some of which he even carry out of door , for some young gentleman at table , amuse with he coolness and gallant free - and - easy manner , induce he to pocket a handful of macaroon , which he discuss on he way to the theatre ,
, whither everybody go in the cheery social little german place . the lady in black , the boy 's mamma , laugh and blush , and look exceedingly pleased and shy as the dinner go on , and at the various feat and instance of espieglerie on the part of she son . the Colonel -- for so he become very soon afterwards -- I remember joke the boy with a great deal of grave fun , point out dish which he have not try , and entreat he not to baulk he appetite , but to have a second supply of this or that . it be what they call a gast - rolle night at the -- or theatre -- and , then in the bloom of she beauty and genius , perform the part of the heroine in the wonderful opera of . from we place in the stall we could see we four friend of the table d'hote in the loge which of the keep for he best guest , and I could not help remark the effect which the magnificent actress and music produce upon , for so we hear the stout gentleman in the mustachio call she . during the astonishing of the prisoner , over which the delightful voice of the actress rise and soar in the most ravishing harmony , the english lady 's face wore such a expression of wonder and delight that it strike even little , the blase attache , who draw out , as he fix he glass upon she , " , it really do one good to see a woman caypable of that stayt of excaytement . " and in the , where , rush to she husband , cry , " Nichts , nicht , mein , " she fairly lose herself and cover she face with she handkerchief . every woman in the house be snivell at the time , but I suppose it be because it be predestin that I be to write this particular lady 's memoir that I remark she . the next day they give another piece of , . be introduce at the beginning of the performance , as indicative of the brisk advance of the french army . then come drum , trumpet , thunder of artillery , and groan of the dying , and at last , in a grand triumphal swell , " the " be perform . there may have be a score of in the house , but at the burst of that belov and well - know music , every one of they , we young fellow in the stall , and ( who have take a house at for the education of they nine child ) , the fat gentleman with the mustachio , the long major in white duck trousers , and the lady with the little boy upon whom he be so sweet , even , the courier in the gallery , stand bolt upright in they place and proclaim themselves to be member of the dear old british nation . as for , the , he rise up in he box and bow and simper , as if he would represent the whole empire . be nephew and heir of old , who have be introduce in this story as , just before , who be of the -- th regiment in which major Dobbin serve , and who die in this year full of honour , and of a aspic of plover ' egg ; when the regiment be graciously give by he to , . who have command it in many glorious fields . Tapeworm must have meet with at the house of the 's , the , for he recognize he on this night at the theatre , and with the utmost condescension , he 's minister come over from he own box and publicly shook hand with he new - found friend . " look at that infernal sly - boot of a Tapeworm , " Fipps whisper , examine he chief from the stall . " wherever there be a pretty woman he always twist himself in . " and I wonder what be diplomatist make for but for that ? " have I the honour of addressing myself to ? " ask the Secretary with a most insinuating grin . burst out laugh and say , " by , that be a good 'un . " and the major blush : we see they from the stall . " this lady be , " say the major , " and this be she brother , , a distinguished officer of the : permit I to introduce he to you lordship . " my lord nearly send off he leg with the most fascinating smile . " be you go to stop in ? " he say . " it be a dull place , but we want some nice people , and we would try and make it so agreeable to you . Mr.-- . I shall do myself the honour of call upon you to - morrow at you inn . " and he go away with a Parthian grin and glance which he think must finish completely . the performance over , the young fellow lounge about the lobby , and we see the society take its departure . the go off in she jingling old coach , attend by two faithful and wither old maid of honour , and a little snuffy spindle - shank gentleman in waiting , in a brown jasey and a green coat cover with order -- of which the star and the grand yellow cordon of the order of of be most conspicuous . the drum roll , the guard salute , and the old carriage drive away . then come he Transparency the and transparent family , with he great officer of state and
and household . he bow serenely to everybody . and amid the saluting of the guard and the flaring of the torch of the running footman , clad in scarlet , the transparent carriage drive away to the old Ducal schloss , with its towers and pinacle stand on the schlossberg . everybody in know everybody . no sooner be a foreigner see there than the of foreign affair , or some other great or small officer of state , go round to the and find out the name of the new arrival . we watch they , too , out of the theatre . Tapeworm have just walk off , envelope in he cloak , with which he gigantic chasseur be always in attendance , and look as much as possible like . the 's lady have just squeeze herself into she sedan , and she daughter , the , have put on she calash and clog ; when the english party come out , the boy yawn drearily , the major take great pain in keep the shawl over 's head , and look grand , with a crush opera - hat on one side of he head and he hand in the stomach of a voluminous white waistcoat . we take off we hat to we acquaintance of the table d'hote , and the lady , in return , present we with a little smile and a curtsey , for which everybody might be thankful . the carriage from the inn , under the superintendence of the bustling , be in wait to convey the party ; but the fat man say he would walk and smoke he cigar on he way homewards , so the other three , with nod and smile to we , go without , , with the cigar case , follow in he master 's wake . we all walk together and talk to the stout gentleman about the agremen of the place . it be very agreeable for the . there be shoot - party and battue ; there be a plenty of ball and entertainment at the hospitable court ; the society be generally good ; the theatre excellent ; and the living cheap . " and we seem a most delightful and affable person , " we new friend say . " with such a representative , and -- and a good medical man , I can fancy the place to be most eligible . good -night , gentleman . " and creak up the stair to bedward , follow by with a flambeau . we rather hope that nice - look woman would be induce to stay some time in the town . in we a polite behaviour as that of do not fail to have the most favourable effect upon 's mind , and the very next morning , at breakfast , he pronounce he opinion that be the pleasantest little place of any which he have visit on they tour . 's motive and artifice be not very difficult of comprehension , and laugh in he sleeve , like a hypocrite as he be , when he find , by the know air of the civilian and the offhand manner in which the latter talk about and the other member of the family , that have be up already in the morning , consult he travel Peerage . yes , he have see the the of , he lordship 's father ; he be sure he have , he have meet he at -- at the -- do not remember ? and when the Diplomatist call on the party , faithful to he promise , receive he with such a salute and honour as be seldom accord to the little . he wink at on he Excellency 's arrival , and that emissary , instruct before - hand , go out and superintend a entertainment of cold meat , jelly , and other delicacy , bring in upon tray , and of which absolutely insist that he noble guest should partake . Tapeworm , so long as he could have a opportunity of admir the bright eye of ( whose freshness of complexion bore daylight remarkably well ) be not ill pleased to accept any invitation to stay in 's lodging ; he put one or two dexterous question to he about and the dancing - girl there ; ask about that beautiful boy who have be with she ; and compliment the astonished little woman upon the prodigious sensation which she have make in the house ; and try to fascinate by talk of the late war and the exploit of the contingent under the command of the , now of . inherit no little portion of the family gallantry , and it be he happy belief that almost every woman upon whom he himself cast friendly eye be in love with he . he leave under the persuasion that she be slain by he wit and attraction and go home to he lodging to write a pretty little note to she . she be not fascinate , only puzzl , by he grinning , he simper , he scent cambric handkerchief , and he high - heel lacquered boot . she do not understand one - half the compliment which he pay ; she have never , in she small experience of mankind , meet a professional lady ' man as yet , and look upon my lord as something curiious rather than pleasant ; and if she do not admire , certainly wonder at he . , on the contrary , be delighted . " how very affable he Lordship be , " he say ; " how very kind of he Lordship to say he would send he medical man ! , you will carry we card to the directly ; the major and I will have the greatest pleasure in pay we
we respects at as soon as possible . put out my uniform , -- both we uniform . it be a mark of politeness which every english gentleman ought to show to the country which he visit to pay he respects to the sovereign of those country as to the representative of he own . " when 's doctor come , von , to . the , he speedily convince Jos that the Pumpernickel mineral spring and the Doctor 's particular treatment would infallibly restore the to youth and slimness . " Dere come here last year , " he say , " , a english Sheneral , tvice so pic as you , sir . I send he back qvite tin after tree month , and he dance vid at the end of two . " 's mind be make up ; the spring , the , the court , and the charge d'Affaires convince he , and he propose to spend the autumn in these delightful quarter . and punctual to he word , on the next day the present and the major to , be conduct to they audience with that sovereign by the , of the court . they be straightway invite to dinner at , and they intention of staying in the town be announce , the politest lady of the whole town instantly call upon ; and as not one of these , however poor they might be , be under the rank of a Baroness , 's delight be beyond expression . he write off to at the to say that the service be highly appreciate in , that he be go to show he friend , the , how to stick a pig in the indian fashion , and that he august friend , the and , be everything that be kind and civil . Emmy , too , be present to the august family , and as mourning be not admit in court on certain day , she appear in a pink crape dress with a diamond ornament in the corsage , present to she by she brother , and she look so pretty in this costume that the and ( put out of the question the major , who have scarcely ever see she before in a evening dress , and vow that she do not look five - and - twenty ) all admire she excessively . in this dress she walk a Polonaise with major Dobbin at a ball , in which easy dance have the honour of lead out the Countess of , a old lady with a hump back , but with sixteen good quarter of nobility and related to half the royal house of . Pumpernickel stand in the midst of a happy valley through which sparkle -- to mingle with the somewhere , but I have not the map at hand to say exactly at what point -- the fertilizing stream of the Pump . in some place the river be big enough to support a ferry - boat , in other to turn a mill ; in itself , the last Transparency but three , the great and renowne build a magnificent bridge , on which he own statue rise , surround by water - nymph and emblem of victory , peace , and plenty ; he have he foot on the neck of a prostrate Turk -- history say he engage and run a through the body at the relief of by -- but , quite undisturbed by the agony of that prostrate , who writh at he foot in the most ghastly manner , the smile blandly and point with he truncheon in the direction of the , where he begin to erect a new palace that would have be the wonder of he age have the great - soul but have fund to complete it . but the completion of ( the honest german folk call it ) be stop for lack of ready money , and it and its park and garden be now in rather a fad condition , and not more than ten time big enough to accommodate the court of the reign . the garden be arrange to emulate those of versaille , and amidst the terrace and grove there be some huge allegorical waterwork still , which spout and froth stupendously upon fete - day , and frighten one with they enormous aquatic insurrection . there be the 's cave in which , by some artifice , the leaden Triton be make not only to spout water , but to play the most dreadful groan out of they lead conch -- there be the nymphbath and the cataract , which the people of the neighbourhood admire beyond expression , when they come to the yearly fair at the opening of the , or to the fete with which the happy little nation still celebrate the birthday and marriage - day of its princely governors . then from all the town of the , which stretch for nearly ten mile -- from , which lie on its western frontier bidding defiance to , from , where the have a hunting - lodge , and where he dominion be separate by the from those of the neighbour of ; from all the little villag , which besides these three great city , dot over the happy principality -- from the farm and the mill along the pump come troops of people in red petticoat and velvet head - dress , or with three - corner hat and pipe in they mouth , who flock to the Residenz and share in the pleasure of the fair and the festivity there . then the theatre be open for nothing , then the water of begin to play ( it be lucky that there be company to behold they , for one would be afraid to see they alone ) --
-- then there come mountebank and ride troops ( the way in which he Transparency be fascinate by one of the horse - rider be well know , and it be believe that , as she be call , be a spy in the french interest ) , and the delighted people be permit to march through room after room of the palace and admire the slippery floor , the rich hanging , and the spittoon at the door of all the innumerable chamber . there be one Pavilion at which have arrange -- a great but too fond of pleasure -- and which I be tell be a perfect wonder of licentious elegance . it be paint with the story of and , and the table work in and out of the room by means of a windlass , so that the company be serve without any intervention of domestic . but the place be shut up by , 's widow , a severe and devout princess of the of and of the during she son 's glorious minority , and after the death of she husband , cut off in the pride of he pleasure . the theatre of be know and famous in that quarter of . it languish a little when the present in he youth insist upon have he own opera play there , and it be say one day , in a fury , from he place in the orchestra , when he attend a rehearsal , break a bassoon on the head of the master , who be conduct , and lead too slow ; and during which time the write domestic comedy , which must have be very dreary to witness . but the execute he music in private now , and the Duchess only give away she play to the foreigner of distinction who visit she kind little court . it be conduct with no small comfort and splendour . when there be ball , though there may be four hundr people at supper , there be a servant in scarlet and lace to attend upon every four , and every one be serve on silver . there be festival and entertainment go continually on , and the have he chamberlain and equerry , and the Duchess she mistress of the wardrobe and lady of honour , just like any other and more potent potentate . the constitution be or be a moderate despotism , temper by a Chamber that might or might not be elect . I never certainly could hear of its sitting in my time at . the have lodging in a second floor , and the foreign Secretary occupy the comfortable lodging over 's . the army consist of a magnificent band that also do duty on the stage , where it be quite pleasant to see the worthy fellow march in turkish dress with rouge on and wooden scimitar , or as Roman warrior with ophicleide and trombone -- to see they again , I say , at night , after one have listen to they all the morning in the , where they perform opposite the cafe where we breakfast . besides the band , there be a rich and numerous staff of officer , and , I believe , a few man . besides the regular sentry , three or four man , habite as hussar , use to do duty at the palace , but I never see they on horseback , and au fait , what be the use of cavalry in a time of profound peace ?-- and whither the deuce should the hussar ride ? everybody --everybody that be noble of course , for as for the bourgeois we could not quite be expect to take notice of they -- visit he neighbour . h . receive once a week , . have she night -- the theatre be open twice a week , the graciously receive once , so that a man 's life might in fact be a perfect round of pleasure in the unpretending Pumpernickel way . that there be feud in the place , no one can deny . politics run very high at , and party be very bitter . there be the Strumpff faction and the Lederling party , the one support by we envoy and the other by the french , . indeed it suffice for we to stand up for , who be clearly the greater singer of the two , and have three more note in she voice than Lederlng she rival -- it suffice , I say , for we to advance any opinion to have it instantly contradict by the french diplomatist . everybody in the town be range in one or other of these faction . the Lederlung be a prettyish little creature certainly , and she voice ( what there be of it ) be very sweet , and there be no doubt that the Strumpff be not in she first youth and beauty , and certainly too stout ; when she come on in the last scene of the , for instance , in she night - chemise with a lamp in she hand , and have to go out of the window , and pass over the plank of the mill , it be all she could do to squeeze out of the window , and the plank use to bend and creak again under she weight -- but how she pour out the finale of the opera ! and with what a burst of feeling she rush into 's arm -- almost fit to smother he ! whereas the little Lederlung -- but a truce to this gossip -- the fact be that these two woman be the two flag of the french and the english party at , and the society be divide in its allegiance to those two great nations . we have
have on we side the , the master of the horse , the 's private , and the 's Tutor ; whereas of the french party be the , the - in - 's , who have serve under , and the - and he wife , who be glad enough to get the fashions from , and always have they and she cap by 's courier . the Secretary of he Chancery be little , a young fellow , as malicious as , and who make caricature of in all the - album of the place . they headquarters and table d'hote be establish at the , the other inn of the town ; and though , of course , these gentleman be oblige to be civil in public , yet they cut at each other with epigram that be as sharp as razor , as I have see a couple of wrestler in , lash at each other 's shin and never show they agony upon a muscle of they face . neither nor ever send home a dispatch to he government without a most savage series of attack upon he rival . for instance , on we side we would write , " the interests of Great in this place , and throughout the whole of , be perill by the continuance in office of the present french envoy ; this man be of a character so infamous that he will stick at no falsehood , or hesitate at no crime , to attain he end . he poison the mind of the against the english minister , represent the conduct of Great in the most odious and atrocious light , and be unhappily back by a minister whose ignorance and necessity be as notorious as he influence be fatal . " on they side they would say , " continue he system of stupid insular arrogance and vulgar falsehood against the greatest nation in the world . yesterday he be hear to speak lightly of she the of ; on a former occasion he insult the heroic of and da to insinuate that H.R.h . the of be conspir against the august throne of the lily . he gold be prodigate in every direction which he stupid menace fail to frighten . by one and the other , he have win over creature of the court here -- and , in fine , Pumpernickel will not be quiet , Germany tranquil , respect , or content until this poisonous viper be crush under heel " : and so on . when one side or the other have write any particularly spicy dispatch , news of it be sure to slip out . before the winter be far advanced , it be actually on record that take a night and receive company with great propriety and modesty . she have a french master , who compliment she upon the purity of she accent and she facility of learn ; the fact be she have learn long ago and grounde herself subsequently in the grammar so as to be able to teach it to ; and come to give she lesson in singing , which she perform so well and with such a true voice that the major 's window , who have lodging opposite under the , be always open to hear the lesson . some of the german lady , who be very sentimental and simple in they taste , fall in love with she and begin to call she do at once . these be trivial detail , but they relate to happy time . the major make himself 's tutor and read and mathematic with he , and they have a german master and ride out of evening by the side of 's carriage -- she be always too timid , and make a dreadful outcry at the slightest disturbance on horse - back . so she drive about with one of she dear german friend , and asleep on the back - seat of the barouche . he be become very sweet upon the , a very gentle tender - hear and unassum young creature , a Canoness and Countess in she own right , but with scarcely ten pound per year to she fortune , and Fanny for she part declare that to be 's sister be the greatest delight that could bestow on she , and might have put a Countess 's shield and coronet by the side of he own arm on he carriage and fork ; when -- when event occur , and those grand fete give upon the marriage of the of with the lovely of - take place . at this festival the magnificence display be such as have not be know in the little german place since the day of the prodigal . all the neighbour Prince , Princess , and be invite to the feast . bed rise to half a crown per night in , and the Army be exhaust in provide guard of honour for the Highness , Serenity , and who arrive from all quarter . the princess be marry by proxy , at she father 's residence , by the . Snuff - box be give away in profusion ( as we learn from the jeweller , who sell and afterwards buy they again ) , and bushel of the order of of be send to the nobles of the court , while hamper of the cordon and decoration of the of of be bring to ours . the french envoy get both . " he be cover with ribbon like a prize cart - horse , " say , who be not allow by the rule of he service to take any decoration : " let he have the cordon ; but with whom be the victory ? " the fact be , it be a triumph of british diplomacy ,
, the french party have propose and try they utmost to carry a marriage with a princess of the of - , whom , as a matter of course , we oppose . everybody be ask to the fete of the marriage . Garland and triumphal arch be hang across the road to welcome the young bride . the great 's fountain run with uncommonly sour wine , while that in the place froth with beer . the great water play ; and pole be put up in the park and garden for the happy peasantry , which they might climb at they leisure , carry off watch , silver fork , prize sausage hang with pink ribbon , & c. , at the top . get one , wrench it off , have swarm up the pole to the delight of the spectator , and slide down with the rapidity of a fall of water . but it be for the glory 's sake merely . the boy give the sausage to a peasant , who have very nearly seize it , and stand at the foot of the mast , blubber , because he be unsuccessful . at the french they have six more lampion in they illumination than ours have ; but we transparency , which represent the young couple advancing and fly away , with the most ludicrous likeness to the , beat the french picture hollow ; and I have no doubt get Tapeworm the advancement and the of the bath which he subsequently attaine . crowd of foreigner arrive for the fete , and of , of course . besides the court balls , public ball be give at the and the Redoute , and in the former place there be a room for trent - et - quarante and roulette establish , for the week of the festivity only , and by one of the great german company from or - - . the officer or inhabitant of the town be not allow to play at these game , but stranger , peasant , lady be admit , and any one who choose to lose or win money . that little scapegrace amongst other , whose pockets be always full of dollar and whose relation be away at the grand festival of the , come to the ball in company of he uncle 's courier , , and have only pee into a play - room at - when he hang on 's arm , and where , of course , he be not permit to gamble , come eagerly to this part of the entertainment and hanker round the table where the croupier and the punter be at work . woman be play ; they be mask , some of they ; this license be allow in these wild time of . a woman with light hair , in a low dress by no means so fresh as it have be , and with a black mask on , through the eyelet of which she eye twinkle strangely , be seat at one of the roulette - table with a card and a pin and a couple of florin before she . as the croupier call out the colour and number , she prick on the card with great care and regularity , and only venture she money on the colour after the red or black have come up a certain number of time . it be strange to look at she . but in spite of she care and assiduity she guess wrong and the last two florin follow each other under the croupier 's rake , as he cry out with he inexorable voice the win colour and number . she give a sigh , a shrug with she shoulders , which be already too much out of she gown , and dash the pin through the card on to the table , sit thrumm it for a while . then she look round she and see 's honest face staring at the scene . the little scamp ! what business have he to be there ? when she see the boy , at whose face she look hard through she shining eye and mask , she say , " yoMonsieu n'est pa joueur ? " " non , , " say the boy ; but she must have know , from he accent , of what country he be , for she answer he with a slight foreign tone . " you have nevare play -- will you do I a littl ' favor ? " " what be it ? " say , blush again . be at work for he part at the rouge et noir and do not see he young master . " play this for I , if you please ; put it on any number , any number . " and she take from she bosom a purse , and out of it a gold piece , the only coin there , and she put it into 's hand . the boy laugh and do as he be bid . the number come up sure enough . there be a power that arrange that , they say , for beginner . " thank you , " say she , pull the money towards she , " thank you . what be you name ? " " my name 's , " say , and be finger in he own pocket for dollar , and just about to make a trial , when the major , in he uniform , and , , from the ball , make they appearance . other people , find the entertainment stupid and prefer the fun at the , have quit the ball earlier ; but it be probable the major and have go home and find the boy 's absence , for the former instantly go up to
to he and , take he by the shoulder , pull he briskly back from the place of temptation . then , look round the room , he see employ as we have say , and go up to he , ask how he da to bring to such a place . " Laissez - moi tranquille , " say , very much excit by play and wine . " Il faut s'amuser , parbleu . Je ne tsuis pas au service . " see he condition the major do not choose to argue with the man , but contente himself with draw away and ask if he would come away . he be stand close by the lady in the mask , who be play with pretty good luck now , and look on much interested at the game . " have not you better come , , " the major say , " with and I ? " " I will stop and go home with that rascal , , " say ; and for the same reason of modesty , which he think ought to be preserve before the boy , do not care to remonstrate with , but leave he and walk home with . " do you play ? " ask the major when they be out and on they way home . the boy say " no . " " give I you word of honour as a gentleman that you never will . " " why ? " say the boy ; " it seem very good fun . " and , in a very eloquent and impressive manner , the major show he why he should not , and would have enforce he precept by the example of 's own father , have he like to say anything that should reflect on the other 's memory . when he have house he , he go to bed and see he light , in the little room outside of 's , presently disappear . 's follow half a hour afterwards . I do not know what make the major note it so accurately . , however , remain behind over the play - table ; he be no gambler , but not averse to the little excitement of the sport now and then , and he have some Napoleons chinking in the embroidered pocket of he court waistcoat . he put down one over the fair shoulder of the little gambler before he , and they win . she make a little movement to make room for he by she side , and just take the skirt of she gow from a vacant chair there . " come and give I good luck , " she say , still in a foreign accent , quite different from that frank and perfectly English " thank you , " with which she have salute 's coup in she favour . the portly gentleman , look round to see that nobody of rank observe he , sit down ; he mutter -- " ah , really , well now , bless my soul . I be very fortunate ; I be sure to give you good fortune , " and other word of compliment and confusion . " do you play much ? " the foreign mask say . " I put a or two down , " say with a superb air , flinge down a gold piece . " yes ; ay nap after dinner , " say the mask archly . but look frightened , she continue , in she pretty french accent , " you do not play to win . no more do I . I play to forget , but I can not . I can not forget old time , monsieur . you little nephew be the image of he father ; and you -- you be not change -- but yes , you be . everybody change , everybody forget ; nobody have any heart . " " , who be it ? " ask in a flutter . " can not you guess , ? " say the little woman in a sad voice , and undo she mask , she look at he . " you have forget I . " " good heaven ! ! " gas out . " , " say the other , put she hand on he ; but she follow the game still , all the time she be look at he . " I be stop at the , " she continue . " ask for . I see my dear to - day ; how pretty she look , and how happy ! so do you ! everybody but I , who be wretch , . " and she put she money over from the red to the black , as if by a chance movement of she hand , and while she be wip she eye with a pocket - handkerchief fringe with torn lace . the red come up again , and she lose the whole of that stake . " come away , " she say . " come with I a little -- we be old friend , be we not , dear ? " and have lose all he money by this time , follow he master out into the moonlight , where the illumination be wink out and the transparency over we mission be scarcely visible . we must pass over a part of 's biography with that lightness and delicacy which the world demand -- the moral world , that have , perhaps , no particular objection to vice , but a insuperable repugnance to hear vice call by its proper name . there be thing we do and know perfectly well in , though we never speak of they : as the worship the , but do not mention he :
: and a polite public will no more bear to read a authentic description of vice than a truly refin or american female will permit the word breech to be pronounce in she chaste hear . and yet , madam , both be walk the world before we face every day , without much shocke we . if you be to blush every time they go by , what complexion you would have ! it be only when they naughty name be call out that you modesty have any occasion to show alarm or sense of outrage , and it have be the wish of the present writer , all through this story , deferentially to submit to the fashion at present prevailing , and only to hind at the existence of wickedness in a light , easy , and agreeable manner , so that nobody be fine feeling may be offend . I defy any one to say that we , who have certainly some vex , have not be present to the public in a perfectly genteel and inoffensive manner . in describe this Si , singe and smile , coax and cajol , the author , with modest pride , ask he reader all round , have he once forget the law of politeness , and show the monster 's hideous tail above water ? no ! those who like may peep down under wave that be pretty transparent and see it writh and twirl , diabolically hideous and slimy , flapp amongst bone , or curl round corps ; but above the waterline , I ask , have not everything be proper , agreeable , and decorous , and have any the most squeamish immoralist in a right to cry fie ? when , however , the Siren disappear and dife below , down among the dead man , the water of course grow turbid over she , and it be labou lose to look into it ever so curiously . they look pretty enough when they sit upon a rock , twange they harps and comb they hair , and s , and beckon to you to come and hold the look - glass ; but when they sink into they native element , depend on it , those mermaid be about no good , and we have best not examine the fiendish marine cannibal , revell and feast on they wretch pick victim . and so , when be out of the way , be sure that she be not particularly well employ , and that the less that be say about she doings be in fact the better . if we be to give a full account of she proceeding during a couple of year that follow after the catastrophe , there might be some reason for people to say this book be improper . the action of very vain , heartless , pleasure - seek people be very often improper ( as be many of yours , my friend with the grave face and spotless reputation -- but that be merely by the way ) ; and what be those of a woman without faith -- or love -- or character ? and I be inclin to think that there be a period in 's life when she be seize , not by remorse , but by a kind of despair , and absolutely neglect she person and do not even care for she reputation . this abattement and degradation do not take place all at once ; it be bring about by degree , after she calamity , and after many struggle to keep up -- as a man who go overboard hang on to a spar whilst any hope be leave , and then fling it away and go down , when he find that struggling be in vain . she linger about whilst she husband be make preparation for he departure to he seat of government , and it be believe make more than one attempt to see she brother - in - law , , and to work upon he feeling , which she have almost enlisted in she favour . as and be walk down to the of , the latter spy in a black veil , and lurk near the palace of the legislature . she sneak away when she eye meet those of , and indeed never succeed in she design upon the Baronet . probably interpose . I have hear that she quite astonished she husband by the spirit which she exhibit in this quarrel , and she determination to disow . of she own movement , she invite to come and stop in until he departure for , know that with he for a guard Mr . would not try to force she door ; and she look curiously at the superscription of all the letter which arrive for , lest he and he sister - in - law should be correspond . not but that could have write have she a mind , but she do not try to see or to write to at he own house , and after one or two attempt consent to he demand that the correspondence regard she conjugal difference should be carry on by lawyer only . the fact be that 's mind have be poisone against she . a short time after 's accident have be with the Baronet and give he such a biography of . Becky as have astonish the member for 's . he know everything regard she : who she father be ; in what year she mother dance at the opera ; what have be she previous history ; and what she conduct during she married life -- as I have no doubt that the greater part of the story be false and dictate by interested malevolence , it shall not be repeat here . but be leave with a
a sad sad reputation in the esteem of a country gentleman and relative who have be once rather partial to she . the revenue of the of be not large . a part of they be set aside by he Excellency for the payment of certain outstanding debt and liability , the charge incident on he high situation require considerable expense ; finally , it be find that he could not spare to he wife more than three hundred pound a year , which he propose to pay to she on a undertaking that she would never trouble he . otherwise , scandal , separation , doctor ' Commons would ensue . but it be 's business , 's business , 's , everybody be -- to get she out of the country , and hush up a most disagreeable affair . she be probably so much occupy in arrange these affair of business with she husband 's lawyer that she forget to take any step whatever about she son , the little , and do not even once propose to go and see he . that young gentleman be consign to the entire guardianship of he aunt and uncle , the former of whom have always possess a great share of the child 's affection . he mamma write he a neat letter from , when she quit , in which she request he to mind he book , and say she be go to take a continental tour , during which she would have the pleasure of writing to he again . but she never do for a year afterwards , and not , indeed , until 's only boy , always sickly , die of hoope - cough and measle -- then 's mamma write the most affectionate composition to she darling son , who be make heir of 's by this accident , and draw more closely than ever to the kind lady , whose tender heart have already adopt he . , then grow a tall , fine lad , blush when he get the letter . " oh , , you be my mother ! " he say ; " and not -- and not that one . " but he write back a kind and respectful letter to , then live at a boarding - house at . but we be advance matter . we darl 's first flight be not very far . she perch upon the french coast at , that refuge of so much exil English innocence , and there live in rather a genteel , widow manner , with a femme de chambre and a couple of room , at a hotel . she dine at the table d'hote , where people think she very pleasant , and where she entertaine she neighbour by story of she brother , , and she great acquaintance , talk that easy , fashionable slip - slop which have so much effect upon certain folk of small breeding . she pass with many of they for a person of importance ; she give little tea - party in she private room and share in the innocent amusement of the place in sea - bathing , and in jaunt in open carriage , in stroll on the sand , and in visit to the play . , the printer 's lady , who be board with she family at the hotel for the summer , and to whom she come of a and , vote she charming , until that little rogue of a begin to pay she too much attention . but there be nothing in the story , only that be always affable , easy , and good - nature -- and with man especially . number of people be go abroad as usual at the end of the season , and have plenty of opportunity of find out by the behaviour of she acquaintance of the great world the opinion of " society " as regard she conduct . one day it be and she daughter whom confront as she be walk modestly on pier , the cliff of shine in the distance across the deep blue sea . lady Partlet marshall all she daughter round she with a sweep of she parasol and retreat from the pier , dart savage glance at poor little who stand alone there . on another day the packet come in . it have be blow fresh , and it always sui 's humour to see the droll woe - begone face of the people as they emerge from the boat . happen to be on board this day . she ladyship have be exceedingly ill in she carriage , and be greatly exhaust and scarcely fit to walk up the plank from the ship to the pier . but all she energie rally the instant she see smile roguishly under a pink bonnet , and give she a glance of scorn such as would have shrivell up most woman , she walk into the custom House quite unsupported . Becky only laugh : but I do not think she like it . she feel she be alone , quite alone , and the far - off shining cliff of be impassable to she . the behaviour of the man have undergone too I do not know what change . show he tooth and laugh in she face with a familiarity that be not pleasant . , who be cap in hand to she three month before , and would walk a mile in the rain to see for she carriage in the line at , be talk to of the ( 's son ) one day upon the jetty , as take she walk there . nod to she over he shoulder , without move he hat , and continue he conversation with the heir of . try to walk into she sitting - room
room at the inn with a cigar in he mouth , but she close the door upon he , and would have lock it , only that he finger be inside . she begin to feel that she be very lonely indeed . " if he have be here , " she say , " those coward would never have da to insult I . " she think about " he " with great sadness and perhaps long -- about he honest , stupid , constant kindness and fidelity ; he never - cease obedience ; he good humour ; he bravery and courage . very likely she cry , for she be particularly lively , and have put on a little extra rouge , when she come down to dinner . she rouge regularly now ; and -- and she may get for she besides that which be charge in the hotel bill . perhaps the insult of the man be not , however , so intolerable to she as the sympathy of certain woman . and pass through on they way to . the party be protect by , young , and of course old Crackenbury , and 's little girl . they do not avoid she . they giggle , cackle , tattle , condol , consol , and patronize she until they drive she almost wild with rage . to be patronize by they ! she think , as they go away simper after kiss she . and she hear 's laugh ringing on the stair and know quite well how to interpret he hilarity . it be after this visit that , who have pay she weekly bill , who have make herself agreeable to everybody in the house , who smile at the landlady , call the waiter " monsieur , " and pay the chambermaid in politeness and apology , what far more than compensate for a little niggardliness in point of money ( of which never be free ) , that , we say , receive a notice to quit from the landlord , who have be tell by some one that she be quite a unfit person to have at he hotel , where English lady would not sit down with she . and she be force to fly into lodging of which the dulness and solitude be most wearisome to she . still she hold up , in spite of these rebuff , and try to make a character for herself and conquer scandal . she go to church very regularly and sang louder than anybody there . she take up the cause of the widow of the shipwrecked fisherman , and give work and drawing for the ; she subscribe to the and would not waltz . in a word , she do everything that be respectable , and that be why we dwell upon this part of she career with more fondness than upon subsequent part of she history , which be not so pleasant . she see people avoid she , and still laboriously smile upon they ; you never could suppose from she countenance what pang of humiliation she might be endure inwardly . she history be after all a mystery . party be divide about she . some people who take the trouble to busy themselves in the matter say that she be the criminal , whilst other vow that she be as innocent as a lamb and that she odious husband be in fault . she win over a good many by burst into tear about she boy and exhibit the most frantic grief when he name be mention , or she see anybody like he . she gain good 's heart in that way , who be rather the of and give the most dinner and ball of all the resident there , by weeping when come from 's academy to pass he holiday with he mother . " he and she be of the same age , and so like , " say in a voice chok with agony ; whereas there be five year ' difference between the boy 's age , and no more likeness between they than between my respect reader and he humble servant . Wenham , when he be go abroad , on he way to Kissingen to join , enlighten Mrs . Alderney on this point and tell she how he be much more able to describe little than he mamma , who notoriously hate he and never see he ; how he be thirteen year old , while little be but nine , fair , while the other darling be dark -- in a word , cause the lady in question to repent of she good humour . whenever make a little circle for herself with incredible toil and labour , somebody come and sweep it down rudely , and she have all she work to begin over again . it be very hard ; very hard ; lonely and dishearten . there be , who take she up for some time , attract by the sweetness of she singe at church and by she proper view upon serious subject , concern which in former day , at 's , . have have a good deal of instruction . well , she not only take tract , but she read they . she work flannel petticoat for the -- night - cap for the -- paint handscreens for the conversion of the and the -- sit under on , on , attend two service at church , besides , the , in the evening , and all in vain . have occasion to correspond with the Countess of about the Warmingpan fund for the ( for the management of which admirable charity both these lady for part of a female committee ) , and have mention she " sweet friend , " , the Countess write
write back such a letter regard , with such particular , hint , fact , falsehood , and general commination , that intimacy between and . cease forthwith , and all the serious world of , where this misfortune take place , immediately part company with the reprobate . those who know the abroad know that we carry with we we we pride , pill , prejudice , Harvey - sauce , cayenne - pepper , and other Lare , make a little wherever we settle down . from one colony to another fle uneasily . from to , from to , from to -- trye with all she might to be respectable , and alas ! always find out some day or other and peck out of the cage by the real daw . take she up at one of these place -- a woman without a blemish in she character and a house in . she be stay at the hotel at , whither fle , and they make each other 's acquaintance first at sea , where they be swimm together , and subsequently at the table d'hote of the hotel . have hear -- who indeed have not ?--some of the scandal of the affair ; but after a conversation with , she pronounce that be a angel , she husband a ruffian , a unprincipled wretch , as everybody know , and the whole case against a infamous and wick conspiracy of that rascal Wenham . " if you be a man of any spirit , , you would box the wretch 's ears the next time you see he at the , " she say to she husband . but be only a quiet old gentleman , husband to , with a taste for geology , and not tall enough to reach anybody 's ears . the Eagles then patronize , take she to live with she at she own house at , quarrell with the ambassador 's wife because she would not receive she protegee , and do all that lay in woman 's power to keep straight in the path of virtue and good repute . be very respectable and orderly at first , but the life of humdrum virtue grow utterly tedious to she before long . it be the same routine every day , the same dulness and comfort , the same drive over the same stupid , the same company of a evening , the same 's of a night -- the same opera always be act over and over again ; be die of weariness , when , luckily for she , young come from , and he mother , see the impression which she little friend make upon he , straightway give Becky warning . then she try keep house with a female friend ; then the double menage begin to quarrel and get into debt . then she determine upon a boarding - house existence and live for some time at that famous mansion keep by , in the , at , where she begin exercise she graces and fascination upon the shabby dandy and fly - blow beauty who frequent she landlady 's salon . love society and , indeed , could no more exist without it than a opium -eater without he dram , and she be happy enough at the period of she boarding - house life . " the woman here be as amusing as those in , " she tell a old friend who meet she , " only , they dress be not quite so fresh . the man wear clean glove , and be sad rogue , certainly , but they be not worse than and that . the mistress of the house be a little vulgar , but I do not think she be so vulgar as ------ " and here she name the name of a great leader of fashion that I would die rather than reveal . in fact , when you see 's room light up of a night , man with plaque and cordon at the ecarte table , and the woman at a little distance , you might fancy yourself for a while in good society , and that be a real Countess . many people do so fancy , and be for a while one of the most dashing lady of the Countess 's salon . but it be probable that she old creditor of 1815 find she out and cause she to leave , for the poor little woman be force to fly from the city rather suddenly , and go thence to . how well she remember the place ! she grin as she look up at the little entresol which she have occupi , and think of the family , bawling for horse and flight , as they carriage stand in the porte - cochere of the hotel . she go to and to , where 's monument much strike she . she make a little sketch of it . " that poor Cupid ! " she say ; " how dreadfully he be in love with I , and what a fool he be ! I wonder whether little be alive . it be a good little creature ; and that fat brother of hers . I have he funny fat picture still among my papers . they be kind simple people . " at arrive , recommend by to she friend , , widow of 's , the famous , who be leave with no resource by the deceased hero but that of a table d'hote and a ecarte table . second - rate dandy and roue , widow - lady who always have a lawsuit , and very simple English folk , who fancy they see " continental society " at these house , put down they money , or eat they meal , at 's table
table . the gallant young fellow treat the company round to champagne at the table d'hote , ride out with the woman , or hire horse on country excursion , club money to take box at the play or the opera , bet over the fair shoulders of the ladie at the ecarte table , and write home to they parent in about they felicitous introduction to foreign society . here , as at , be a boarding - house queen , and rule in select pension . she never refuse the champagne , or the bouquet , or the drive into the country , or the private boxe ; but what she prefer be the ecarte at night , -- and she play audaciously . first she play only for a little , then for five - franc piece , then for , then for note : then she would not be able to pay she month 's pension : then she borrowed from the young gentleman : then she get into cash again and bully , whom she have coax and wheedle before : then she be play for ten sous at a time , and in a dire state of poverty : then she quarter 's allowance would come in , and she would pay off 's score and would once more take the card against , or the . when leave , the sad truth be that she owe three month ' pension to , of which fact , and of the gambling , and of the drinking , and of the go down on she knee to the , , and borrowe money of he , and of she coaxing and flirt with , son of , pupil of the , whom she use to take into she private room , and of whom she win large sum at ecarte -- of which fact , I say , and of a hundred of she other knavery , the inform every English person who stop at she establishment , and announce that be no better than a vipere . so we little wanderer go about set up she tent in various city of , as restless as or . she taste for disrespectability grow more and more remarkable . she become a perfect Bohemian ere long , herding with people whom it would make you hair stand on end to meet . there be no town of any mark in but it have it be little colony of English raff -- men whose name the officer read out periodically at the ' -- young gentleman of very good family often , only that the latter disown they ; frequenter of billiard - room and estaminet , patron of foreign races and game - table . they people the debtor 's prison -- they drink and swagger -- they fight and brawl -- they run away without pay -- they have duel with French and german officer -- they cheat at ecarte -- they get the money and drive off to in magnificent britzka -- they try they infallible martingale and lurk about the table with empty pocket , shabby bully , penniless buck , until they can swindle a banker with a sham bill of exchange , or find another to rob . the alternation of splendour and misery which these people undergo be very queer to viow . they life must be one of great excitement . --must it be own ?-- take to this life , and take to it not unkindly . she go about from town to town among these . the lucky be know at every play - table in . she and keep house at together . it be say she be order out of , and my friend avers that it be at she house at that he be hocuss at supper and lose eight hundred pound to major Loder and the Honourable . we be bound , you see , to give some account of 's biography , but of this part , the less , perhaps , that be say the better . they say that , when . be particularly down on she luck , she give concert and lesson in music here and there . there be a , who certainly have a matinee musicale at , accompany by , premier pianist to the of , and my little friend , who know everybody and have travel everywhere , always use to declare that he be at in the year 1830 , when a certain make she appearance in the opera of the , give occasion to a furious row in the theatre there . she be hiss off the stage by the audience , partly from she own incompetency , but chiefly from the ill - advise sympathy of some persons in the parquet , ( where the officer of the garrison have they admission ) ; and be certain that the unfortunate debutante in question be no other than . she be , in fact , no better than a vagabond upon this earth . when she get she money she gamble ; when she have gamble it she be put to shift to live ; who know how or by what mean she succeed ? it be say that she be once see at . , but be summarily dismiss from that capital by the police , so that there can not be any possibility of truth in the report that she be a russian spy at and to afterward . I have even be inform that at she discover a relation of she own , no less a person than she maternal grandmother , who be not by any means a , but a hideous old box -opener at a theatre on the Boulevard . the meeting between they , of which other person , as it be hint elsewhere , seem
seem to have be acquaint , must have be a very affecting interview . the present historian can give no certain detail regard the event . it happen at once that 's half - year 's salary have just be pay into the principal banker 's there , and , as everybody who have a balance of above five hundred scudi be invite to the ball which this prince of merchant give during the winter , have the honour of a card , and appear at one of the and 's splendid evening entertainment . the princess be of the family of , lineally descend from the second king of , and of the house of , while the 's grandfather , , sell wash - ball , essences , tobacco , and pocket-handkerchiefs , ran errand for gentleman , and lent money in a small way . all the great company in thronge to he saloon -- Princes , Dukes , Ambassadors , artist , fiddler , monsignori , young bear with they leader -- every rank and condition of man . he hall blaze with light and magnificence ; be resplendent with gilt frame ( contain picture ) , and dubious antique ; and the enormous gilt crown and arm of the princely owner , a gold mushroom on a crimson field ( the colour of the pocket - handkerchief which he sell ) , and the silver fountain of the family shone all over the roof , door , and panel of the house , and over the grand velvet baldaquin prepare to receive popes and emperors . so , who have arrive in the diligence from , and be lod at a inn in a very modest way , get a card for 's entertainment , and she maid dress she with unusual care , and she go to this fine ball lean on the arm of major , with whom she happen to be travel at the time --( the same man who shoot at the next year , and be cane by for carry four king in he hat besides those which he use in playing at ecarte ) -- and this pair go into the room together , and see a number of old face which she remember in happier day , when she be not innocent , but not find out . major Loder know a great number of foreigner , keen - look whiskered man with dirty striped ribbon in they buttonhole , and a very small display of linen ; but he own countryman , it might be remark , eschew the major . , too , know some lady here and there -- french widow , dubious italian countess , whose husband have treat they ill -- faugh -- what shall we say , we who have move among some of the finest company of , of this refuse and sediment of rascal ? if we play , let it be with clean card , and not with this dirty pack . but every man who have form one of the innumerable army of traveller have see these marauding irregulars hang on , like and , to the main force , wear the king 's colour and boasting of he commission , but pillage for themselves , and occasionally gibbet by the roadside . well , she be hang on the arm of major Loder , and they go through the room together , and drank a great quantity of champagne at the buffet , where the people , and especially the major 's irregular corps , struggle furiously for refreshment , of which when the pair have have enough , they push on until they reach the Duchess 's own pink velvet saloon , at the end of the suite of apartment ( where the statue of the , and the great look - glass , fram in silver ) , and where the princely family be entertain they most distinguished guest at a round table at supper . it be just such a little select banquet as that of which recollect that she have partake at 's -- and there he sit at 's table , and she see he . the scar cut by the diamond on he white , bald , shining forehead make a burn red mark ; he red whisker be dye of a purple hue , which make he pale face look still paler . he wear he collar and order , he blue ribbon and garter . he be a greater than any there , though there be a reign and a , with they princess , and near he Lordship be seat the beautiful Countess of , nee , whose husband ( the della ) , so well know for he brilliant entomological collection , have be long absent on a mission to the emperor of . when beheld that familiar and illustrious face , how vulgar all of a sudden do major Loder appear to she , and how that odious do smell of tobacco ! in one instant she reassume she fine - ladyship and try to look and feel as if she be in once more . " that woman look stupid and ill - humoured , " she think ; " I be sure she can not amuse he . no , he must be bo by she -- he never be by I . " a hundred such touching hope , fear , and memory palpitate in she little heart , as she look with she brightest eye ( the rouge which she wear up to she eyelid make they twinkle ) towards the great nobleman . of a and night use also to put on he grandest manner and to look and speak like a great prince , as he be . admire he smile sumptuously , easy , lofty , and stately . ah
ah , bon , what a pleasant companion he be , what a brilliant wit , what a rich fund of talk , what a grand manner !-- and she have exchange this for major Loder , reek of cigar and brandy - and - water , and with he horsejockey joke and prize - ring slang , and they like . " I wonder whether he will know I , " she think . be talk and laugh with a great and illustrious lady at he side , when he look up and see . she be all over in a flutter as they eye meet , and she put on the very best smile she could muster , and drop he a little , timid , implor curtsey . he star aghast at she for a minute , as might on behold 's sudden appearance at he ball - supper , and remain look at she with open mouth , when that horrid major pull she away . " come away into the supper - room , , " be that gentleman 's remark : " see these nob grubb away have make I peckish too . let 's go and try the old 's champagne . " think the major have have a great deal too much already . the day after she go to walk on the -- the of the idler -- possibly in hope to have another sight of . but she meet another acquaintance there : it be , he lordship 's confidential man , who come up nodding to she rather familiarly and put a finger to he hat . " I know that be here , " he say ; " I follow she from she hotel . I have some advice to give . " " from the of ? " ask , resume as much of she dignity as she could muster , and not a little agitate by hope and expectation . " no , " say the valet ; " it be from I . be very unwholesome . " " not at this season , -- not till after . " " I tell Madame it be unwholesome now . there be always malaria for some people . that curse marsh wind kill many at all season . look , , you be always bon enfant , and I have a interest in you , parole d'honneur . be warn . go away from , I tell you -- or you will be ill and die . " laugh , though in rage and fury . " what ! assassinate poor little I ? " she say . " how romantic ! do my lord carry bravo for courier , and stiletto in the fourgon ? Bah ! I will stay , if but to plague he . I have those who will defend I whilst I be here . " it be 's turn to laugh now . " defend you , " he say , " and who ? the major , the captain , any one of those gambl man whom see would take she life for a hundred louis . we know thing about major Loder ( he be no more a major than I be my the ) which would send he to the galley or worse . we know everything and have friend everywhere . we know whom you see at , and what relation you find there . yes , may stare , but we do . how be it that no minister on the continent would receive ? she have offend somebody : who never forgive -- whose rage redouble when he see you . he be like a madman last night when he come home . to make he a scene about you and fire off in one of she fury . " " oh , it be , be it ? " say , relieve a little , for the information she have just get have scared she . " no -- she do not matter -- she be always jealous . I tell you it be . you do wrong to show yourself to he . and if you stay here you will repent it . Mark my word . . here be my lord 's carriage " -- and seize 's arm , he rush down a alley of the garden as 's barouche , blaze with heraldic device , come whir along the avenue , borne by the almost priceless horse , and bear to lol on the cushion , dark , sulky , and bloom , a in she lap , a white parasol sway over she head , and old stretch at she side with a livid face and ghastly eye . , or anger , or desire cause they to brighten now and then still , but ordinarily , they give no light , and seem tired of look out on a world of which almost all the pleasure and all the best beauty have pal upon the worn - out wick old man . " yoMonseigneu have never recover the shock of that night , never , " whisper to as the carriage flash by , and she pee out at it from behind the shrub that hide she . " that be a consolation at any rate , " thought . whether my lord really have murderous intentions towards as say ( since 's death he have return to he native country , where he live much respecte , and have purchase from he the title of ) , and the factotum object to have to do with assassination ; or whether he simply have a commission to frighten . out of a city where he Lordship propose to pass the winter , and the sight of she would be eminently disagreeable to the great nobleman , be a
a point which have never be ascertain : but the threat have it be effect upon the little woman , and she seek no more to intrude herself upon the presence of she old patron . everybody know the melancholy end of that nobleman , which befell at two month after the french revolution of 1830 ; when the most , of , of and of , in the Peerage of , , and , a Knight of the most order of the , of the of , of the russian order of of the First class , of the turkish order of the , of the and of the , of the or 's of , a trustee of the , a brother of the , a of the , and .-- die after a series of fit bring on , as the papers say , by the shock occasion to he lordship 's sensibility by the downfall of the ancient french monarchy . a eloquent catalogue appear in a weekly print , describe he virtue , he magnificence , he talents , and he good action . he sensibility , he attachment to the illustrious of , with which he claim a alliance , be such that he could not survive the misfortunes of he august kinsman . he body be bury at , and he heart -- that heart which always beat with every generous and noble emotion be bring back to in a silver urn . " in he , " say , " the poor and the have lose a beneficent patron , society one of its most brilliant ornament , and one of she loftiest patriot and statesman , " & c. , &c . he will be a good deal dispute , and a attempt be make to force from to the celebrated jewel call the " 's - eye " diamond , which he lordship always wore on he forefinger , and which it be say that she remove from it after he lamented demise . but he confidential friend and attendant , prove that the ring have be present to the say two day before the 's death , as be the bank - note , jewel , and french bond , & c. , find in he lordship 's secretaire and claim by he heir from that injured woman . of and the day after the meeting at the play - table , have himself array with unusual care and splendour , and without think it necessary to say a word to any member of he family regard the occurrence of the previous night , or ask for they company in he walk , he sally forth at a early hour , and be presently see make inquirie at the door of the . in consequence of the fete the house be full of company , the table in the street be already surround by person smoke and drink the national small - beer , the public room be in a cloud of smoke , and have , in he pompous way , and with he clumsy german , make inquirie for the person of whom he be in search , be direct to the very top of the house , above the first - floor room where some travel pedlar have liv , and be exhibit they jewellery and brocade ; above the second - floor apartment occupy by the etat major of the gambling firm ; above the third - floor room , tenant by the band of renowne Bohemian vaulter and tumbler ; and so on to the little cabins of the roof , where , among student , bagmen , small tradesman , and country - folk come in for the festival , have find a little nest -- as dirty a little refuge as ever beauty lay hide in . like the life . she be at home with everybody in the place , pedlar , punter , tumbler , student and all . she be of a wild , rove nature , inherit from father and mother , who be both , by taste and circumstance ; if a lord be not by , she would talk to he courier with the greatest pleasure ; the din , the stir , the drink , the smoke , the tattle of the pedlar , the solemn , braggart way of the poor tumbler , the sournois talk of the gambling - table official , the song and swagger of the student , and the general buzz and hum of the place have pleased and tick the little woman , even when she luck be down and she have not wherewithal to pay she bill . how pleasant be all the bustle to she now that she purse be full of the money which little have win for she the night before ! as come creak and puffe up the final stair , and be speechless when he get to the landing , and begin to wipe he face and then to look for no. 92 , the room where he be direct to seek for the person he want , the door of the opposite chamber , no. 90 , be open , and a student , in jack - boot and a dirty schlafrock , be lie on the bed smoke a long pipe ; whilst another student in long yellow hair and a braided coat , exceed smart and dirty too , be actually on he knee at no. 92 , bawl through the keyhole supplication to the person within . " go away , " say a well - know voice , which make , " I expect somebody ; I expect my grandpapa . he must not see you there . " " ! " bellow the kneeling student with the whity - brown ringlet and the large finger - ring ,
, " do take compassion upon we . make a appointment . dine with I and at the inn in the park . we will have roast pheasant and porter , plum -pudding and french wine . we shall die if you do not . " " that we will , " say the young nobleman on the bed ; and this colloquy overheard , though he do not comprehend it , for the reason that he have never study the language in which it be carry on . " Newmero kattervang dooze , si vous plait , " say in he grandest manner , when he be able to speak . " Quater fang tooce ! " say the student , start up , and he bounce into he own room , where he lock the door , and where hear he laugh with he comrade on the bed . the gentleman from be stand , disconcert by this incident , when the door of the 92 open of itself and 's little head pee out full of archness and mischief . she lighte on . " it be you , " she say , come out . " how I have be wait for you ! stop ! not yet -- in one minute you shall come in . " in that instant she put a rouge - pot , a brandy bottle , and a plate of broken meat into the bed , give one smooth to she hair , and finally let in she visitor . she have , by way of morning robe , a pink domino , a trifle faded and soiled , and mark here and there with pomaturn ; but she arm shone out from the loose sleeve of the dress very white and fair , and it be tie round she little waist so as not ill to set off the trim little figure of the wearer . she lead by the hand into she garret . " come in , " she say . " come and talk to I . sit yonder on the chair " ; and she give the civilian 's hand a little squeeze and laughingly place he upon it . as for herself , she place herself on the bed -- not on the bottle and plate , you may be sure -- on which might have repose , have he choose that seat ; and so there she sit and talk with she old admirer . " how little year have change you , " she say with a look of tender interest . " I should have know you anywhere . what a comfort it be amongst stranger to see once more the frank honest face of a old friend ! " the frank honest face , to tell the truth , at this moment bear any expression but one of openness and honesty : it be , on the contrary , much pertur and puzzl in look . be survey the queer little apartment in which he find he old flame . one of she gowns hang over the bed , another depending from a hook of the door ; she bonnet obscure half the look - glass , on which , too , lay the prettiest little pair of bronze boot ; a french novel be on the table by the bedside , with a candle , not of wax . thought of pop that into the bed too , but she only put in the little paper night - cap with which she have put the candle out on go to sleep . " I should have know you anywhere , " she continue ; " a woman never forget some thing . and you be the first man I ever -- I ever see . " " be I really ? " say . " bless my soul , you -- you do not say so . " " when I come with you sister from , I be scarcely more than a child , " say . " how be that , dear love ? oh , she husband be a sad wicked man , and of course it be of I that the poor dear be jealous . as if I care about he , heigho ! when there be somebody -- but no -- do not let we talk of old time " ; and she pass she handkerchief with the tatter lace across she eyelid . " be not this a strange place , " she continue , " for a woman , who have live in a very different world too , to be find in ? I have have so many grief and wrong , ; I have be make to suffer so cruelly that I be almost make mad sometimes . I can not stay still in any place , but wander about always restless and unhappy . all my friend have be false to I -- all . there be no such thing as a honest man in the world . I be the truest wife that ever liv , though I marry my husband out of pique , because somebody else -- but never mind that . I be true , and he trample upon I and desert I . I be the fondest mother . I have but one child , one darling , one hope , one joy , which I hold to my heart with a mother 's affection , which be my life , my prayer , my -- my blessing ; and they -- they tore it from I -- tore it from I " ; and she put she hand to she heart with a passionate gesture of despair , bury she face for a moment on the bed . the brandy - bottle inside clink up against the plate which hold the cold sausage
sausage . both be move , no doubt , by the exhibition of so much grief . and be at the door , listen with to 's sob and cry . , too , be a good deal frightene and affect at see he old flame in this condition . and she begin , forthwith , to tell she story -- a tale so neat , simple , and artless that it be quite evident from hear she that if ever there be a white - rob angel escape from heaven to be subject to the infernal machination and villainy of fiend here below , that spotless be -- that miserable unsullied martyr , be present on the bed before -- on the bed , sit on the brandy - bottle . they have a very long , amicable , and confidential talk there , in the course of which be somehow make aware ( but in a manner that do not in the least scare or offend he ) that 's heart have first learn to beat at he enchanting presence ; that have certainly pay a unjustifiable court to , which might account for 's jealousy and they little rupture ; but that never give the least encouragement to the unfortunate officer , and that she have never cease to think about from the very first day she have see he , though , of course , she duty as a married woman be paramount -- duty which she have always preserved , and would , to she dying day , or until the proverbially bad climate in which be live should release she from a yoke which he cruelty have render odious to she . go away , convince that she be the most virtuous , as she be one of the most fascinating of woman , and revolve in he mind all sort of benevolent scheme for she welfare . she persecution ought to be end : she ought to return to the society of which she be a ornament . he would see what ought to be do . she must quit that place and take a quiet lodging . must come and see she and befriend she . he would go and settle about it , and consult with the major . she weep tear of heart - felt gratitude as she part from he , and press he hand as the gallant stout gentleman stoop down to kiss hers . so bow out of she little garret with as much grace as if it be a palace of which she do the honour ; and that heavy gentleman have disappear down the stair , and come out of they hole , pipe in mouth , and she amuse herself by mimick to they as she munch she cold bread and sausage and take draught of she favourite brandy - and - water . walk over to 's lodging with great solemnity and there impart to he the affect history with which he have just be make acquainted , without , however , mention the play business of the night before . and the two gentleman be lay they head together and consult as to the best means of be useful to . , while she be finish she interrupt dejeuner a la fourchette . how be it that she have come to that little town ? how be it that she have no friend and be wander about alone ? little boy at school be teach in they earliest latin book that the path of be very easy of descent . let we skip over the interval in the history of she downward progress . she be not worse now than she have be in the day of she prosperity -- only a little down on she luck . as for , she be a woman of such a soft and foolish disposition that when she hear of anybody unhappy , she heart straightway melt towards the sufferer ; and as she have never think or do anything mortally guitely herself , she have not that abhorrence for wickedness which distinguish moralist much more know . if she spoilead everybody who come near she with kindness and compliment -- if she beg pardon of all she servants for trouble they to answer the bell -- if she aologize to a shopboy who show she a piece of silk , or make a curtsey to a street -sweeper with a complimentary remark upon the elegant state of he crossing -- and she be almost capable of every one of these folly -- the notion that a old acquaintance be miserable be sure to soften she heart ; nor would she hear of anybody 's be deservedly unhappy . a world under such legislation as hers would not be a very orderly place of abode ; but there be not many woman , at least not of the ruler , who be of she sort . this lady , I believe , would have abolish all gaol , punishment , handcuffs , whipping , poverty , sickness , hunger , in the world , and be such a mean - spirit creature that -- we be oblige to confess it -- she could even forget a mortal injury . when the major heard from of the sentimental adventure which have just befall the latter , he be not , it must be own , nearly as much interested as the gentleman from . on the contrary , he excitement be quite the reverse from a pleasurable one ; he make use of a brief but improper expression regard a poor woman in distress , say , in fact , " the little minx , have she come to light again ? " he never have have the slightest liking for she , but have heartily mistrust she from the very first moment when she green eye
eye have look at , and turn away from , he own . " that little devil bring mischief wherever she go , " the major say disrespectfully . " who know what sort of life she have be lead ? and what business have she here abroad and alone ? do not tell I about persecutor and enemy ; a honest woman always have friend and never be separate from she family . why have she leave she husband ? he may have be disreputable and wick , as you say . he always be . I remember the confounded blackleg and the way in which he use to cheat and hoodwink poor . be not there a scandal about they separation ? I think I hear something , " cry out major , who do not care much about gossip , and whom try in vain to convince that . be in all respects a most injured and virtuous female . " well , well ; let 's ask , " say that arch -diplomatist of a major . " only let we go and consult she . I suppose you will allow that she be a good judge at any rate , and know what be right in such matters . " " Hm ! be very well , " say , who do not happen to be in love with he sister . " very well ? by , sir , she be the finest lady I ever meet in my life , " bounce out the major . " I say at once , let we go and ask she if this woman ought to be visit or not -- I will be content with she verdict . " now this odious , artful rogue of a major be think in he own mind that he be sure of he case . Emmy , he remember , be at one time cruelly and deservedly jealous of , never mention she name but with a shrinking and terror -- a jealous woman never forgive , think : and so the pair go across the street to . 's house , where she be contentedly warbl at a music lesson with . when that lady take she leave , open the business with he usual pomp of word . " , my dear , " say he , " I have just have the most extraordinary -- yes -- bless my soul ! the most extraordinary adventure -- a old friend -- yes , a most interesting old friend of yours , and I may say in old time , have just arrive here , and I should like you to see she . " " she ! " say , " who be it ? major Dobbin , if you please not to break my scissors . " the major be twirl they round by the little chain from which they sometimes hang to they lady 's waist , and be thereby endanger he own eye . " it be a woman whom I dislike very much , " say the major , doggedly , " and whom you have no cause to love . " " it be , I be sure it be , " say , blush and be very much agitate . " you be right ; you always be , " answer . , , old , old time , grief , pang , remembrance , rush back into 's gentle heart and cause a cruel agitation there . " do not let I see she , " continue . " I could not see she . " " I tell you so , " say to . " she be very unhappy , and -- and that sort of thing , " urg . " she be very poor and unprotected , and have be ill -- exceedingly ill -- and that scoundrel of a husband have desert she . " " ah ! " say " she have not a friend in the world , " Jos go on , not undexterously , " and she say she think she might trust in you . she be so miserable , . she have be almost mad with grief . she story quite affect I --' pon my word and honour , it do -- never be such a cruel persecution borne so angelically , I may say . she family have be most cruel to she . " " poor creature ! " say . " and if she can get no friend , she say she think she will die , " proceed in a low tremulous voice . " bless my soul ! do you know that she try to kill herself ? she carry laudanum with she -- I see the bottle in she room --such a miserable little room -- at a third - rate house , the , up in the roof at the top of all . I go there . " this do not seem to affect . she even smile a little . perhaps she figure to herself pante up the stair . " she be beside herself with grief , " he resume . " the agony that woman have endure be quite frightful to hear off . she have a little boy , of the same age as . " " yes , yes , I think I remember , " remark . " well ? " " the most beautiful child ever see , " say , who be very fat , and easily move , and have be touch by the story tell ; " a perfect angel , who adore he mother . the ruffian tore he shriek out of she arm , and have never allow he to see she . " " dear , " cry out , start up at once , " let
let we go and see she this minute . " and she run into she adjoining bedchamber , tie on she bonnet in a flutter , come out with she shawl on she arm , and order to follow . he go and put she shawl -- it be a white cashmere , consign to she by the major himself from -- over she shoulders . he see there be nothing for it but to obey , and she put she hand into he arm , and they go away . " it be number 92 , up four pair of stair , " say , perhaps not very willing to ascend the step again ; but he place himself in the window of he drawing - room , which command the place on which the elephant stand , and see the pair march through the market . it be as well that see they too from she garret , for she and the two student be chatter and laugh there ; they have be joke about the appearance of 's grandpapa -- whose arrival and departure they have witness -- but she have time to dismiss they , and have she little room clear before the landlord of the , who know that be a great favourite at the , and respecte she accordingly , lead the way up the stair to the roof story , encourage and the Herr major as they achieve the ascent . " gracious lady , gracious lady ! " say the landlord , knock at 's door ; he have call she Madame the day before , and be by no means courteous to she . " who be it ? " say , put out she head , and she give a little scream . there stand in a tremble , and , the tall major , with he cane . he stand still watch , and very much interested at the scene ; but spring forward with open arm towards , and forgave she at that moment , and embrace she and kiss she with all she heart . ah , poor wretch , when be you lip press before by such pure kiss ? and kindness like 's be likely to touch even such a harden little reprobate as . she return 's caress and kind speech with something very like gratitude , and a emotion which , if it be not last , for a moment be almost genuine . that be a lucky stroke of hers about the child " tear from she arm shriek . " it be by that harrow misfortune that have win she friend back , and it be one of the very first point , we may be certain , upon which we poor simple little begin to talk to she new - find acquaintance . " and so they take you darling child from you ? " we simpleton cry out . " oh , , my poor dear suffer friend , I know what it be to lose a boy , and to feel for those who have lose one . but please yours will be restore to you , as a merciful merciful Providence have bring I back mine . " " the child , my child ? oh , yes , my agony be frightful , " own , not perhaps without a twinge of conscience . it jar upon she to be oblige to commence instantly to tell lie in reply to so much confidence and simplicity . but that be the misfortune of begin with this kind of forgery . when one fib become due as it be , you must forge another to take up the old acceptance ; and so the stock of you lie in circulation inevitably multiply , and the danger of detection increase every day . " my agony , " continue , " be terrible ( I hope she will not sit down on the bottle ) when they take he away from I ; I think I should die ; but I fortunately have a brain fever , during which my doctor give I up , and -- and I recover , and -- and here I be , poor and friendless . " " how old be he ? " ask . " , " say . " ! " cry the other . " why , he be bear the same year with , who be -- " " I know , I know , " cry out , who have in fact quite forgotten all about little 's age . " have make I forget so many thing , . I be very much change : half - wild sometimes . he be eleven when they take he away from I . bless he sweet face ; I have never see it again . " " be he fair or dark ? " go on that absurd little . " show I he hair . " almost laugh at she simplicity . " not to - day , love -- some other time , when my trunk arrive from , whence I come to this place -- and a little drawing of he , which I make in happy day . " " poor , poor ! " say . " how thankful , how thankful I ought to be " ; ( though I doubt whether that practice of piety inculcate upon we by we womankind in early youth , namely , to be thankful because we be better off than somebody else , be a very rational religious exercise ) and then she begin to think , as usual , how she son be the handsomest , the best , and the cleverest boy in the whole world . " you will see my , " be the best thing could think of to console .
. if anything could make she comfortable that would . and so the two woman continue talk for a hour or more , during which have the opportunity of give she new friend a full and complete version of she private history . she show how she marriage with have always be view by the family with feeling of the utmost hostility ; how she sister - in - law ( a artful woman ) have poisone she husband 's mind against she ; how he have form odious connection , which have estrange he affections from she : how she have borne everything -- poverty , neglect , coldness from the being whom she most love -- and all for the sake of she child ; how , finally , and by the most flagrant outrage , she have be drive into demand a separation from she husband , when the wretch do not scruple to ask that she should sacrifice she own fair fame so that he might procure advancement through the means of a very great and powerful but unprincipled man -- the of , indeed . the atrocious monster ! this part of she eventful history give with the utmost feminine delicacy and the most indignant virtue . force to fly she husband 's roof by this insult , the coward have pursue he revenge by take she child from she . and thus say she be a wanderer , poor , unprotected , friendless , and wretch . receive this story , which be tell at some length , as those person who be acquaint with she character may imagine that she would . she quiver with indignation at the account of the conduct of the miserable and the unprincipled . she eye make note of admiration for every one of the sentence in which describe the persecution of she aristocratic relative and the falling away of she husband . ( do not abuse he . she speak rather in sorrow than in anger . she have love he only too fondly : and be he not the father of she boy ? ) and as for the separation scene from the child , while be recit it , retire altogether behind she pocket - handkerchief , so that the consummate little tragedian must have be charme to see the effect which she performance produce on she audience . whilst the lady be carry on they conversation , 's constant escort , the major ( who , of course , do not wish to interrupt they conference , and find himself rather tired of creak about the narrow stair passage of which the roof brush the nap from he hat ) descende to the ground - floor of the house and into the great room common to all the frequenter of the , out of which the stair lead . this apartment be always in a fume of smoke and liberally sprinkle with beer . on a dirty table stand score of corresponding brass candlestick with tallow candle for the lodger , whose key hang up in row over the candle . Emmy have pass blush through the room anon , where all sort of people be collect ; Tyrolese glove - seller and Danubian linen - merchant , with they pack ; student recruit themselves with butterbrod and meat ; idler , play card or dominoe on the sloppy , beery table ; tumbler refresh during the cessation of they performance -- in a word , all the fumum and strepitus of a german inn in fair time . the waiter bring the major a mug of beer , as a matter of course , and he take out a cigar and amuse himself with that pernicious vegetable and a newspaper until he charge should come down to claim he . and come presently downstairs , they cap on one side , they spur jingling , they pipe splendid with coat of arm and full - blown tassel , and they hang up the key of no. 90 on the board and call for the ration of butterbrod and beer . the pair sit down by the major and fall into a conversation of which he could not help hear somewhat . it be mainly about " Fuchs " and " , " and duel and drinking - bout at the neighbouring of , from which renowned seat of learning they have just come in the , with , as it appear , by they side , and in order to be present at the bridal fete at . " the seem to be en bay de gonnoisance , " say , who know the french language , to , he comrade . " after the fat grandfather go away , there come a pretty little compatriot . I hear they chatter and whimper together in the little woman 's chamber . " " we must take the ticket for she concert , " say . " Hast thout any money , ? " " Bah , " say the other , " the concert be a concert in nubibus . say that she advertise one at , and the take many ticket . but she go off without singing . she say in the coach yesterday that she pianist have fall ill at . she can not se , it be my belief : she voice be as cracked as thine , of thou beer - soak Renowner ! " " it be crack ; I hear she try out of she window a schrecklich . , call ' upon . ' " " Saufen and singan go not together , " observe with the red nose , who evidently prefer the former amusement . " no , thou shalt take none of she ticket . she win money at the trent and quarante last night . I see she : she make a
a little English boy play for she . we will spend thy money there or at the theatre , or we will treat she to french wine or Cognac in the , but the ticket we will not buy . what sayest thou ? yet , another mug of beer ? " and one and another successively have bury they blond whisker in the mawkish dratch , curl they and swagger off into the fair . the major , who have see the key of no. 90 put up on its hook and have hear the conversation of the two young blood , be not at a loss to understand that they talk related to . " the little devil be at she old trick , " he think , and he smile as he recal old day , when he have witness the desperate flirtation with and the ludicrous end of that adventure . he and have often laugh over it subsequently , and until a few week after 's marriage , when he also be catch in the little Circe 's toil , and have a understanding with she which he comray certainly suspect , but prefer to ignore . be too much hurt or asham to ask to fathom that disgraceful mystery , although once , and evidently with remorse on he mind , have allude to it . it be on the morning of , as the young man stand together in front of they line , survey the black mass of who crown the opposite height , and as the rain be come down , " I have be mix in a foolish intrigue with a woman , " say . " I be glad we be march away . if I drop , I hope will never know of that business . I wish to it have never be begin ! " and be pleased to think , and have more than once soothe poor 's widow with the narrative , that , after quit he wife , and after the action of , on the first day , speak gravely and affectionately to he comrade of he father and he wife . on these fact , too , have insist very strongly in he conversation with the elder , and have thus be the means of reconcile the old gentleman to he son 's memory , just at the close of the elder man 's life . " and so this devil be still go on with she intrigue , " think . " I wish she be a hundr mile from here . she bring mischiefinitely wherever she go . " and he be pursue these foreboding and this uncomfortable train of thought , with he head between he hand , and the Pumpernickel Gazette of last week unread under he nose , when somebody tap he shoulder with a parasol , and he look up and see . this woman have a way of tyrannizing over ( for the weakest of all people will domineer over somebody ) , and she order he about , and pat he , and make he fetch and carry just as if he be a great Newfoundland dog . he like , so to speak , to jump into the water if she say " High , ! " and to trot behind she with she reticule in he mouth . this history have be write to very little purpose if the reader have not perceive that the major be a spooney . " why do you not wait for I , sir , to escort I downstairs ? " she say , give a little toss of she head and a most sarcastic curtsey . " I could not stand up in the passage , " he answer with a comical deprecatory look ; and , delighte to give she he arm and to take she out of the horrid smoky place , he would have walk off without even so much as remember the waiter , have not the young fellow run after he and stop he on the threshold of the to make he pay for the beer which he have not consum . laugh : she call he a naughty man , who want to run away in debt , and , in fact , make some joke suitable to the occasion and the small - beer . she be in high spirit and good humour , and trip across the market - place very briskly . she want to see Jos that instant . the major laugh at the impetuous affection exhibit ; for , in truth , it be not very often that she want she brother " that instant . " they find the civilian in he saloon on the first - floor ; he have be pace the room , and bite he nail , and look over the market - place towards the a hundred time at least during the past hour whilst be close with she friend in the garret and the major be beat the tattoo on the sloppy table of the public room below , and he be , on he side too , very anxious to see . " well ? " say he . " the poor dear creature , how she have suffer ! " say . " bless my soul , yes , " say , wag he head , so that he cheek quiver like jelly . " she may have 's room , who can go upstairs , " continue . be a staid English maid and personal attendent upon , to whom the courier , as in duty bound , pay court , and whom use to " lark " dreadfully with account of german robber and ghost . she pass she time chiefly in grumbling , in order about she mistress , and in state she
she intention to return the next morning to she native village of . " she may have 's room , " say . " why , you do not mean to say you be go to have that woman into the house ? " bounce out the major , jump up . " of course we be , " say in the most innocent way in the world . " do not be angry and break the furniture , major Dobbin . of course we be go to have she here . " " of course , my dear , " say . " the poor creature , after all she suffering , " continue ; " she horrid banker break and run away ; she husband -- wick wretch -- have desert she and take she child away from she " ( here she double she two little fist and hold they in a most menacing attitude before she , so that the major be charme to see such a dauntless virago ) " the poor dear thing ! quite alone and absolutely force to give lesson in singing to get she bread -- and not have she here ! " " take lesson , my dear , " cry the major , " but do not have she in the house . I implore you do not . " " Pooh , " say . " you who be always good and kind -- always use to be at any rate -- I be astonished at you , major , " cry . " why , what be the moment to help she but when she be so miserable ? now be the time to be of service to she . the oldest friend I ever have , and not -- " " she be not always you friend , , " the major say , for he be quite angry . this allusion be too much for , who , look the major almost fiercely in the face , say , " for shame , major ! " and after have fire this shot , she walk out of the room with a most majestic air and shut she own door briskly on herself and she outraged dignity . " to allude to that ! " she say , when the door be close . " oh , it be cruel of he to remind I of it , " and she look up at 's picture , which hang there as usual , with the portrait of the boy underneath . " it be cruel of he . if I have forgive it , ought he to have spoken ? no . and it be from he own lip that I know how wicked and groundless my jealousy be ; and that you be pure -- oh , yes , you be pure , my saint in heaven ! " she pace the room , trembling and indignant . she go and lean on the chest of drawer over which the picture hang , and gaze and gaze at it . it be eye seem to look down on she with a reproach that deepen as she look . the early dear , dear memory of that brief prime of love rush back upon she . the wound which year have scarcely cicatrize b afresh , and oh , how bitterly ! she could not bear the reproach of the husband there before she . it could not be . never , never . poor Dobbin ; poor old ! that unlucky word have undone the work of many a year -- the long laborious edifice of a life of love and constancy -- raise too upon what secret and hide foundation , wherein lay bury passion , uncounted struggle , unknown sacrifice -- a little word be speak , and down fall the fair palace of hope -- one word , and away fly the bird which he have be try all he life to lure ! , though he see by 's look that a great crisis have come , nevertheless continue to implore , in the most energetic term , to beware of ; and he eagerly , almost frantically , adjure not to receive she . he besotch to inquire at least regard she ; tell he how he have hear that she be in the company of gambler and people of ill repute ; point out what evil she have do in former day , how she and have misl poor into ruin , how she be now part from she husband , by she own confession , and , perhaps , for good reason . what a dangerous companion she would be for he sister , who know nothing of the affair of the world ! implor , with all the eloquence which he could bring to bear , and a great deal more energy than this quiet gentleman be ordinarily in the habit of show , to keep out of he household . have he be less violent , or more dexterous , he might have succeed in he supplication to ; but the civilian be not a little jealous of the air of superiority which the major constantly exhibit towards he , as he fancie ( indeed , he have impart he opinion to , the courier , whose bill major Dobbin check on this journey , and who sid with he master ) , and he begin a blustering speech about he competency to defend he own honour , he desire not to have he affair meddle with , he intention , in fine , to rebel against the major , when the colloquy -- rather a long and stormy one -- be put a end to in the simplest way possible , namely , by the arrival of , with a porter from the in charge of
of she very meagre baggage . she greet she host with affectionate respect and make a shrinking , but amicable salutation to , who , as she instinct assure she at once , be she enemy , and have be speak against she ; and the bustle and clatter consequent upon she arrival bring out of she room . go up and embrace she guest with the greatest warmth , and take no notice of the major , except to fl he a angry look -- the most unjust and scornful glance that have perhaps ever appear in that poor little woman 's face since she be bear . but she have private reason of she own , and be bent upon be angry with he . and , indignant at the injustice , not at the defeat , go off , make she a bow quite as haughty as the kill curtsey with which the little woman choose to bid he farewell . he be gone , be particularly lively and affectionate to , and bust about the apartment and install she guest in she room with a eagerness and activity seldom exhibite by we placid little friend . but when a act of injustice be to be do , especially by weak people , it be best that it should be do quickly , and think she be display a great deal of firmness and proper feeling and veneration for the late in she present behaviour . come in from the fete for dinner - time and find four cover laid as usual ; but one of the place be occupy by a lady , instead of by . " Hullo ! where be ? " the young gentleman ask with he usual simplicity of language . " major Dobbin be dine out , I suppose , " he mother say , and , draw the boy to she , kiss he a great deal , and put he hair off he forehead , and introduce he to . " this be my boy , , " say -- as much as to say -- can the world produce anything like that ? look at he with rapture and press he hand fondly . " dear boy ! " she say --" he be just like my -- " chok she further utterance , but understood , as well as if she have speak , that be think of she own bless child . however , the company of she friend console , and she eat a very good dinner . during the repast , she have occasion to speak several time , when eye she and listen to she . at the desert be go out to superintend further domestic arrangement ; be in he great chair do over ; and the new arrival sit close to each other -- he have continue to look at she knowingly more than once , and at last he lay down the nutcracker . " I say , " say . " what do you say ? " say , laugh . " you be the lady I see in the mask at the . " " Hush ! you little sly creature , " say , take up he hand and kiss it . " you uncle be there too , and must not know . " " oh , no -- not by no means , " answer the little fellow . " you see we be quite good friend already , " say to , who now re-enter ; and it must be own that Osborne have introduce a most judicious and amiable companion into she house . , in a state of great indignation , though still unaware of all the treason that be in store for he , walk about the town wildly until he fall upon the Secretary of , , who invite he to dinner . as they be discuss that meal , he take occasion to ask the Secretary whether he know anything about a certain , who have , he believe , make some noise in ; and then , who of course know all the gossip , and be besides a relative of , pour out into the astonished major 's ear such a history about and she husband as astonished the querist , and supply all the point of this narrative , for it be at that very table year ago that the present writer have the pleasure of hear the tale . , , the Crawley , and they history -- everything connect with and she previous life pass under the record of the bitter diplomatist . he know everything and a great deal beside , about all the world -- in a word , he make the most astounding revelation to the simple - hear major . when say that and have take she into they house , burst into a peal of laughter which shock the major , and ask if they have not better send into the prison and take in one or two of the gentleman in shaved head and yellow jacket who sweep the street of , chain in pair , to board and lodge , and act as tutor to that little scapegrace . this information astonish and horrify the major not a little . it have be agree in the morning ( before meet with ) that should go to the ball that night . there would be the place where he should tell she . the major go home , and dress himself in he uniform , and repair to , in hope to see . she never come . when he return to he lodging all the light in the tenement be put out . he could not see she till the morning . I do not know what sort of a night 's rest he have with this frightful
frightful secret in bed with he . at the earliest convenient hour in the morning he send he servant across the way with a note , say that he wish very particularly to speak with she . a message come back to say that be exceedingly unwell and be keep she room . she , too , have be awake all that night . she have be think of a thing which have agitate she mind a hundred time before . a hundred time on the point of yielding , she have shrink back from a sacrifice which she feel be too much for she . she could not , in spite of he love and constancy and she own acknowledge regard , respect , and gratitude . what be benefit , what be constancy , or merit ? one curl of a girl 's ringlet , one hair of a whisker , will turn the scale against they all in a minute . they do not weigh with more than with other woman . she have try they ; want to make they pass ; could not ; and the pitiless little woman have find a pretext , and determine to be free . when at length , in the afternoon , the major gain admission to , instead of the cordial and affectionate greeting , to which he have be accustom now for many a long day , he receive the salutation of a curtsey , and of a little gloved hand , retract the moment after it be accord to he . , too , be in the room , and advance to meet he with a smile and a extend hand . draw back rather confusedly , " I -- I beg you pardon , m 'am , " he say ; " but I be bound to tell you that it be not as you friend that I be come here now . " " Pooh ! damn ; do not let we have this sort of thing ! " cry out , alarme , and anxious to get rid of a scene . " I wonder what major Dobbin have to say against ? " say in a low , clear voice with a slight quiver in it , and a very determined look about the eyes . " I will not have this sort of thing in my house , " again interpose . " I say I will not have it ; and , I beg , sir , you will stop it . " and he look round , trembl and turn very red , and give a great puff , and make for he door . " dear friend ! " say with angelic sweetness , " do hear what have to say against I . " " I will not hear it , I say , " squeak out at the top of he voice , and , gather up he dressing - gown , he be gone . " we be only two woman , " say . " you can speak now , sir . " " this manner towards I be one which scarcely become you , , " the major answer haughtily ; " nor I believe be I guilty of habitual harshness to woman . it be not a pleasure to I to do the duty which I be come to do . " " pray proceed with it quickly , if you please , , " say , who be more and more in a pet . the expression of 's face , as she speak in this imperious manner , be not pleasant . " I come to say -- and as you stay , Crawley , I must say it in you presence -- that I think you -- you ought not to form a member of the family of my friend . a lady who be separate from she husband , who travel not under she own name , who frequent public gaming - table -- " " it be to the ball I go , " cry out . " -- be not a fit companion for and she son , " go on : " and I may add that there be people here who know you , and who profess to know that regard you conduct about which I do not even wish to speak before -- before . " " yours be a very modest and convenient sort of calumny , major , " say . " you leave I under the weight of a accusation which , after all , be unsaid . what be it ? be it unfaithfulness to my husband ? I scorn it and defy anybody to prove it -- I defy you , I say . my honour be as untouched as that of the bitterest enemy who ever malign I . be it of be poor , forsake , wretch , that you accuse I ? yes , I be guilty of those fault , and punish for they every day . let I go , . it be only to suppose that I have not meet you , and I be no worse to - day than I be yesterday . it be only to suppose that the night be over and the poor wanderer be on she way . do not you remember the song we use to s in old , dear old day ? I have be wander ever since then -- a poor castaway , scorn for be miserable , and insult because I be alone . let I go : my stay here interfere with the plan of this gentleman . " " indeed it do , madam , " say the major . " if I have any authority in this house -- " " authority , none ! " break out "
" , you stay with I . I will not desert you because you have be persecute , or insult you because -- because major choose to do so . come away , dear . " and the two woman make towards the door . open it . as they be go out , however , he take 's hand and say -- " will you stay a moment and speak to I ? " " he wish to speak to you away from I , " say , look like a martyr . grip she hand in reply . " upon my honour it be not about you that I be go to speak , " say . " come back , , " and she come . bow to , as he shut the door upon she . look at he , lean against the glass : she face and she lip be quite white . " I be confused when I speak just now , " the say after a pause , " and I misuse the word authority . " " you do , " say with she tooth chatter . " at least I have claim to be hear , " continue . " it be generous to remind I of we obligation to you , " the woman answer . " the claim I mean be those leave I by 's father , " say . " yes , and you insult he memory . you do yesterday . you know you do . and I will never forgive you . never ! " say . she shot out each little sentence in a tremor of anger and emotion . " you do not mean that , ? " say sadly . " you do not mean that these word , uttere in a hurried moment , be to weigh against a whole life 's devotion ? I think that 's memory have not be injure by the way in which I have deal with it , and if we be come to bandy reproach , I at least merit none from he widow and the mother of he son . reflect , afterwards when -- when you be at leisure , and you conscience will withdraw this accusation . it do even now . " hold down she head . " it be not that speech of yesterday , " he continue , " which move you . that be but the pretext , , or I have love you and watch you for fifteen year in vain . have I not learn in that time to read all you feeling and look into you thought ? I know what you heart be capable of : it can cling faithfully to a recollection and cherish a fancy , but it can not feel such a attachment as mine deserve to mate with , and such as I would have win from a woman more generous than you . no , you be not worthy of the love which I have devote to you . I know all along that the prize I have set my life on be not worth the winning ; that I be a fool , with fond fancie , too , barter away my all of truth and ardour against you little feeble remnant of love . I will bargain no more : I withdraw . I find no fault with you . you be very good - natured , and have do you best , but you could not -- you could not reach up to the height of the attachment which I bear you , and which a loftier soul than yours might have be proud to share . good - bye , ! I have watch you struggle . let it end . we be both weary of it . " stand scared and silent as thus suddenly break the chain by which she hold he and declare he independence and superiority . he have place himself at she foot so long that the poor little woman have be accustom to trample upon he . she do not wish to marry he , but she wish to keep he . she wish to give he nothing , but that he should give she all . it be a bargain not unfrequently levy in love . 's sally have quite broken and cast she down . she assault be long since over and beaten back . " be I to understand then , that you be go -- away , ? " she say . he give a sad laugh . " I go once before , " he say , " and come back after twelve year . we be young then , . good - bye . I have spend enough of my life at this play . " whilst they have be talk , the door into 's room have open ever so little ; indeed , have keep a hold of the handle and have turn it on the instant when quit it , and she hear every word of the conversation that have pass between these two . " what a noble heart that man have , " she think , " and how shamefully that woman play with it ! " she admire ; she bear he no rancour for the part he have take against she . it be a open move in the game , and play fairly . " ah ! " she think , " if I could have have such a husband as that -- a man with a heart and brain too ! I would not have mind he large foot " ; and run into she room , she absolutely bethotch herself of something , and write he a note , beseech he to stop for a few day -- not to think of go
go -- and that she could serve he with a . the parting be over . once more poor walk to the door and be gone ; and the little widow , the author of all this work , have she will , and have win she victory , and be leave to enjoy it as she best might . let the lady envy she triumph . at the romantic hour of dinner , make he appearance and again remark the absence of " . " the meal be eat in silence by the party . 's appetite not be diminish , but take nothing at all . after the meal , be lol in the cushion of the old window , a large window , with three side of glass abutt from the gable , and command on one side the market - place , where the elephant be , he mother be busy hard by , when he remark symptom of movement at the major 's house on the other side of the street . " Hullo ! " say he , " there be 's trap -- they be bring it out of the court - yard . " the " trap " in question be a carriage which the major have buy for six pound sterling , and about which they use to rally he a good deal . give a little start , but say nothing . " Hullo ! " continue , " there be come out with the portmanteaus , and , the one - eye postilion , come down the market with three schimmel . look at he boot and yellow jacket -- be not he a rum one ? why -- they be put the horse to 's carriage . be he go anywhere ? " " yes , " say , " he be go on a journey . " " go on a journey ; and when be he come back ? " " he be -- not come back , " answer . " not come back ! " cry out , jump up . " stay here , sir , " roar out . " stay , , " say he mother with a very sad face . the boy stop , kick about the room , jump up and down from the window - seat with he knee , and show every symptom of uneasiness and curiosity . the horse be put to . the baggage be strap on . come out with he master 's sword , cane , and umbrella tie up together , and lay they in the well , and he desk and old tin cock - hat case , which he place under the seat . bring out the stain old blue cloak line with red camlet , which have wrap the owner up any time these fifteen year , and have manche Sturm erlebt , as a favourite song of those day say . it have be new for the campaign of and have cover and after the night of . , the landlord of the lodging , come out , then , with more package -- final package -- then major -- want to kiss he . the major be adore by all people with whom he have to do . it be with difficulty he could escape from this demonstration of attachment . " by , I will go ! " scream out . " give he this , " say , quite interested , and put a paper into the boy 's hand . he have rush down the stair and fling across the street in a minute -- the yellow postilion be crack he whip gently . have get into the carriage , release from the embrace of he landlord . bound in afterwards , and fling he arm round the major 's neck ( as they see from the window ) , and begin ask he multiplied question . then he fel in he waistcoat pocket and give he a note . seize at it rather eagerly , he open it trembl , but instantly he countenance change , and he tore the paper in two and drop it out of the carriage . he kiss on the head , and the boy get out , double he fists into he eye , and with the aid of . he linger with he hand on the panel . , ! the yellow postilion crack he whip prodigiously , up spring to the box , away go the schimmel , and with he head on he breast . he never look up as they pass under 's window , and , leave alone in the street , burst out cry in the face of all the crowd . 's maid hear he how again during the night and bring he some preserve apricot to conseal he . she mingle she lamentation with he . all the poor , all the humble , all honest folk , all good man who know he , love that kind - hearted and simple gentleman . as for , have she not do she duty ? she have she picture of for a consolation . , , and 's private plan might be by which 's true love be to be crown with success , the little woman think that the secret might keep , and indeed , be by no means so much interested about anybody 's welfare as about she own , she have a great number of thing pertain to herself to consider , and which concern she a great deal more than 's happiness in this life . she find herself suddenly and unexpectedly in snug comfortable quarter , surround by friend , kindness , and good - natured simple people such as she have not meet with for many a long day ; and , wanderer
wanderer as she be by force and inclination , there be moment when rest be pleasant to she . as the most harden arab that ever career across the desert over the hump of a dromedary likes to repose sometimes under the date - tree by the water , or to come into the city , walk into the bazaar , refresh himself in the bath , and say he prayer in the mosque , before he go out again maraud , so 's tent and pilau be pleasant to this little Ishmaelite . she pickete she steed , hang up she weapon , and warm herself comfortably by he fire . the halt in that roving , restless life be inexpressibly soothing and pleasant to she . so , please herself , she try with all she might to please everybody ; and we know that she be eminent and successful as a practitioner in the art of give pleasure . as for , even in that little interview in the garret at the , she have find means to win back a great deal of he good - will . in the course of a week , the civilian be she swear slave and frantic admirer . he do not go to sleep after dinner , as he custom be in the much less lively society of . he drive out with in he open carriage . he ask little party and invent festivity to do she honour . , the , who have abuse she so cruelly , come to dine with , and then come every day to pay he respects to . poor , who be never very talkative , and more glum and silent than ever after 's departure , be quite forget when this superior genius make she appearance . the be as much charme with she as he English rival . the german lady , never particularly squeamish as regards moral , especially in English people , be delighted with the cleverness and wit of 's charming friend , and though she do not ask to go to , yet the most august and transparent Personage there hear of she fascination and be quite curious to know she . when it become know that she be noble , of a ancient family , that she husband be a Colonel of the , and of a island , only separate from he lady by one of those trifling difference which be of little account in a country where be still read and the of be consider a edifying moral book , nobody think of refuse to receive she in the very highest society of the little Duchy ; and the lady be even more ready to call she du and to swear eternal friendship for she than they have be to bestow the same inestimable benefit upon . and be interpret by those simple Germans in a way which honest folk in and little understand , and a lady might , in some philosophic and civilized town , be divorce ever so many time from she respective husband and keep she character in society . 's house never be so pleasant since he have a house of he own as cause it to be . she sang , she play , she laugh , she talk in two or three language , she bring everybody to the house , and she make believe that it be he own great social talents and wit which gather the society of the place round about he . as for , who find herself not in the least mistress of she own house , except when the bill be to be pay , soon discover the way to soothe and please she . she talk to she perpetually about send about he business , and make no scruple of declare she admiration for that excellent , high - minded gentleman , and of tell that she have behave most cruelly regard he . defend she conduct and show that it be dictate only by the purest religious principle ; that a woman once , & c. , and to such a angel as he whom she have have the good fortune to marry , be marry forever ; but she have no objection to hear the major praise as much as ever choose to praise he , and indeed , bring the conversation round to the subject a score of time every day . means be easily find to win the favour of and the servants . 's , it have be say , be heart and soul in favour of the generous major . have at first dislike for be the means of dismiss he from the presence of she mistress , she be reconcile to subsequently , because the latter become 's most ardent admirer and champion . and in those nightly conclave in which the two lady indulge after they party , and while be " brush they ' air , " as she call the yellow lock of the one and the soft brown tress of the other , this girl always put in she word for that dear good gentleman major Dobbin . she advocacy do not make angry any more than 's admiration of he . she make write to he constantly and persist in send 's kind live in a postscript . and as she look at she husband 's portrait of night , it no longer reproach she -- perhaps she reproach it , now be gone . be not very happy after she heroic sacrifice . she be very distraite , nervous , silent , and ill to please . the family have never know she so peevish . she grow pale and ill . she use to try to s certain song ( " ich nicht alleine , " be one of they , that tender love -
- song of 's which in old - fashioned day , young lady , and when you be scarcely bear , show that those who liv before you know too how to love and to s ) certain song , I say , to which the major be partial ; and as she warble they in the twilight in the drawing - room , she would break off in the midst of the song , and walk into she neighbour apartment , and there , no doubt , take refuge in the miniature of she husband . some book still subsist , after 's departure , with he name write in they ; a german dictionary , for instance , with " , -- th , " in the fly - leaf ; a guide - book with he initial ; and one or two other volume which belong to the major . clear these away and put they on the drawer , where she place she work - box , she desk , she , and prayer - book , under the picture of the two Georg . and the major , on go away , have leave he glove behind he , it be a fact that , rummage he mother 's desk some time afterwards , find the glove neatly fold up and put away in what they call the secret - drawer of the desk . not care for society , and mo there a great deal , 's chief pleasure in the summer evening be to take long walk with ( during which be leave to the society of ) , and then the mother and son use to talk about the major in a way which even make the boy smile . she tell he that she think major be the best man in all the world -- the gentlest and the kindest , the bravest and the humblest . over and over again she tell he how they owed everything which they possess in the world to that kind friend 's benevolent care of they ; how he have befriend they all through they poverty and misfortune ; watch over they when nobody care for they ; how all he comrade admire he though he never speak of he own gallant action ; how 's father trust he beyond all other man , and have be constantly befriend by the good . " why , when you papa be a little boy , " she say , " he often tell I that it be who defend he against a tyrant at the school where they be ; and they friendship never cease from that day until the last , when you dear father fell . " " do kill the man who kill ? " say . " I be sure he do , or he would if he could have catch he , would not he , mother ? when I be in the , will not I hate the french ?-- that be all . " in such colloquy the mother and the child pass a great deal of they time together . the artless woman have make a confident of the boy . he be as much 's friend as everybody else who know he well . by the way , . Becky , not to be behind hand in sentiment , have get a miniature too hang up in she room , to the surprise and amusement of most people , and the delight of the original , who be no other than we friend . on she first come to favour the Sedley with a visit , the little woman , who have arrive with a remarkably small shabby kit , be perhaps asham of the meanness of she trunk and bandbox , and often speak with great respect about she baggage leave behind at , which she must have from that city . when a traveller talk to you perpetually about the splendour of he luggage , which he do not happen to have with he , my son , beware of that traveller ! he be , ten to one , a impostor . neither nor know this important maxim . it seem to they of no consequence whether have a quantity of very fine clothes in invisible trunk ; but as she present supply be exceedingly shabby , supply she out of she own store , or take she to the best milliner in the town and there fit she out . it be no more torn collar now , I promise you , and fad silk traile off at the shoulder . change she habits with she situation in life -- the rouge - pot be suspend -- another excitement to which she have accustom herself be also put aside , or at least only indulge in in privacy , as when she be prevail on by of a summer evening , and the boy be absent on they walk , to take a little spirit - and - water . but if she do not indulge -- the courier do : that rascal Kirsch could not be keep from the bottle , nor could he tell how much he take when he apply to it . he be sometimes surprise himself at the way in which 's diminish . well , well , this be a painful subject . do not very likely indulge so much as she use before she enter a decorous family . at last the much - brag - about boxe arrive from ; three of they not by any mean large or splendid ; nor do appear to take out any sort of dress or ornament from the box when they do arrive . but out of one , which contain a mass of she papers ( it be that very box which have ransack in he furious
furious hunt for 's conceal money ) , she take a picture with great glee , which she pin up in she room , and to which she introduce . it be the portrait of a gentleman in pencil , he face have the advantage of be pain up in pink . he be ride on a elephant away from some cocoa -nut tree and a pagoday : it be a eastern scene . " bless my soul , it be my portrait , " cry out . it be he indeed , bloom in youth and beauty , in a nankeen jacket of the cut of 1804 . it be the old picture that use to hang up in . " I buy it , " say in a voice trembl with emotion ; " I go to see if I could be of any use to my kind friend . I have never part with that picture -- I never will . " " will not you ? " cry with a look of unutterable rapture and satisfaction . " do you really now value it for my sake ? " " you know I do , well enough , " say ; " but why speak -- why think -- why look back ! it be too late now ! " that evening 's conversation be deliciious for . only come in to go to be very tired and unwell . and he fair guest have a charming tete - a - tete , and he sister could hear , as she lay awake in she adjoin chamber , singe over to the old song of 1815 . he do not sleep , for a wonder , that night , any more than . it be , and , by consequence , high season in ; , who read the incomparable ( the exile 's best friend ) through every day , use to favour the lady with extracts from he paper during they breakfast . every week in this paper there be a full account of military movement , in which Jos , as a man who have see service , be especially interested . on one occasion he read out -- " arrival of the -- th regiment . , 20.-- the , , come into the river this morning , have on board 14 officer , and 132 rank and file of this gallant corps . they have be absent from fourteen year , have be embark the year after , in which glorious conflict they take a active part , and have subsequently distinguished themselves in the Burmese war . the veteran colonel , , , with he lady and sister , land here yesterday , with , , , ; , , , ; and ; the band on the pier play the national anthem , and the crowd loudly cheer the gallant veteran as they go into 's hotel , where a sumptuous banquet be provide for the defender of . during the repast , which we need not say be serve up in 's best style , the cheering continue so enthusiastically that and the come forward to the balcony and drank the healt of they fellow - countryman in a bumper of 's best claret . " on a second occasion read a brief announcement -- have join the -- th regiment at ; and subsequently he promulgate account of the presentations at the Drawing - room of , , ( by of ) , and ( by ) . almost directly after this , 's name appear among the - : for old have die during the passage of the -- th from , and the be pleased to advance to the rank of Major- General on he return to , with a intimation that he should be of the distinguished regiment which he have so long command . have be make aware of some of these movement . the correspondence between and he guardian have not cease by any means : have even write once or twice to she since he departure , but in a manner so unconstrainedly cold that the poor woman feel now in she turn that she have lose she power over he and that , as he have say , he be free . he have leave she , and she be wretch . the memory of he almost countless service , and lofy and affectionate regard , now present itself to she and rebuk she day and night . she brood over those recollection accord to she wont , see the purity and beauty of the affection with which she have trifle , and reproach herself for have flung away such a treasure . it be go indeed . have spend it all out . he love she no more , he think , as he have love she . he never could again . that sort of regard , which he have proffer to she for so many faithful year , can not be fling down and shatte and mende so as to show no scars . the little heedless tyrant have so destroy it . no , think again and again , " it be myself I delude and persist in cajoling ; have she be worthy of the love I give she , she would have return it long ago . it be a fond mistake . be not the whole course of life make up of such ? and suppose I have win she , should I not have be disenchant the day after my victory ? why pine , or be asham of my defeat ? " the more he think of this long passage of he life , the more clearly he see he deception . " I will go into harness again , " he say , " and do my duty in that state
state of life in which it have pleased Heaven to place I . I will see that the buttons of the recruit be properly bright and that the sergeant make no mistakes in they account . I will dine at mess and listen to the Scotch surgeon tell he story . when I be old and break , I will go on half - pay , and my old sister shall scold I . I have geliebt und gelebet , as the girl in ' ' say . I be done . pay the bill and get I a cigar : find out what there be at the play to - night , Francis ; to - morrow we cross by the . " he make the above speech , whereor only hear the last two line , pace up and down the at . the be lie in the basin . he could see the place on the quarter - deck where he and have sit on the happy voyage out . what have that little to say to he ? Psha ; to - morrow we will put to sea , and return to , home , and duty ! after all the little of use to separate , accord to the german plan , and make for a hundred watering - place , where they drank at the well , ride upon donkey , gamble at the redoute if they have money and a mind , rush with hundred of they kind to gourmandise at the table d'hote , and id away the summer . the english diplomatist go off to and , they french rival shut up they chancellerie and whisk away to they darling . the transparent reign family take too to the water , or retire to they hunting lodg . everybody go away have any pretension to politeness , and of course , with they , von , the , and he Baroness . the season for the bath be the most productive period of the 's practice -- he unite business with pleasure , and he chief place of resort be , which be much frequented by , and where the Doctor treat himself and he spouse to what he call a " dib " in the sea . he interesting patient , , be a regular milch -cow to the doctor , and he easily persuade the civilian , both for he own health 's sake and that of he charming sister , which be really very much shatter , to pass the summer at that hideous seaport town . do not care where she go much . jump at the idea of a move . as for , she come as a matter of course in the fourth place inside of the fine barouche have buy , the two domestic be on the box in front . she might have some misgiving about the friend whom she should meet at , and who might be likely to tell ugly story -- but bah ! she be strong enough to hold she own . she have cast such a anchor in now as would require a strong storm to shake . that incident of the picture have finish he . take down she elephant and put it into the little box which she have have from ever so many year ago . also come off with she Lare -- she two picture -- and the party , finally , were , lod in a exceedingly dear and uncomfortable house at . there begin to take bath and get what good she could from they , and though score of people of 's acquaintance pass she and cut she , yet , who walk about with she , and who know nobody , be not aware of the treatment experience by the friend whom she have choose so judiciously as a companion ; indeed , never think fit to tell she what be pass under she innocent eye . some of 's acquaintance , however , acknowledge she readily enough , -- perhaps more readily than she would have desire . among those be major ( unattached ) , and ( late of the rifles ) , who might be see any day on the Dike , smoke and star at the woman , and who speedily get a introduction to the hospitable board and select circle of . in fact they would take no denial ; they burst into the house whether be at home or not , walk into 's drawing - room , which they perfume with they coat and mustachio , call " buck , " and invade he dinner - table , and laugh and drank for long hour there . " what can they mean ? " ask , who do not like these gentleman . " I hear the major say to . yesterday , ' no , no , , you not keep the old buck to yourself . we must have the bone in , or , dammy , I will split . ' what could the major mean , ? " " major ! do not call he major ! " say . " I be sure I can not tell what he mean . " he presence and that of he friend inspire the little lady with intolerable terror and aversion . they pay she tipsy compliment ; they leer at she over the dinner - table . and the make she advance that fill she with sickening dismay , nor would she ever see he unless she have by she side . , to do she justice , never would let either of these man remain alone with ; the major be disengage too , and swore he would be the winner of she . a couple of ruffian be fight for this innocent creature , gambling for she at she
she own table , and though she be not aware of the rascal 's design upon she , yet she feel a horror and uneasiness in they presence and long to fly . she besotch , she entreate to go . not he . he be slow of movement , tie to he Doctor , and perhaps to some other leading - string . at least be not anxious to go to . at last she take a great resolution -- make the great plunge . she write off a letter to a friend whom she have on the other side of the water , a letter about which she do not speak a word to anybody , which she carry herself to the post under she shawl ; nor be any remark make about it , only that she look very much flush and agitate when meet she , and she kiss he , and hang over he a great deal that night . she do not come out of she room after she return from she walk . think it be major Loder and the who frightene she . " she must not stop here , " reaso with herself . " she must go away , the silly little fool . she be still whimper after that gaby of a husband -- dead ( and serve right ! ) these fifteen year . she sha not marry either of these man . it be too bad of . no ; she shall marry the bamboo cane , I will settle it this very night . " so take a cup of tea to in she private apartment and find that lady in the company of she miniature , and in a most melancholy and nervous condition . she lay down the cup of tea . " thank you , " say . " listen to I , , " say , march up and down the room before the other and surveie she with a sort of contemptuous kindness . " I want to talk to you . you must go away from here and from the impertinence of these man . I will not have you harass by they : and they will insult you if you stay . I tell you they be rascal : man fit to send to the hulk . never mind how I know they . I know everybody . can not protect you ; he be too weak and want 's a protector himself . you be no more fit to live in the world than a baby in arm . you must marry , or you and you precious boy will go to ruin . you must have a husband , you fool ; and one of the best gentleman I ever see have offer you a hundred time , and you have reject he , you silly , heartless , ungrateful little creature ! " " I try -- I try my best , indeed I do , , " say deprecatingly , " but I could not forget -- " ; and she finish the sentence by look up at the portrait . " could not forget he ! " cry out , " that selfish humbug , that low - breed cockney dandy , that padde booby , who have neither wit , nor manners , nor heart , and be no more to be compare to you friend with the bamboo cane than you be to . why , the man be weary of you , and would have jilt you , but that force he to keep he word . he own it to I . he never care for you . he use to sneer about you to I , time after time , and make love to I the week after he marry you . " " it be false ! it be false ! , " cry out , start up . " look there , you fool , " say , still with provoke good humour , and take a little paper out of she belt , she open it and fling it into lap . " you know he handwriting . he write that to I -- want I to run away with he -- give it I under you nose , the day before he be shot -- and serve he right ! " repeat . do not hear she ; she be look at the letter . it be that which have put into the bouquet and give to on the night of the Duchess of 's ball . it be as she say : the foolish young man have ask she to fly . 's head sank down , and for almost the last time in which she shall be call upon to weep in this history , she commence that work . she head fall to she bosom , and she hand go up to she eye ; and there for a while , she give way to she emotion , as stand on and regard she . who shall analyse those tear and say whether they be sweet or bitter ? be she most grieve because the idol of she life be tumble down and shiver at she foot , or indignant that she love have be so despise , or glad because the barrier be remove which modesty have place between she and a new , a real affection ? " there be nothing to forbid I now , " she think . " I may love he with all my heart now . oh , I will , I will , if he will but let I and forgive I . " I believe it be this feeling rush over all the other which agitate that gentle little bosom . indeed , she do not cry so much as expect -- the other
other soothe and kiss she -- a rare mark of sympathy with . . she treat like a child and pat she head . " and now let we get pen and ink and write to he to come this minute , " she say . " I -- I write to he this morning , " say , blush exceedingly . scream with laughter -- " un biglietto , " she sang out with , " eccolo qua ! " -- the whole house echo with she shrill singe . two morning after this little scene , although the day be rainy and gusty , and have have a exceedingly wakeful night , listen to the wind roaring , and pity all traveller by land and by water , yet she get up early and insist upon take a walk on the with ; and there she pace as the rain beat into she face , and she look out westward across the dark sea line and over the swollen billow which come tumbling and frothing to the shore . neither spoke much , except now and then , when the boy say a few word to he timid companion , indicative of sympathy and protection . " I hope he will not cross in such weather , " say . " I bet ten to one he do , " the boy answer . " look , mother , there be the smoke of the steamer . " it be that signal , sure enough . but though the steamer be under way , he might not be on board ; he might not have get the letter ; he might not choose to come . a hundr fear pour one over the other into the little heart , as fast as the wave on to the Dike . the boat follow the smoke into sight . have a dandy telescope and get the vessel under view in the most skilful manner . and he make appropriate nautical comment upon the manner of the approach of the steamer as she come nearer and nearer , dip and rise in the water . the signal of a english steamer in sight go flutter up to the mast on the pier . I daresay 's heart be in a similar flutter . try to look through the telescope over 's shoulder , but she could make nothing of it . she only see a black eclipse bobb up and down before she eye . take the glass again and rak the vessel . " how she do pitch ! " he say . " there go a wave slap over she bow . there be only two people on deck besides the steersman . there be a man lie down , and a -- chap in a -- cloak with a -- hooray !-- it be , by ! " he clap to the telescope and fling he arm round he mother . as for that lady , let we say what she do in the word of a favourite poet --" . " she be sure it be . it could be no other . what she have say about hope that he would not come be all hypocrisy . of course he would come ; what could he do else but come ? she know he would come . the ship come swiftly nearer and nearer . as they go in to meet she at the landing - place at the quay , 's knee tremble so that she scarcely could run . she would have like to kneel down and say she prayer of thanks there . oh , she think , she would be all she life say they ! it be such a bad day that as the vessel come alongside of the quay there be no idler abroad , scarcely even a commissioner on the look out for the few passenger in the steamer . that young scapegrace have fle too , and as the gentleman in the old cloak line with red stuff step on to the shore , there be scarcely any one present to see what take place , which be briefly this : a lady in a dripping white bonnet and shawl , with she two little hand out before she , go up to he , and in the next minute she have altogether disappear under the fold of the old cloak , and be kiss one of he hand with all she might ; whilst the other , I suppose , be engage in hold she to he heart ( which she head just about reach ) and in prevent she from tumbling down . she be murmur something about --forgive -- dear -- dear , dear , dearest friend -- kiss , kiss , kiss , and so forth -- and in fact go on under the cloak in a absurd manner . when emerge from it , she still keep tight hold of one of 's hand , and look up in he face . it be full of sadness and tender love and pity . she understand its reproach and hang down she head . " it be time you send for I , dear , " he say . " you will never go again , ? " " no , never , " he answer , and press the dear little soul once more to he heart . as they issue out of the custom - house precinct , break out on they , with he telescope up to he eye , and a loud laugh of welcome ; he dance round the couple and perform many facetious antic as he lead they up to the house . be not up yet ; not visible ( though she look at they through the blind ) . run off to see about breakfast . Emmy
Emmy , whose shawl and bonnet be off in the passage in the hand of , now go to undue the clasp of 's cloak , and -- we will , if you please , go with , and look after breakfast for the Colonel . the vessel be in port . he have get the prize he have be try for all he life . the bird have come in at last . there it be with it be head on he shoulder , bill and cooe close up to he heart , with soft outstretched fluttering wing . this be what he have ask for every day and hour for eighteen year . this be what he pin after . here it be -- the summit , the end -- the last page of the third volume . good - bye , -- bless you , honest !-- farewell , dear -- green again , tender little parasite , round the rug old oak to which you c ! perhaps it be compunction towards the kind and simple creature , who have be the first in life to defend she , perhaps it be a dislike to all such sentimental scene -- but , satisfied with she part in the transaction , never present herself before and the lady whom he marry . " particular business , " she say , take she to , whither she go , and only and he uncle be present at the marriage ceremony . when it be over , and have rejoin he parent , . return ( just for a few day ) to comfort the solitary bachelor , . he prefer a continental life , he say , and decline to join in housekeeping with he sister and she husband . be very glad in she heart to think that she have write to she husband before she read or know of that letter of 's . " I know it all along , " say ; " but could I use that weapon against the poor fellow 's memory ? it be that which make I suffer so when you -- " " Never speak of that day again , " Emmy cry out , so contrite and humble that turn off the conversation by he account of and dear old , with whom he be sit when the letter of recall reach he . " if you have not send for I , " he add with a laugh , " who know what 's name might be now ? " at present it be ( now ) ; she take he on the death of he first wife , have resolve never to marry out of the regiment . be also so attach to it that , she say , if anything be to happen to , bedad she would come back and marry some of th'ey . but the Major- General be quite well and live in great splendour at , with a pack of beagles , and ( with the exception of perhaps they neighbour , of ) he be the first man of he county . she Ladyship still dance jig , and insist on stand up with the master of the horse at the 's last ball . both she and declare that have use the latter SHEAMFULLy , but fall in , be consol , and a beautiful turban from appease the wrath of . when quit the service , which he do immediately after he marriage , he rent a pretty little country place in , not far from 's , where , after the passing of the , and he family constantly reside now . all idea of a Peerage be out of the question , the 's two seat in parliament be lose . he be both out of pocket and out of spirit by that catastrophe , fail in he health , and prophesy the speedy ruin of the . and become great friend -- there be a perpetual crossing of pony -chaise between the hall and the , the 's place ( rent of he friend major , who be abroad with he family ) . she Ladyship be godmother to 's child , which bear she name , and be christen by the , who succeed he father in the living : and a pretty close friendship subsist between the two lad , and , who hunt and shoot together in the vacation , be both entered of the same college at , and quarrell with each other about 's daughter , with whom they be both , of course , in love . a match between and that young lady be long a favourite scheme of both the matron , though I have hear that herself inclin towards she cousin . 's name be never mention by either family . there be reason why all should be silent regard she . for wherever go , she travel likewise , and that infatuate man seem to be entirely she slave . the 's lawyer inform he that he brother - in - law have effect a heavy insurance upon he life , whence it be probable that he have be raise money to discharge debt . he procure prolonge leave of absence from the , and indeed , he infirmity be daily increase . on hear the news about the insurance , , in a good deal of alarm , entreate she husband to go to , where then be , and inquire into the state of he affair . the quit home with reluctance ( for he be deeply immersed in he History of the which still occupy he , and much alarmed about he little daughter , whom he idolize , and who be just recover from the chicken - pox ) and go to Brussels and find live at one of the enormous
enormous hotel in that city . , who have she carriage , give entertainment , and live in a very genteel manner , occupy another suite of apartment in the same hotel . the Colonel , of course , do not desire to see that lady , or even think proper to notify he arrival at , except privately to by a message through he valet . beg the to come and see he that night , when . would be at a soiree , and when they could meet alone . he find he brother - in - law in a condition of pitiable infirmity -- and dreadfully afraid of , though eager in he praise of she . she tend he through a series of unheard - of illness with a fidelity most admirable . she have be a daughter to he . " but -- but -- oh , for 's sake , do come and live near I , and -- and -- see I sometimes , " whimper out the unfortunate man . the 's brow darken at this . " we can not , , " he say . " consider the circumstance , can not visit you . " " I swear to you -- I swear to you on the , " gas out , want to kiss the book , " that she be as innocent as a child , as spotless as you own wife . " " it may be so , " say the gloomily , " but can not come to you . be a man , : break off this disreputable connection . come home to you family . we hear you affair be involved . " " involve ! " cry . " who have tell such calumny ? all my money be place out most advantageously . -- that be -- I mean -- it be laid out to the best interest . " " you be not in debt , then ? why do you insure you life ? " " I think - - a little present to she -- in case anything happen ; and you know my health be so delicate -- common gratitude you know -- and I intend to leave all my money to you -- and I can spare it out of my income , indeed I can , " cry out 's weak brother - in - law . the besotch to fly at once -- to go back to , whither . Crawley could not follow he ; to do anything to break off a connection which might have the most fatal consequence to he . clasp he hand and cry , " he would go back to . he would do anything , only he must have time : they must not say anything to -- she ' -- she would kill I if she know it . you do not know what a terrible woman she be , " the poor wretch say . " then , why not come away with I ? " say in reply ; but have not the courage . " he would see again in the morning ; he must on no account say that he have be there . he must go now . might come in . " and quit he , full of foreboding . he never see more . three month afterwards die at - . it be find that all he property have be muddle away in speculation , and be represent by valueless share in different bubble company . all he available asset be the two thousand pound for which he life be insure , and which be leave equally between he beloved " sister , wife of , & c. , and he friend and invaluable attendent during sickness , , wife of - , , " who be appoint administratrix . the solicitor of the insurance company swore it be the blackest case that ever have come before he , talk of send a commission to to examine into the death , and the company refuse payment of the policy . but , or , as she sty herself , come to town at once ( attend with she solicitor , Messrs . , , and , of ) and da the company to refuse the payment . they invite examination , they declare that she be the object of a infamous conspiracy , which have be pursue she all through life , and triumph finally . the money be pay , and she character establish , but send back he share of the legacy to the insurance office and rigidly decline to hold any communication with . she never be , though she continue so to call herself . he Excellency die of yellow fever at , most deeply belove and deplor , and six week before the demise of he brother , . the estate consequently devolve upon the present , . he , too , have decline to see he mother , to whom he make a liberal allowance , and who , besides , appear to be very wealthy . the Baronet live entirely at 's , with and she daughter , whilst , , chiefly hang about and , where a very strong party of excellent people consider she to be a most injured woman . she have she enemy . who have not ? she life be she answer to they . she busy herself in work of piety . she go to church , and never without a footman . she name be in all the . the destitute orange - girl , the neglect washerwoman , the distressed muffin-man find in she a fast and generous friend . she be always have stall at Fancy Fairs for the benefit of these hapless being . Emmy , she child , and the Colonel
