from the work of by Bibliographical note I .-- my Pedigree and family -- Undergo the influence of the Tender passion ii .-- in which I show Myself to be a man of .-- I make a false start in the iv .-- in of .-- IN which Barry try to remove as far from as .-- the -- a , and friend there Viii .--barry Bid Adieu to the .-- I appear in a manner become my name and .-- more run of .-- in which the .-- the of the princess of ----- .-- I continue my career as a man of .-- I return to Ireland , and exhibin my Splendour and GENEROSITy in .-- I pay court to my .-- I provide Nobly for my family , and aattain the height of my ( Seeme ) Gand .-- I appear as a ornament of .-- in which my good Fortune begin to .-- conclusion Barry Lyndon a Bibliographical note -- far from the best know , but by some critic acclaim as the finest , of 's work -- appear originally as a serial a few year before be write ; yet it be not publish in book form , and then not by itself , until after the publication of , , and the Newcome have place it 's author in the forefront of the literary man of the day . so many year after the event we can not help wonder why the story be not earlier put in book form ; for in its delineation of the character of a adventurer it be as great as , while for the local colour of history , if I may put it so , it be no undistinguished precursor of ESMOND . in the number of 's for 1844 appear the first instalment of ' the of , . , a romance of the , by , ' and the story continue to appear month by month -- with the exception of -- up to the end of the year , when the concluding portion be sign . . ' 's , it should be add , have appear occasionally in the magazine during the year immediately precedent , so that the pseudonym be familiar to 's reader . the story be write , accord to its author 's own word , ' with a great deal of dulness , unwillingness and labour , ' and be evidently do as the instalment be require , for in he write ' read for " . " all the morning at the club , ' and four day later of ' " . L. " lie like a nightmare on my mind . ' the journey to the -- which be to give we in literary result note of a journey from to -- be begin with yet unfinished , for at the author note on the first three day of but slowly and with great difficulty . ' ' with no more success than yesterday . ' ' finish after great throe late at night . ' in the number of 's for the follow month , as I have say , the conclusion appear . a dozen year later , in 1856 , the story form the first part of the third volume of 's , when it be call of , , by himself . since then , it have nearly always be issue with other matter , as though it be not strong enough to stand alone , or as though the importance of a work be mainly to be gauge by the number of page to be crowd into one cover . the scheme of the present edition fortunately allow fit honou to be do to the memoir of the great adventurer . to come from the story as a whole to the personality of the eponymous hero . widely - differ historical individual be suggest as have contribute to the composite portrait . best known of these be that very prince among adventurer , g . , a man who in the latter half of the eighteenth century play the part of adventurer -- and generally that of the successful adventurer -- in most of the european capital ; who within the first five - and - twenty year of he life have be ' abbe , secretary to , ensign , and violinist , at , , , and he own birthplace ( ) , where he cure a senator of apoplexy . ' he autobiography , ( in twelve volume ) , have be describe as ' unmatched as a self - revelation of scoundrelism . ' it have also be suggest , with I think far less colour of probability , that the original of be the diplomatist and satiric poet , whom describe as 'our lively and elegant though too licentious lyrick bard . ' the third original , and one who , there can not be the slightest doubt , contribute feature to the great portrait , be a certain , afterwards - . the original of the be , Countess of , and heiress of a very wealthy family . this lady have many suitor , but in 1777 , a bankrupt lieutenant on half pay , who have fight a duel on she behalf , induce she to marry he , and subsequently hyphenate she name with he own . he become member of parliament , and run such extravagant course as do , treat he wife with similar barbarity , abduct she when she have escape from he , and then , after be divorce , find he way to a debtor ' prison . there be similarity here which no seeker after original can overlook . say that she father have a friend at , , who may have first tell he this history of which the detail be almost incredible , as
as quote from the papers of the time . ' the name of 's friend be a curious coincidence , unless , as may well have be the case , he be a connection of the family into which the notorious adventurer have marry . it be not unlikely that have see the work publish in 1810 -- the year of - 's death -- in which the whole unhappy romance be set forth . this be ' the of , and the Countess of . from thirty - three year ' , from letter and other well authenticate document by , . ' in this book we find several incidents similar to one in the story . Bowes cut down all the timber on he wife 's estate , but ' the neighbour would not buy it . ' such practical joke as play upon he son 's tutor be play by Bowes on he chaplain . the story of and he marriage will be find briefly give in the notice of the Countess 's life in the dictionary of . Whence that part of the romantic interlude deal with the stay in the of ---- , deal with in chapter x. , etc. , be inspire , 's own note \ book ( as quote by ) conclusively show : ' 4,1844 . read in a silly book call , a good story about the first . of 's wife ; kill by she husband for adultery . , bear in 1734 ( ? ) , m. in 1780 the of , who die the 1788 . for the rest of the story see , , : , , 1836 ; vol. I . 220 . ' the ' ' to whom owed he adventur on he journey to ( chapter iii . ) be a notorious highwayman , on whose doings have enlarge in the fifteenth chapter of he . despite the slowness with which it be write , and the seem neglect with which it be permit to remain unreprinted , Barry Lyndon be to be haile by competent critic as one of 's finest performance , though the author himself seem to have have no strong regard for the story . he daughter have record , ' my father once say to I when I be a girl : " you need not read , you will not like it . " indeed , it be scarcely a book to , but one to admire and to wonder at for its consummate power and mastery . ' another novelist , , have say of it : ' in imagination , language , construction , and general literary capacity , never do anything more remarkable than . ' say : ' all later critic have recognise in this book one of he most powerful performance . in directness and vigour he never surpass it . ' W.J. the of , . chapter I my Pedigree and family -- Undergo the influence of the Tender passion since the day of , there have be hardly a mischief do in this world but a woman have be at the bottom of it . ever since ours be a family ( and that must be very 's time , -- so old , noble , and illustrious be the barrys , as everybody know ) woman have play a mighty part with the destiny of we race . I presume that there be no gentleman in that have not hear of the house of of , of the kingdom of , than which a more famous name be not to be find in or ; and though , as a man of the world , I have learn to despise heartily the claim of some Pretender to high birth who have no more genealogy than the lacquey who clean my boot , and though I laugh to utter scorn the boasting of many of my countryman , who be all for descending from king of , and talk of a domain no bigger than would feed a pig as if it be a principality ; yet truth compel I to assert that my family be the noblest of the island , and , perhaps , of the universal world ; while they possession , now insignificant and tear from we by war , by treachery , by the loss of time , by ancestral extravagance , by adhesion to the old faith and monarch , be formerly prodigious , and embrace many county , at a time when be vastly more prosperous than now . I would assume the irish crown over my coat - of - arm , but that there be so many silly pretender to that distinction who bear it and render it common . who know , but for the fault of a woman , I might have be wear it now ? you start with incredulity . I say , why not ? have there be a gallant chief to lead my countryman , instead or pule knave who bend the knee to , they might have be freemen ; have there be a resolute leader to meet the murderous ruffian , we should have shake off the for ever . but there be no Barry in the field against the usurper ; on the contrary , my ancestor , , come over with the first - named monarch , and marry the daughter of the then of , whose son in battle he pitilessly slow . in 's time it be too late for a chief of the name of to lift up he war - cry against that of the murderous brewer . we be prince of the land no longer ; we unhappy race have lose its possession a century previously , and by the most shameful treason . this I know to be the fact , for my mother have often
often tell I the story , and besides have work it in a worsted pedigree which hang up in the yellow saloon at where we liv . that very estate which the Lyndons now possess in be once the property of my race . of own it in 's time , and half beside . the be always in feud with the in those time ; and , as it happen , a certain colonel pass through the former 's country with a body of man - at - arm , on the very day when the have make a inroad upon we territory , and carry off a frightful plunder of we flock and herds . this young , whose name be , , or , have be most hospitably receive by the , and find he just on the point of carry a inroad into the ' land , offer the aid of himself and he lance , and behave himself so well , as it appear , that the be entirely overcome , all the 's property restore , and with it , say the old chronicle , twice as much of the 's good and cattle . it be the setting in of the winter season , and the young soldier be press by the not to quit he house of , and remain there during several month , he man be quarter with 's own gallowglass , man by man in the cottage round about . they conduct themselves , as be they wont , with the most intolerable insolence towards the irish ; so much so , that fight and murder continually ensue , and the people vow to destroy they . the 's son ( from whom I descend ) be as hostile to the as any other man on he domain ; and , as they would not go when bidden , he and he friend consult together and determine on destroy these to a man . but they have let a woman into they plot , and this be the 's daughter . she be in love with the , and break the whole secret to he ; and the dastardly prevent the just massacre of themselves by fal on the irish , and destroy , my ancestor , and many hundred of he man . the cross at near be the spot where the odious butchery take place . marry the daughter of , and claim the estate which he leave : and though the descendant of be alive , as indeed they be in my person , [ : as we have never be able to find proof of the marriage of my ancestor Phaudrig with he wife , I make no doubt that destroy the contract , and murder the priest and witness of the marriage .-- ] on appeal to the english court , the estate be award to the , as have ever be the case where and be concerned . thus , have it not be for the weakness of a woman , I should have be bear to the possession of those very estate which afterwards come to I by merit , as you shall hear . but to proceed with my family , history . my father be well know to the best circle in this kingdom , as in that of , under the name of . he be breed like many other young son of genteel family to the profession of the law , be article to a celebrate attorney of in the city of ; and , from he great genius and aptitude for learning , there be no doubt he would have make a eminent figure in he profession , have not he social quality , love of field - sport , and extraordinary graces of manner , mark he out for a higher sphere . while he be attorney 's clerk he keep seven race - horse , and hunt regularly both with the Kildare and Wicklow hunt ; and ride on he grey horse Endymion that famous match against , which be still remember by lover of the sport , and of which I cause a splendid picture to be make and hang over my dining - hall mantelpiece at . a year afterwards he have the honour of riding that very horse Endymion before he late . at -market , and win the plate there and the attention of the august sovereign . although he be only the second son of we family , my dear father come naturally into the estate ( now miserably reduce to L400 a year ) ; for my grandfather 's eldest son ( call the , from a wound which he receive in ) remain constant to the old religion in which we family be educated , and not only serve abroad with credit , but against he most ii . in the unhappy Scotch disturbance in ' 45 . we shall hear more of the hereafter . for the conversion of my father I have to thank my dear mother , , daughter of of , county , and . she be the most beautiful woman of she day in , and universally call the there . see she at the assembly , my father become passionately attach to she ; but she soul be above marry a Papist or a attorney 's clerk ; and so , for the love of she , the good old law be then in force , my dear father slip into my uncle 's shoe and take the family estate . besides the force of my mother 's bright eye , several person , and of the genteelest society too , contribute to this happy change ; and I have often hear my mother laughingly tell the story of my father 's recantation , which be solemnly pronounce at the tavern in the
the company of , , , and two or three other young spark of the town . win 300 piece that very night at faro , and lay the necessary information the next morning against he brother ; but he conversion cause a coolness between he and my uncle , who join the rebel in consequence . this great difficulty be settle , my lent my father he own yacht , then lie at the , and the handsome be induce to run away with he to , although she parent be against the match , and she lover ( as I have hear she tell many thousand of time ) be among the most numerous and the most wealthy in all the kingdom of . they be marry at the , and my grandfather die very soon , , , take possession of he paternal property and support we illustrious name with credit in . he pink the famous behind , he be a member of ' , ' and a frequenter of all the chocolate - house ; and my mother , likewise , make no small figure . at length , after he great day of triumph before he Sacre at , 's fortune be just on the point of be make , for the gracious monarch promise to provide for he . but alas ! he be take in charge by another monarch , whose will have no delay or denial , -- by , namely , who seize upon my father at races , leave I a helpless orphan . peace be to he ash ! he be not faultless , and dissipate all we princely family property ; but he be as brave a fellow as ever toss a bumper or call a main , and he drive he coach - and - six like a man of fashion . I do not know whether he gracious Majesty be much affect by this sudden demise of my father , though my mother say he she some royal tear on the occasion . but they help we to nothing : and all that be find in the house for the wife and creditor be a purse of ninety guinea , which my dear mother naturally take , with the family plate , and my father 's wardrobe and she own ; and put they into we great coach , drive off to , whence she take shipping for . my father 's body accompany we in the finest hearse and plume money could buy ; for though the husband and wife have quarrell repeatedly in life , yet at my father 's death he high - spirited widow forget all she difference , give he the grandest funeral that have be see for many a day , and erect a monument over he remains ( for which i subsequently pay ) , which declare he to be the wisest , purest , and most affectionate of man . in perform these sad duty over she decease lord , the widow spend almost every guinea she have , and , indeed , would have spend a great deal more , have she discharge one - third of the demand which the ceremony occasion . but the people around we old house of , although they do not like my father for he change of faith , yet stand by he at this moment , and be for exterminate the mute send by of with the lamented remains . the monument and vault in the church be then , alas ! all that remain of my vast possession ; for my father have sell every stick of the property to one , a attorney , and we receive but a cold welcome in he house -- a miserable old tumble - down place it be . [ Footnote : in another part of he memoir will be find to describe this mansion as one of the most splendid palace in ; but this be a practice not unusual with he nation ; and with respect to the irish principality claim by he , it be know that 's grandfather be a attorney and maker of he own fortune . ] the splendour of the funeral do not fail to increase the 's reputation as a woman of spirit and fashion ; and when she write to she brother , that worthy gentleman immediately ride across the country to fl himself in she arm , and to invite she in he wife 's name to . and have quarrell , as all man will , and very high word have pass between they during 's courtship of . when he take she off , swore he would never forgive or ; but come to in the year ' 46 , he fall in once more with , and live in he fine house in , and lose a few piece to he at play , and break a watchman 's head or two in he company , -- all of which reminiscence endear and she son very much to the good - hear gentleman , and he receive we both with open arm . do not , perhaps wisely , at first make know to she friend what be she condition ; but arrive in a huge gilt coach with enormous armorial bearing , be take by she sister - in - law and the rest of the county for a person of considerable property and distinction . for a time , then , and as be right and proper , . give the law at . she order the servants to and fro , and teach they , what indeed they much want , a little neatness ; and ' , ' as I be call , be treat like a little lord , and have a maid and a footman to himself ; and honest pay they
they wage , -- which be much more than he be used to do for he own domestic , -- do all in he power to make he sister decently comfortable under she affliction . , in return , determine that , when she affair be arrange , she would make she kind brother a handsome allowance for she son 's maintenance and she own ; and promise to have she handsome furniture bring over from to adorn the somewhat dilapidate room of . but it turn out that the rascally landlord seize upon every chair and table that ought by rights to have belong to the widow . the estate to which I be here be in the hand of rapacious creditor ; and the only means of subsistence remain to the widow and child be a rent - charge of L50 upon my 's property , who have many turf - dealings with the deceased . and so my dear mother 's liberal intentions towards she brother be of course never fulfil . it must be confess , very much to the discredit of of , that when she sister - in - law 's poverty be thus make manifest , she forget all the respect which she have be accustom to pay she , instantly turn my maid and man - servant out of door , and tell . Barry that she might follow they as soon as she choose . be of a low family , and a sordid way of think ; and after about a couple of year ( during which she have save almost all she little income ) the widow comply with 's desire . at the same time , give way to a just though prudently dissimulate resentment , she make a vow that she would never enter the gate of while the lady of the house remain alive within they . she fitte up she new abode with much economy and considerable taste , and never , for all she poverty , abate a jot of the dignity which be she due and which all the neighbourhood award to she . how , indeed , could they refuse respect to a lady who have live in , frequent the most fashionable society there , and have be present ( as she solemnly declare ) at ? these advantage give she a right which seem to be pretty unsparingly exercise in by those native who have it , -- the right of look down with scorn upon all persons who have not have the opportunity of quit the mother - country and inhabit for a while . thus , whenever appear abroad in a new dress , she sister - in - law would say , ' poor creature ! how can it be expect that she should know anything of the fashion ? ' and though pleased to be call the handsome widow , as she be , . be still better pleas to be call the english widow . , for she part , be not slow to reply : she use to say that the defunct be a bankrupt and a beggar ; and as for the fashionable society which he see , he see it from my 's side - table , whose flatterer and hanger - on he be know to be . regard , the lady of would make insinuation still more painful . however , why should we allude to these charge , or rake up private scandal of a hundred year old ? it be in the reign of II that the above -named personage live and quarrell ; good or bad , handsome or ugly , rich or poor , they be all equal now ; and do not the papers and the court of law supplly we every week with more novel and interesting slander ? at any rate , it must be allow that Barry , after she husband 's death and she retirement , live in such a way as to defy slander . for whereas have be the gayest girl in the whole county of , with half the bachelor at she foot , and plenty of smile and encouragement for every one of they , adopt a dignified reserve that almost amount to pomposity , and be as starch as any Quakeress . many a man renew he offer to the widow , who have be smite by the charms of the spinster ; but . refuse all offer of marriage , declare that she liv now for she son only , and for the memory of she depart saint . ' Sbe not forsooth ! ' say ill - nature . ' be as big a sinner as ever be know ; and ' tis notorious that he and hate each other . if she will not marry now , depend on it , the artful woman have a husband in she eye for all that , and only wait until be a widower . ' and suppose she do , what then ? be not the widow of a fit to marry with any lord of ? and be it not always say that a woman be to restore the fortune of the family ? if my mother fancie that she be to be that woman , I think it be a perfectly justifiable notion on she part ; for the ( my godfather ) be always most attentive to she : I never know how deeply this notion of advance my interests in the world have take possession of mamma 's mind , until he Lordship 's marriage in the year ' 57 with , the indian nabob 's rich daughter . meanwhile we continue to reside at , and , consider the smallness of we income , keep up a wonderful state . of the half - dozen family that form the congregation at
at 's town , there be not a single person whose appearance be so respectable as that of the widow , who , though she always dress in mourning , in memory of she decease husband , take care that she garment should be make so as to set off she handsome person to the greatest advantage ; and , indeed , I think , spend six hour out of every day in the week in cutting , trimm , and alte they to the fashion . she have the largest of hoops and the handsomest of furbelow , and once a month ( under my 's cover ) would come a letter from contain the newest account of the fashions there . she complexion be so brilliant that she have no call to use rouge , as be the mode in those day . no , she leave red and white , she say ( and hence the reader may imagine how the two lady hate each other ) to , whose yellow complexion no plaster could alter . in a word , she be so accomplish a beauty , that all the woman in the country take pattern by she , and the young fellow from ten mile round would ride over to church to have the sight of she . but if ( like every other woman that ever I see or read of ) she be proud of she beauty , to do she justice she be still more proud of she son , and have say a thousand time to I that I be the handsomest young fellow in the world . this be a matter of taste . a man of sixty may , however , say what he be at fourteen without much vanity , and I must say I think there be some cause for my mother 's opinion . the good soul 's pleasure be to dress I ; and on Sunday and holiday I turn out in a velvet coat with a silver - hilt sword by my side and a gold garter at my knee , as fine as any lord in the land . my mother work I several most splendid waistcoat , and I have plenty of lace for my ruffle , and a fresh riband to my hair , and as we walk to church on , even envious be find to allow that there be not a prettier pair in the kingdom . of course , too , the lady of use to sneer , because on these occasion a certain , who use to be call my valet , follow I and my mother to church , carry a huge prayer - book and a cane , and dress in the livery of one of we own fine footman from , which , as be a bandy - shank little fellow , do not exactly become he . but , though poor , we be gentlefolk , and not to be sneer out of these become appendage to we rank ; and so would march up the aisle to we pew with as much state and gravity as the 's lady and son might do . when there , my mother would give the response and amens in a loud dignified voice that be delightful to hear , and , besides , have a fine loud voice for singing , which be she have perfect in under a fashionable teacher ; and she would exercise she talent in such a way that you would hardly hear any other voice of the little congregation which choose to join in the psalm . in fact , my mother have great gift in every way , and believe herself to be one of the most beautiful , accomplish , and meritorious person in the world . often and often have she talk to I and the neighbour regard she own humility and piety , point they out in such a way that I would defy the most obstinate to disbelieve she . when we leave we come to occupy a house in 's town , which mamma christen . I confess it be but a small place , but , indeed , we make the most of it . I have mention the family pedigree which hang up in the drawingroom , which call the yellow saloon , and my bedroom be call the pink bedroom , and hers the orange tawny apartment ( how well I remember they all ! ) ; and at dinner - time Tim regularly ring a great bell , and we each have a silver tankard to drink from , and mother boast with justice that I have as good a bottle of claret by my side as any squire of the land . so indeed I have , but I be not , of course , allow at my tender year to drink any of the wine ; which thus attaine a considerable age , even in the decanter . uncle ( in spite of the family quarrel ) find out the above fact one day by call at at dinner - time , and unluckily taste the liquor . you should have see how he sputter and make face ! but the honest gentleman be not particular about he wine , or the company in which he drank it . he would get drunk , indeed , with the parson or the priest indifferently ; with the latter , much to my mother 's indignation , for , as a true blue Nassauite , she heartily despise all those of the old faith , and would scarcely sit down in the room with a benighted Papist . but the squire have no such scruple ; he be , indeed , one of the easiest , idlest , and best - natured fellow that ever liv , and many a hour
hour would he pass with the lonly widow when he be tired of at home . he like I , he say , as much as one of he own son , and at length , after the widow have hold out for a couple of year , she agree to allow I to return to the castle ; though , for herself , she resolutely keep the oath which she have make with regard to she sister - in - law . the very first day I return to my trial may be say , in a manner , to have begun . my cousin , master , a huge monster of nineteen ( who hate I , and I promise you I return the compliment ) , insult I at dinner about my mother 's poverty , and make all the girl of the family titter . so when we go to the stable , whither always go for he pipe of tobacco after dinner , I tell he a piece of my mind , and there be a fight for at least ten minute , during which I stand to he like a man , and blacke he left eye , though I be myself only twelve year old at the time . of course he beat I , but a beat make only a small impression on a lad of that tender age , as I have prove many time in battle with the rag 's town boy before , not one of whom , at my time of life , be my match . my uncle be very much please when he hear of my gallantry ; my cousin bring brown paper and vinegar for my nose , and I go home that night with a pint of claret under my girdle , not a little proud , let I tell you , at have hold my own against so long . and though he persist in he bad treatment of I , and use to cane I whenever I fall in he way , yet I be very happy now at with the company there , and my cousin , or some of they , and the kindness of my uncle , with whom I become a prodigious favourite . he buy a colt for I , and teach I to ride . he take I out course and fowl , and instruct I to shoot fly . and at length I be release from 's persecution , for he brother , master , return from , and hat he elder brother , as be mostly the way in family of fashion , take I under he protection ; and from that time , as be a deal bigger and stronger than , I , , as I be call , be leave alone ; except when the former thought fit to thrash I , which he do whenever he think proper . be my learning neglect in the ornamental part , for I have a uncommon natural genius for many thing , and soon top in accomplishment most of the persons around I . I have a quick ear and a fine voice , which my mother cultivate to the best of she power , and she teach I to step a minuet gravely and gracefully , and thus lay the foundation of my future success in life . the common dances I learn ( as , perhaps , I ought not to confess ) in the servants ' hall , which , you may be sure , be never without a piper , and where I be consider unrivalled both at a hornpipe and a jig . in the matter of book - learn , I have always a uncommon taste for reading play and novel , as the best part of a gentleman 's polite education , and never let a pedlar pass the village , if I have a penny , without have a ballad or two from he . as for you dull grammar , and and and stuff , I have always hate they from my youth upward , and say , very unmistakably , I would have none of they . this I prove pretty clearly at the age of thirteen , when my aunt 's legacy of come in to , who think to employ the sum on my education , and send I to 's famous academy at -- , as my uncle use to call it . but six week after I have be consign to he reverence , I suddenly make my appearance again at , have walk forty mile from the odious place , and leave the Doctor in a state near upon apoplexy . the fact be , that at taw , prison - bar , or box , I be at the head of the school , but could not be bring to excel in the classic ; and after have be flog seven time , without it be do I the least good in my , I refuse to submit altogether ( finde it useless ) to a eighth application of the rod . ' try some other way , sir , ' say I , when he be for horse I once more ; but he would not ; whereon , and to defend myself , I fling a slate at he , and knock down a usher with a leaden inkstand . all the lad huzza would at this , and some or the servant want to stop I ; but take out a large clasp - knife that my cousin have give I , I swore I would plunge it into the waistcoat of the first man who da to balk I , and faith they let I pass on . I sleep that night twenty mile off , at the house of a cottier , who
who give I potatoe and milk , and to whom I give a hundred guinea after , when I come to visit in my day of greatness . I wish I have the money now . but what be the use of regret ? I have have many a harder bed than that I shall sleep on to - night , and many a scantier meal than honest give I on the evening I run away from school . so six week ' be all the schooling I ever get . and I say this to let parent know the value of it ; for though I have meet more learned book -worm in the world , especially a great hulking , clumsy , blear - eye old doctor , whom they call , and who live in a court off , in , yet I pretty soon silence he in a argument ( at ' 's Coffeehouse ' ) ; and in that , and in poetry , and what I call natural philosophy , or the science of life , and in riding , music , leap , the small - sword , the knowledge of a horse , or a main of cock , and the manners of a accomplished gentleman and a man of fashion , I may say for myself that have seldom find he equal . ' , ' say I to , on the occasion I allude to -- he be accompany by a of , and I be present to the club by a , a countryman of my own --' , ' say I , in reply to the schoolmaster 's great thunder quotation in , ' you fancy you know a great deal more than I , because you quote you and you Pluto ; but can you tell I which horse will win at next week ? -- can you run six mile without breathing ? -- can you shoot the ace of spade ten time without missing ? if so , talk about and to I . ' would 'ye knee who ye be speak to ? ' roar out the , , at this . ' hold you tongue , , ' say the old schoolmaster . 'I have no right to brag of my to the gentleman , and he have answer I very well . ' ' Doctor , ' say I , look waggishly at he , 'do you know ever a rhyme for ? ' ' Port , if you plaise , ' say , laugh . and we have for before we leave the coffee - house that even . it become a regular joke afterwards when I tell the story , and at ' 's ' or the ' Cocoa - tree ' you would hear the wag say , ' waiter , bring I one of 's rhyme for . ' once , when I be in liquor at the latter place , young call I a great Staggerite , a joke which I could never understand . but I be wander from my story , and must get back to home , and dear old again . I have make acquaintance with the best in the land since , and my manners be such , I have say , as to make I the equal of they all ; and , perhaps , you will wonder how a country boy , as I be , educate amongst irish squire , and they dependant of the stable and farm , should arrive at possessing such elegant manners as I be indisputably allow to have . I have , the fact be , a very valuable instructor in the person of a old gamekeeper , who have serve the french king at , and who teach I the dance and custom , and a smattering of the language of that country , with the use of the sword , both small and broad . many and many a long mile I have trudge by he side as a lad , he tell I wonderful story of the french king , and the irish brigade , and , and the opera - dancer ; he know my uncle , too , the , and indeed have a thousand accomplishment which he teach I in secret . I never know a man like he for make or throw a fly , for physick a horse , or break , or choose one ; he teach I manly sport , from bird '- nesting upward , and I always shall consider as the very best tutor I could have have . he fault be drink , but for that I have always have a blind eye ; and he hate my cousin like poison ; but I could excuse he that too . with , and at the age of fifteen , I be a more accomplished man than either of my cousin ; and I think have be also more bountiful to I in the matter of person . some of the girl ( as you shall hear presently ) adore I . at fair and races many of the prettiest lass present say they would like to have I for they bachelor ; and yet somehow , it must be confess , I be not popular . in the first place , every one knew I be bitter poor ; and I think , perhaps , it be my good mother 's fault that I be bitter proud too . I have a habit of boasting in company of my birth , and the splendour of my carriage , garden , cellar , and domestic , and this before people who be perfectly aware of my real circumstance . if it be boy , and they venture to sneer , I would beat they , or die for it ; and many be
be the time I have be bring home well - nigh kill by one or more of they , on what , when my mother ask I , I would say be 'a family quarrel . ' ' support you name with you blood , Reddy my boy , ' would that saint say , with the tear in she eye ; and so would she herself have do with she voice , ay , and she tooth and nail . thus , at fifteen , there be scarce a lad of twenty , for half - a - dozen mile round , that I have not beat for one cause or other . there be the vicar 's two son of -- in course I could not associate with such beggarly brat as they , and many a battle do we have as to who should take the wall in 's town ; there be , the blacksmith 's son , who have the better of I four time before we come to the crowning fight , when I overcome he ; and I could mention a score more of my deed of prowess in that way , but that fisticuff fact be dull subject to talk of , and to discuss before high - breed gentleman and lady . however , there be another subject , lady , on which I must discourse , and that be never out of place . day and night you like to hear of it : young and old , you dream and think of it . handsome and ugly ( and , faith , before fifty , I never see such a thing as a plain woman ) , it be the subject next to the heart of all of you ; and I think you guess my riddle without more trouble . love ! sure the word be form on purpose out of the prettiest soft vowel and consonant in the language , and he or she who do not care to read about it be not worth a fig , to my thinking . my uncle 's family consist of ten child ; who , as be the custom in such large family , be divide into two camp , or party ; the one siding with they mamma , the other take the part of my uncle in all the numerous quarrel which arise between that gentleman and he lady . 's faction be head by , the eldest son , who hate I so , and dislike he father for keep he out of he property : while , the second brother , be he father 's own boy ; and , in revenge , master be desperately afraid of he . I need not mention the girl 's name ; I have plague enough with they in after - life , know ; and one of they be the cause of all my early trouble : this be ( though to be sure all she sister deny it ) the belle of the family , by name . she say she be only nineteen at the time ; but I could read the fly - leaf in the family Bible as well as another ( it be one of the three book which , with the backgammon - board , form my uncle 's library ) , and know that she be bear in the year ' 37 , and christen by , of 's , : hence she be three - and - twenty year old at the time she and I be so much together . when I come to think about she now , I know she never could have be handsome ; for she figure be rather of the fattest , and she mouth of the widest ; she be freckle over like a partridge 's egg , and she hair be the colour of a certain vegetable which we eat with boiled beef , to use the mildest term . often and often would my dear mother make these remark concern she ; but I do not believe they then , and somehow have get to think a angelical being , far above all the other angels of she sex . and as we know very well that a lady who be skill in dancing or singe never can perfect herself without a deal of study in private , and that the song or the minuet which be perform with so much graceful ease in the assembly - room have not be acquire without vast labour and perseverance in private ; so it be with the dear creature who be skill in coquetting . , for instance , be always practise , and she would take poor I to rehearse she accomplishment upon ; or the exciseman , when he come he round , or the steward , or the poor curate , or the young apothecary 's lad from 's town : whom I recollect beat once for that very reason . if he be alive now I make he my apology . poor fellow ! as if it be he fault that he should be a victim to the wile of one of the greatest coquette ( consider she obscure life and rustic breeding ) in the world . if the truth must be tell -- and every word of this narrative of my life be of the most sacred veracity --my passion for begin in a very vulgar and unromantic way . I do not save she life ; on the contrary , I once very nearly kill she , as you shall hear . I do not behold she by moonlight play on the guitar , or rescue she from the hand of ruffian , as do in the novel ; but one day , after dinner at 's town , in summer , go into the garden
garden to pull gooseberry for my dessert , and think only of gooseberry , I pledge my honour , I come upon and one of she sister , with whom she be friend at the time , who be both engage in the very same amusement . ' what be the for , ? ' say she . she be always ' pok she fun , ' as the phrase it . 'I know the for , ' say I . ' and what be that ? ' cry , as pert as a peacock . ' Bo to you ! ' say I ( for I have never a want of wit ) ; and so we fall to work at the gooseberry - bush , laugh and talk as happy as might be . in the course of we diversion manage to scratch she arm , and it b , and she scream , and it be mighty round and white , and I tie it up , and I believe be permit to kiss she hand ; and though it be as big and clumsy a hand as ever you see , yet I think the favour the most ravish one that be ever confer upon I , and go home in a rapture . I be much too simple a fellow to disguise any sentiment I chance to feel in those day ; and not one of the eight Castle Brady girl but be soon aware of my passion , and joke and compliment about she bachelor . the torment of jealousy the cruel coquette make I endure be horrible . sometimes she would treat I as a child , sometimes as a man . she would always leave I if ever there come a stranger to the house . ' for after all , , ' she would say , ' you be but fifteen , and you have not a guinea in the world . ' at which I would swear that I would become the greatest hero ever know out of , and vow that before I be twenty I would have money enough to purchase a estate six time as big as . all which vain promise , of course , I do not keep ; but I make no doubt they influence I in my very early life , and cause I to do those great action for which I have be celebrate , and which shall be narrate presently in order . I must tell one of they , just that my dear young lady reader may know what sort of a fellow be , and what a courage and undaunted passion he have . I question whether any of the jenny - jessamine of the present day would do half as much in the face of danger . about this time , it must be premise , the be in a state of great excitement from the threat generally credit of a french invasion . the Pretender be say to be in high favour at Versailles , a descent upon be especially look to , and the nobleman and people of condition in that and all other part of the kingdom show they loyalty by raise regiment of horse and foot to resist the invader . 's send a company to join the regiment , of which master be the captain ; and we have a letter from at Trinity College , state that the have also form a regiment , in which he have the honour to be a corporal . how I envy they both ! especially that odious as I see he in he laced scarlet coat , with a ribbon in he hat , march off at the head of he man . he , the poor spiritless creature , be a captain , and I nothing ,-- I who feel I have as much courage as the of himself , and felt , too , that a red jacket would mightily become I ! my mother say I be too young to join the new regiment ; but the fact be , that it be she herself who be too poor , for the cost of a new uniform would have swallow up half she year 's income , and she would only have she boy appear in a way suitable to he birth , ride the finest of racer , dress in the best of clothes , and keep the genteelest of company . well , then , the whole country be alive with war 's alarum , the three kingdom ring with military music , and every man of merit pay he devoir at the court of , whilst poor I be oblige to stay at home in my fustian jacket and sigh for fame in secret . come to and fro from the regiment , and bring numerous of he comrade with he . they costume and swagger air fill I with grief , and 's unvarying attention to they serve to make I half wild . no one , however , think of attribute this sadness to the young lady 's score , but rather to my disappointment at not be allow to join the military profession . once the officer of the give a grand ball at , to which , as a matter of course , all the lady of ( and a pretty ugly coachful they be ) be invite . I know to what torture the odious little flirt of a would put I with she eternal coquetry with the officer , and refuse for a long time to be one of the party to the ball . but she have a way of conquer I , against which all resistance of mine be in vain . she vow that ride in a coach always make she ill . ' and how can I go to the
the ball , ' say she , ' unless you take I on daisy behind you on the pillion ? ' be a good blood - mare of my uncle 's , and to such a proposition I could not for my soul say no ; so we ride in safety to , and I feel myself as proud as any prince when she promise to dance a country - dance with I . when the dance be end , the little ungrateful flirt inform I that she have quite forgotten she engagement ; she have actually dance the set with a ! I have endure torment in my life , but none like that . she try to make up for she neglect , but I would not . some of the prettiest girl there offer to conseal I , for I be the best dancer in the room . I make one attempt , but be too wretched to continue , and so remain alone all night in a state of agony . I would have play , but I have no money ; only the gold piece that my mother bay I always keep in my purse as a gentleman should . I do not care for drink , or know the dreadful comfort of it in those day ; but I think of kill myself and , and most certainly of make away with ! at last , and at morning , the ball be over . the rest of we lady go off in the lumbering creak old coach ; be bring out , and take she place behind I , which I let she do without a word . but we be not half - a - mile out of town when she begin to try with she coaxing and blandishment to dissipate my ill - humour . ' sure it be a bitter night , dear , and you will catch cold without a handkerchief to you neck . ' to this sympathetic remark from the pillion , the saddle make no reply . ' do you and have a pleasant evening , ? you be together , I see , all night . ' to this the saddle only reply by grind he tooth , and give a lash to . 'o mercy ! you will make rear and throw I , you careless creature you : and you know , , I be so timid . ' the pillion have by this get she arm round the saddle 's waist , and perhaps give it the gentlest squeeze in the world . 'I hate , you know I do ! ' answer the saddle ; ' and I only dance with she because -- because -- the person with whom I intend to dance choose to be engage the whole night . ' ' sure there be my sister , ' say the pillion , now laugh outright in the pride of she conscious superiority ; ' and for I , my dear , I have not be in the room five minute before I be engage for every single set . ' ' be you oblige to dance five time with ? ' say I ; and oh ! strange delicious charm of coquetry , I do believe at twenty - three year of age feel a pang of delight in think that she have so much power over a guileless lad of fifteen . of course she reply that she do not care a fig for : that he dance prettily , to be sure , and be a pleasant rattle of a man ; that he look well in he regimental too ; and if he choose to ask she to dance , how could she refuse he ? ' but you refuse I , . ' 'Oh ! I can dance with you any day , ' answer , with a toss of she head ; ' and to dance with you cousin at a ball , look as if you could find no other partner . besides , ' say -- and this be a cruel , unkind cut , which show what a power she have over I , and how mercilessly she use it ,--' besides , , 's a man and you be only a boy ! ' ' if ever I meet he again ,' I roar out with a oath , ' you shall see which be the best man of the two . I will fight he with sword or with pistol , captain as he be . a man indeed ! I will fight any man -- every man ! do not I stand up to when I be eleven year old ? -- do not I beat , the great hulking brute , who be nineteen ? -- do not I do for the ? of , it be cruel of you to sneer at I so ! ' but be in the sneer mood that night , and pursue she sarcasm ; she point out that be already know as a valiant soldier , famous as a man of fashion in , and that it be mighty well of to talk and boast of beat usher and farmer ' boy , but to fight a be a very different matter . then she fall to talk of the invasion , and of military matter in general ; of ( who be call , in those day , the Protestant hero ) , of and he fleet , of and he squadron , of , how it be attack , and where it be ; we both agree it must be in , and hope the french might be soundly beat there . I sigh after a while ( for I be begin to melt ) , and say how much I longe to be a soldier ; on
on which recur to she infallible 'Ah ! now , would you leave I , then ? but , sure , you be not big enough for anything more than a little drummer . ' to which I reply , by swear that a soldier I would be , and a general too . as we be chatter in this silly way , we come to a place that have ever since go by the name of 's . it be a old high bridge , over a stream sufficientely deep and rocky , and as the mare daisy with she double load be cross this bridge , , give a loose to she imagination , and still harp on the military theme ( I would lay a wager that she be think of ) -- say , ' suppose now , Redmond , you , who be such a hero , be pass over the bridge , and the inimy on the other side ? ' 'I would draw my sword , and cut my way through they . ' ' what , with I on the pillion ? would you kill poor I ? ' ( this young lady be perpetually speak of ' poor I ! ' ) ' well , then , I will tell you what I would do . I would jump into the river , and swim you both across , where no enemy could follow we . ' ' jump twenty foot ! you would not dare to do any such thing on . there be the 's horse , , I have hear say that --' she never finish the word , for , madden by the continual recurrence of that odious monosyllable , I shoute to she to ' hold tight by my waist , ' and , give the spur , in a minute sprang with over the parapet into the deep water below . I do not know why , now -- whether it be I want to dry myself and , or to perform a act that even should crane at , or whether I fancie that the enemy actually be in front of we , I can not tell now ; but over I go . the horse sank over he head , the girl scream as she sank and scream as she rise , and I land she , half faint , on the shore , where we be soon find by my uncle 's people , who return on hear the scream . I go home , and be ill speedily of a fever , which keep I to my bed for six week ; and I quit my couch prodigiously increase in stature , and , at the same time , still more violently in love than I have be even before . at the commencement of my illness , have be pretty constant in she attendance at my bedside , forget , for the sake of I , the quarrel between my mother and she family ; which my good mother be likewise pleased , in the most Christian manner , to forget . and , let I tell you , it be no small mark of goodness in a woman of she haughty disposition , who , as a rule , never forgave anybody , for my sake to give up she hostility to , and to receive she kindly . for , like a mad boy as I be , it be I be always rave about and ask for ; I would only accept medicine from she hand , and would look rudely and sulkily upon the good mother , who love I better than anything else in the world , and give up even she favourite habit , and proper and become jealousy , to make I happy . as I get well , I see that 's visit become daily more rare : ' why do not she come ? ' I would say , peevishly , a dozen time in the day ; in reply to which query , . would be oblige to make the best excuse she could find , -- such as that have sprain she ankle , or that they have quarrell together , or some other answer to soothe I . and many a time have the good soul leave I to go and break she heart in she own room alone , and come back with a smile face , so that I should know nothing of she mortification . , indeed , do I take much pain to ascertain it : nor should I , I fear , have be very much touch even have I discover it ; for the commencement of manhood , I think , be the period of we extremest selfishness . we get such a desire then to take wing and leave the parent nest , that no tear , entreaty , or feeling of affection will counter - balance this overpower longe after independence . she must have be very sad , that poor mother of mine -- be good to she !-- at that period of my life ; and have often tell I since what a pang of the heart it be to she to see all she care and affection of year forgote by I in a minute , and for the sake of a little heartless jilt , who be only play with I while she could get no better suitor . for the fact be , that during the last four week of my illness , no other than be stay at , and make love to in form . my mother do not dare to break this news to I , and you may be sure that herself keep it a secret : it be only by chance that I discover it . shall I tell you how
how ? the minx have be to see I one day , as I sit up in my bed , convalescent ; she be in such high spirit , and so gracious and kind to I , that my heart pour over with joy and gladness , and I have even for my poor mother a kind word and a kiss that morning . I feel myself so well that I eat up a whole chicken , and promise my uncle , who have come to see I , to be ready against partridge - shoot , to accompany he , as my custom be . the next day but one be a , and I have a project for that day which I determine to realise , in spite of all the doctor 's and my mother 's injunction : which be that I be on no account to leave the house , for the fresh air would be the death of I . well , I lay wondrous quiet , compose a copy of verse , the first I ever make in my life ; and I give they here , spelt as I spelt they in those day when I know no better . and though they be not so polished and elegant as ' ease a love -sick , ' and ' when bedeck the , ' and other lyrical effusion of mine which obtain I so much reputation in after life , I still think they pretty good for a humble lad of fifteen :-- the rose of . send by a young gentleman of quality to - dy , of . on 's tower there grow a flower , it be the loveliest flower that blow ,-- at there live a lady ( and how I love she no one know ) : she name be , and the goddess present she with this blooming rose . 'O , ' say the goddess , 'I have many a rich and bright parterre ; in 's towers there be seven more flower , but you be the fairest lady there : not all the county , nor 's bounty , can projuice a treasure that be half so fair ! what cheek be redder ? sure ros feed she ! she hair be maregold , and she eye of blow she eyelid be like the vi'let , that darkly glisten with gentle jew ? the lily 's nature be not surely whiter 's neck be , -- and she arrum too . ' come , gentle , ' say the goddess , ' my dearest creature , take my advice , there be a poet , full well you know it , who spend he lifetime in heavy sigh ,-- yong , ' ti he you will marry , if rhyme and raisin you would choose likewise . ' on , no sooner be my mother go to church , than I summon Phil the valet , and insist upon he produce my best suit , in which I array myself ( although I find that I have shoot up so in my illness that the old dress be wofully too small for I ) , and , with my notable copy of verse in my hand , run down towards , bend upon behold my beauty . the air be so fresh and bright , and the bird sang so loud amidst the green tree , that I feel more elated than I have be for month before , and spring down the avenue ( my uncle have cut down every stick of the tree , by the way ) as brisk as a young fawn . my heart begin to thump as I mount the grass - grow step of the terrace , and pass in by the rickety hall - door . the master and mistress be at church , screw the butler tell I ( after give a start back at see my altered appearance , and gaunt lean figure ) , and so be six of the young lady . ' be one ? ' I ask . 'no , be not one , ' say , assume a very puzzled , and yet know look . ' where be she ? ' to this question he answer , or rather make believe to answer , with usual irish ingenuity , and leave I to settle whether she be go to on the pillion behind she brother , or whether she and she sister have go for a walk , or whether she be ill in she room ; and while I be settle this query , leave I abruptly . I rush away to the back court , where the stable stand , and there I find a dragoon whistl the ' of , ' as he clean down a cavalry horse . ' whose horse , fellow , be that ? ' cry I . ' Feller , indeed ! ' reply the : ' the horse belong to my captain , and he be a better Feller nor you any day . ' I do not stop to break he bone , as I would on another occasion , for a horrible suspicion have come across I , and I make for the garden as quickly as I could . I know somehow what I should see there . I see and pace the alley together . she arm be under he , and the scoundrel be fond and squeeze the hand which lay closely nestle against he odious waistcoat . some distance beyond they be of the regiment , who be pay court to 's sister . I be not afraid of any man or ghost ; but as I see that sight my knee fall a -trembling violently under I , and such a sickness come over I , that I be fain to sink down
down on the grass by a tree against which I lean , and lose almost all consciousness for a minute or two : then I gather myself up , and , advanc towards the couple on the walk , loose the blade of the little silver - hilt hanger I always wore in its scabbard ; for I be resolve to pass it through the body of the delinquent , and spit they like two pigeon . I do not tell what feeling else besides those of rage be pass through my mind ; what bitter blank disappointment , what mad wild despair , what a sensation as if the whole world be tumbl from under I ; I make no doubt that my reader hath be jilt by the ladie many time , and so bid he recall he own sensation when the shock first fall upon he . 'no , , ' say the ( for it be the fashion of those time for lover to call themselves by the most romantic name out of novel ) , ' except for you and four other , I vow before all the gods , my heart have never feel the soft flame ! ' 'Ah ! you men , you men , ! ' say she ( the beast 's name be ) , ' you passion be not equal to ours . we be like -- like some plant I have read of -- we bear but one flower and then we die ! ' ' do you mean you never feel a inclination for another ? ' say . ' never , my , but for thee ! how can you ask a blushing nymph such a question ? ' ' ! ' say he , raise she hand to he lip . I have a knot of cherry - coloured riband , which she have give I out of she breast , and which somehow I always wore upon I . I pull these out of my bosom , and fling they in 's face , and rush out with my little sword draw , shriek , ' she be a liar -- she be a liar , ! draw , sir , and defend yourself , if you be a man ! ' and with these word I leapt at the monster , and collar he , while make the air echo with she scream ; at the sound of which the other and hasten up . although I spring up like a weed in my illness , and be now nearly attaine to my full growth of six foot , yet I be but a lath by the side of the enormous , who have calf and shoulders such as no chairman at ever boast . he turn very red , and then exceedingly pale at my attack upon he , and slipp back and clutch at he sword -- when , in a agony of terror , fling herself round he , scream , ' ! , for 's sake spare the child -- he be but a infant . ' ' and ought to be whip for he impudence , ' say the ; ' but never fear , , I shall not touch he ; you favourite be safe from I . ' so say , he stoop down and pick up the bunch of riband which have fall at 's foot , and hand it to she , say in a sarcastic tone , ' when lady make present to gentleman , it be time for other gentleman to retire . ' ' good heaven , ! ' cry the girl ; ' he be but a boy . ' 'I be a man , ' roar I , ' and will prove it . ' ' and do not signify any more than my parrot or lap - dog . may not I give a bit of riband to my own cousin ? ' ' you be perfectly welcome , miss , ' continue the , 'as many yard as you like . ' ' ! ' exclaim the dear girl ; ' you father be a tailor , and you be always think of the shop . but I will have my revenge , I will ! Reddy , will you see I insult ? ' ' indeed , , ' say I , 'I intend to have he blood as sure as my name 's . ' 'I will send for the usher to cane you , little boy , ' say the , regain he self - possession ; ' but as for you , miss , I have the honour to wish you a good - day . ' he take off he hat with much ceremony , make a low Conge , and be just walk off , when , my cousin , come up , whose ear have likewise be catch by the scream . ' Hoity - toity ! , what be the matter here ? ' say ; ' Nora in tear , 's ghost here with he sword draw , and you make a bow ? ' 'I will tell you what it be , , ' say the : 'I have have enough of , here , and you irish way . I be not use to th'ey , sir . ' ' well , well ! what be it ? ' say good - humouredly ( for he owe Quin a great deal of money as it turn out ) ; 'we will make you use to we way , or adopt one . ' ' it be not the english way for lady to have two lover ' ( the ' Henglish way , ' as the call it ) , ' and so , , I will thank you to pay I the sum you owe I
I , and I will resign all claim to this young lady . if she have a fancy for schoolboy , let she take 'em , sir . ' ' Pooh , pooh ! Quin , you be joke , ' say . never be more in earnest , ' reply the other . ' by , then , look to yourself ! ' shoute . ' Infamous seducer ! infernal deceiver !-- you come and wind you toil round this suffering angel here -- you win she heart and leave she -- and fancy she brother will not defend she ? draw this minute , you slave ! and let I cut the wicked heart out of you body ! ' ' this be regular assassination , ' say , start back ; ' there be two on th'ey on I at once . , you will not let them murder I ? ' ' ! ' say , who seem mightily amused , ' you may settle you own quarrel , ;' and come over to I , whisper , ' at he again , you little fellow . ' 'as long as withdraw he claim , ' say I , 'I , of course , do not interfere . ' 'I do , sir -- I do , ' say , more and more flustered . ' then defend yourself like a man , curse you ! ' cry again . ' Mysie , lead this poor victim away -- and will see fair play between we . ' ' well now -- I do not -- give I time -- I be puzzl -- I -- I do not know which way to look . ' ' like the donkey betwixt the two bundle of hay , ' say drily , ' and there be pretty pickings on either side . ' chapter ii I show Myself to be a man of during this dispute , my cousin do the only thing that a lady , under such circumstance , could do , and faint in due form . I be in hot altercation with at the time , or I should have , of course , fly to she assistance , but ( a dry sort of fellow this be ) prevent I , say , ' I advise you to leave the young lady to herself , , and be sure she will come to . ' and so indeed , after a while , she do , which have show I since that know the world pretty well , for many be the lady I have see in after time recover in a similar manner . do not offer to help she , you may be sure , for , in the midst of the diversion , cause by she screaming , the faithless bully stole away . ' which of we be to engage ? ' say I to ; for it be my first affair , and I be as proud of it as of a suit of lace velvet . ' be it you or I , , that be to have the honour of chastise this insolent ? ' and I hold out my hand as I speak , for my heart melt towards my cousin under the triumph of the moment . but he reject the proffer offer of friendship . ' you -- you ! ' say he , in a towering passion ; 'hang you for a meddling brat : you hand be in everybody 's pie . what business have you to come brawl and quarrell here , with a gentleman who have fifteen hundred a year ? ' 'Oh , ' gas , from the stone bench , 'I shall die : I know I shall . I shall never leave this spot . ' ' the be not go yet , ' whisper ; on which , give he a indignant look , jump up and walk towards the house . ' meanwhile , ' continue , ' what business have you , you meddl rascal , to interfere with a daughter of this house ? ' ' Rascal yourself ! ' roar I : ' call I another such name , , and I will drive my hanger into you weasand . Recollect , I stand to you when I be eleven year old . I be you match now , and , by , provoke I , and I will beat you like -- like you younger brother always do . ' that be a home - cut , and I see turn blue with fury . ' this be a pretty way to recommend yourself to the family , ' say , in a soothing tone . ' the girl 's old enough to be he mother , ' grow . ' old or not ,' I reply : ' you listen to this , ' ( and I swore a tremendous oath , that need not be put down here ) : ' the man that marry must first kill I -- do you mind that ? ' ' Pooh , sir , ' say , turn away , ' kill you -- flog you , you mean ! I will send for the huntsman to do it ;' and so he go off . now come up , and take I kindly by the hand , say I be a gallant lad , and he like my spirit . ' but what say be true , ' continue he ; ' it be a hard thing to give a lad counsel who be in such a far - gone state as you ; but , believe I , I know the world , and if you will but follow my advice , you will not regret have take it . have not a penny ; you be not a
a whit richer . you be but fifteen , and she be four - and - twenty . in ten year , when you be old enough to marry , she will be a old woman ; and , my poor boy , do not you see -- though it be a hard matter to see -- that she be a flirt , and do not care a pin for you or either ? ' but who in love ( or in any other point , for the matter of that ) listen to advice ? I never do , and I tell fairly , that might love I or not as she like , but that should fight I before he marry she -- that I swore . ' faith , ' say , ' I think you be a lad that be likely to keep you word ; ' and , look hard at I for a second or two , he walk away likewise , hum a tune : and I see he look back at I as he go through the old gate out of the garden . when he be gone , and I be quite alone , I fling myself down on the bench where have make believe to faint , and have leave she handkerchief ; and , take it up , hide my face in it , and burst into such a passion of tear as I would then have have nobody see for the world . the crumple riband which I have fling at lay in the walk , and I sit there for hour , as wretch as any man in , I believe , for the time be . but it be a changeable world ! when we consider how great we sorrow , and how small they be ; how we think we shall die of grief , and how quickly we forget , I think we ought to be asham of ourselves and we fickle - heartedness . for , after all , what business have time to bring we consolation ? I have not , perhaps , in the course of my multifarious adventur and experience , hit upon the right woman ; and have forget , after a little , every single creature I adore ; but I think , if I could but have light on the right one , I would have love she for ever . I must have sat for some hour bemoan myself on the garden bench , for it be morning when I come to , and the dinner - bell clange as usual at three o'clock , which wake I up from my reverie . presently I gather up the handkerchief , and once more take the riband . as I pass through the office , I see the 's saddle be still hang up at the stable - door , and see he odious red - coate brute of a servant swagger with the scullion - girl and kitchen - people . ' the 's still there , , ' say one of the maid to I ( a sentimental black - eyed girl , who wait on the young lady ) . 'he be there in the parlour , with the sweetest fillet of vale ; go in , and do not let he browbeat you , master Redmond . ' and in I go , and take my place at the bottom of the big table , as usual , and my friend the butler speedily bring I a cover . 'Hallo , Reddy my boy ! ' say my uncle , ' up and well ?-- that be right . ' ' he would better be home with he mother , ' grow my aunt . ' do not mind she , ' say uncle ; ' it be the cold goose she eat at breakfast do not agree with she . take a glass of spirit , , to 's health . ' it be evident he do not know of what have happen ; but , who be at dinner too , and , and almost all the girl , look exceedingly black , and the foolish ; and , who be again by he side , ready to cry . sit smiling ; and I look on as cold as a stone . I think the dinner would choke I : but I be determined to put a good face on it , and when the cloth be draw , fill my glass with the rest ; and we drank the and the church , as gentleman should . my uncle be in high good - humour , and especially always joke with and the captain . it be , ' Nora , divide that merry - think with the captain ! see who will be marry first . ' ' , my dear boy , never mind a clean glass for the claret , we be short of crystal at ; take and the wine will taste none the worse ;' and so on . he be in the highest glee , -- I do not know why . have there be a reconciliation between the faithless girl and she lover since they have come into the house ? I learn the truth very soon . at the third toast , it be always the custom for the ladie to withdraw ; but my uncle stop they this time , in spite of the remonstrance of , who say , 'Oh , pa ! do let we go ! ' and say , ' no , . and lady , if you plaise ; this be a sort of toast that be drink a great dale too seldom in my family , and you will plaise to receive it with all the honour . here be and . , and long
long life to they . kiss she , , you rogue : for ' faith you have get a treasure ! ' ' he have already ' ---- I screech out , spring up . ' hold you tongue , you fool -- hold you tongue ! ' say big , who sit by I ; but I would not hear . ' he have already ,' I scream , ' be slap in the face this morning , ; he be already be call coward , ; and this be the way I will drink he health . here be you health , ! ' and I fling a glass of claret into he face . I do not know how he look after it , for the next moment I myself be under the table , trip up by , who hit I a violent cuff on the head as I go down ; and I have hardly leisure to hear the general screaming and skurry that be take place above I , be so fully occupy with kick , and thumps , and curse , with which be belabour I . ' you fool ! ' roar he - - ' you great blunder marplot -- you silly beggarly brat ' ( a thump at each ) , ' hold you tongue ! ' these blow from , of course , I do not care for , for he have always be my friend , and have be in the habit of thrashing I all my life . when I get up from under the table all the lady be gone ; and I have the satisfaction of see the 's nose be bleed , as mine be -- he be cut across the bridge , and he beauty spoil for ever . shook himself , sit down quietly , fill a bumper , and push the bottle to I . ' there , you young donkey , ' say he , ' sup that ; and let 's hear no more of you braying . ' 'In 's name , what do all the row mean ? ' say my uncle . ' be the boy in the fever again ? ' ' it be all you fault , ' say sulkily : ' yours and those who bring he here . ' ' hold you noise , ! ' say , turn on he ; ' speak civil of my father and I , and do not let I be call upon to teach you manners . ' ' it be you fault , ' repeat . ' what business have the vagabond here ? if I have my will , I would have he flog and turn out . ' ' and so he should be , ' say . ' you have best not try it , , ' say , who be always my champion ; and turn to he father , ' the fact be , sir , that the young monkey have fall in love with , and find she and the mighty sweet in the garden to - day , he be for murdering . ' ' Gad , he be begin young , ' say my uncle , quite good - humouredly . '' , , that boy be a Brady , every inch of he . ' ' and I will tell you what , ,' cry Quin , bristl up : 'I have be insult grossly in this ' Ouse . I be not at all satisfied with these here way of go on . I be a I be , and a man of property ; and I -- I'--' if you be insult , and not satisfied , remember there be two of we , , ' say grufinitely . on which the fall to wash he nose in water , and answer never a word . ' , ' say I , in the most dignified tone I could assume , ' may also have satisfaction any time he please , by call on , , of . ' at which speech my uncle burst out a - laughing ( as he do at everything ) ; and in this laugh , , much to my mortification , join . I turn rather smartly upon he , however , and bade he to understand that as for my cousin , who have be my best friend through life , I could put up with rough treatment from he ; yet , though I be a boy , even that sort of treatment I would bear from he no longer ; and any other person who venture on the like would find I a man , to they cost . ' ,' I add , ' know that fact very well ; and if he be a man , he will know where to find I . ' my uncle now observ that it be get late , and that my mother would be anxious about I . ' one of you have better go home with he , ' say he , turn to he son , 'or the lad may be play more prank . ' but say , with a nod to he brother , ' Both of we ride home with here . ' 'I be not afraid of 's people , ' say the , with a faint attempt at a laugh ; 'my man be armed , and so be I . ' ' you know the use of arm very well , , ' say ; ' and no one can doubt you courage ; but and I will see you home for all that . ' ' why , you will not be home till morning , boy . be a good ten mile from here . ' ' we will sleep at 's quarter , '
' reply : ' to stop a week there . ' ' thank you , ' say , very faint ; ' it be very kind of you . ' ' you will be lonely , you know , without we . ' ' oh yes , very lonely ! ' say . ' and in another week , my boy , ' say ( and here he whisper something in the 's ear , in which I think I catch the word ' marriage , ' ' parson , ' and feel all my fury return again ) . 'as you please , ' whin out the ; and the horse be quickly bring round , and the three gentleman rode away . stop , and , at my uncle 's injunction , walk across the old treeless park with I . he say that after the quarrel at dinner , he think I would scarcely want to see the lady that night , in which opinion I concur entirely ; and so we go off without a adieu . 'a pretty day 's work of it you have make , , ' say he . ' what ! you a friend to the , and know you uncle to be distress for money , try and break off a match which will bring fifteen hundr a year into the family ? have promise to pay off the four thousand pound which be bother you uncle so . he take a girl without a penny -- a girl with no more beauty than yonder bullock . well , well , do not look furious ; let 's say she be handsome -- there be no accounting for taste ,-- a girl that have be flinge herself at the head of every man in these part these ten year past , and miss they all . and you , as poor as herself , a boy of fifteen -- well , sixtee , if you insist -- and a boy who ought to be attach to you uncle as to you father '-- ' and so I be , ' say I . ' and this be the return you make he for he kindness ! do not he harbour you in he house when you be a orphan , and have not he give you rent - free you fine mansion of ? and now , when he affair can be put into order , and a chance offer for he old age to be make comfortable , who fling himself in the way of he and competence ? -- you , of all other ; the man in the world must oblige to he . it be wicked , ungrateful , unnatural . from a lad of such spirit as you be , I expect a truer courage . ' 'I be not afraid of any man alive , ' exclaim I ( for this latter part of the 's argument have rather stagger I , and I wish , of course , to turn it -- as one always should when the enemy 's too strong ) ; 'and it be _I_ be the injured man , . no man be ever , since the world begin , treat so . look here -- look at this riband . I have wear it in my heart for six month . I have have it there all the time of the fever . do not take it out of she own bosom and give it I ? do not she kiss I when she give it I , and call I she darling ? ' ' she be Practising , ' reply , with a sneer . 'I know woman , sir . give they time , and let nobody else come to the house , and they will fall in love with a chimney - sweep . there be a young lady in '-- 'A young lady in flame , ' roar I ( but I use a still hotter word ) . ' mark this ; come what will of it , I swear I will fight the man who pretend to the hand of . I will follow he , if it be into the church , and meet he there . I will have he blood , or he shall have mine ; and this riband shall be find dyed in it . yes , and if I kill he , I will pin it on he breast , and then she may go and take back she token . ' this I say because I be very much excit at the time , and because I have not read novel and romantic play for nothing . ' well , ' say after a pause , ' if it must be , it must . for a young fellow , you be the most blood - thirsty I ever see . be a determined fellow , too . ' ' will you take my message to he ? ' say I , quite eagerly . ' Hush ! ' say : ' you mother may be on the look - out . here we be , close to . ' ' mind ! not a word to my mother ,' I say ; and go into the house swell with pride and exultation to think that I should have a chance against the I hate so . , my servant , have come up from on my mother 's return from church ; for the good lady be rather alarme at my absence , and anxious for my return . but he have see I go in to dinner , at the invitation of the sentimental lady 's - maid ; and when he have have he own share of the good thing in the kitchen , which be always better furnished than ours at
at home , have walk back again to inform he mistress where I be , and , no doubt , to tell she , in he own fashion , of all the event that have happene at . in spite of my precaution to secrecy , then , I half suspect that my mother know all , from the manner in which she embrace I on my arrival , and receive we guest , . the poor soul look a little anxious and flushed , and every now and then gaze very hard in the 's face ; but she say not a word about the quarrel , for she have a noble spirit , and would as lief have see anyone of she kindred hang as shirking from the field of honour . what have become of those gallant feeling nowadays ? sixty year ago a man be a man , in old , and the sword that be wear by he side be at the service of any gentleman 's gizzard , upon the slightest difference . but the good old time and usage be fast fade away . one scarcely every hear of a fair meeting now , and the use of those cowardly pistol , in place of the honourable and manly weapon of gentleman , have introduce a deal of knavery into the practice of duelling , that can not be sufficiently deplor . when I arrive at home I feel that I be a man in earnest , and welcome to , and introduce he to my mother , in a majestic and dignified way , say the must be thirsty after he walk , and call upon to bring up a bottle of the yellow - seal Bordeaux , and cake and glass , immediately . look at the mistress in great wonderment : and the fact be , that six hour previous I would as soon have think of burn the house down as call for a bottle of claret on my own account ; but I feel I be a man now , and have a right to command ; and my mother feel this too , for she turn to the fellow and say , sharply , ' do not you hear , you rascal , what you master say ! go , get the wine , and the cake and glass , directly . ' then ( for you may be sure she do not give Tim the key of we little cellar ) she go and get the liquor herself ; and bring it in , on the silver tray , in due form . my dear mother pour out the wine , and drank the welcome ; but I observe she hand shake very much as she perform this courteous duty , and the bottle go clink , clink , against the glass . when she have taste she glass , she say she have a headache , and would go to bed ; and so I ask she bless , as become a dutiful son --( the modern Blood have give up the respectful ceremony which distinguished a gentleman in my time ) -- and she leave I and to talk over we important business . ' indeed , ' say the ,' I see now no other way out of the scrape than a meeting . the fact be , there be a talk of it at , after you attack upon Quin this afternoon , and he vow that he would cut you in piece : but the tear and supplication of induce he , though very unwillingly , to relent . now , however , matter have go too far . no officer , bear he 's commission , can receive a glass of wine on he nose -- this claret of yours be very good , by the way , and by you leave we will ring for another bottle -- without resent the affront . fight you must ; and be a huge strong fellow . ' ' he will give the better mark , ' say I . 'I be not afraid of he . ' 'In faith , ' say the ,' I believe you be not ; for a lad , I never see more game in my life . ' ' look at that sword , sir , ' say I , point to a elegant silver - mount one , in a white shagreen case , that hang on the mantelpiece , under the picture of my father , . ' it be with that sword , sir , that my father pink , in , in the year 1740 ; with that sword , sir , he meet , the baronet , and run he through the neck . they meet on horseback , with sword and pistol , on , as I dare say you have hear tell of , and those be the pistol ' ( they hang on each side of the picture ) ' which the gallant use . he be quite in the wrong , have insult , when in liquor , at the assembly . but , like a gentleman , he scorne to apologise , and receive a ball through he hat , before they engage with the sword . I be 's son , sir , and will act as become my name and my quality . ' ' give I a kiss , my dear boy , ' say , with tear in he eye . ' you be after my own soul . as long as life you shall never want a friend or a second . ' poor fellow ! he be shoot six month afterwards , carry order to my , at , and I lose thereby a kind friend . but we do not know what be in store for we , and
and that night be a merry one at least . we have a second bottle , and a third too ( I could hear the poor mother go downstairs for each , but she never come into the parlour with they , and send they in by the butler , ) : and we part at length , he engage to arrange matter with 's second that night , and to bring I news in the morning as to the place where the meeting should take place . I have often think since , how different my fate might have be , have I not fall in love with at that early age ; and have I not flng the wine in 's face , and so bring on the duel . I might have settle down in but for that ( for be a heiress , within twenty mile of we , and , of , leave he daughter a year , and I might have have either of they , have I wait a few year ) . but it be in my fate to be a wanderer , and that battle with send I on my travels at a very early age : as you shall hear anon . I never sleep sounder in my life , though I wake a little earlier than usual ; and you may be sure my first thought be of the event of the day , for which I be fully prepared . I have ink and pen in my room -- have I not be write those verse to but the day previous , like a poor fond fool as I be ? and now I sit down and write a couple of letter more : they might be the last , think I , that I ever should write in my life . the first be to my mother :-- ' Honoure Madam ' -- I write --' this will not be give you unless I fall by the hand of , whom I meet this day in the field of honour , with sword and pistol . if I die , it be as a good and a gentleman , -- how should I be otherwise when educate by such a mother as you ? I forgive all my enemy -- I beg you blessing as a dutiful son . I desire that my mare , which my uncle give I , and which I call after the most faithless of she sex , may be return to , and beg you will give my silver - hike hanger to , the gamekeeper . present my duty to my uncle and , and all the girl of my party there . and I remain you dutiful son , ' REDMOND . ' to I write :-- ' this letter will be find in my bosom along with the token you give I . it will be dye in my blood ( unless I have 's , whom I hate , but forgive ) , and will be a pretty ornament for you on you marriage - day . wear it , and think of the poor boy to whom you give it , and who die ( as he be always ready to do ) for you sake . ' Redmond . ' these letter be write , and seal with my father 's great silver seal of the arm , I go down to breakfast ; where my mother be wait for I , you may be sure . we do not say a single word about what be take place : on the contrary , we talk of anything but that ; about who be at church the day before , and about my want new clothes now I be grow so tall . she say I must have a suit against winter , if -- if -- she could afford it . she wince rather at the ' if , ' heaven bless she ! I know what be in she mind . and then she fall to tell I about the black pig that must be kill , and that she have find the speckle hen 's nest that morning , whose egg I like so , and other such trifling talk . some of these egg be for breakfast , and I eat they with a good appetite ; but in help myself to salt I spill it , on which she start up with a scream . ' , ' say she , ' it be Fallen towards I . ' and then , she heart be too full , she leave the room . ah ! they have they fault , those mother ; but be there any other woman like they ? when she be go I go to take down the sword with which my father have vanquish the baronet , and , would you believe it ?-- the brave woman have tie a new Riband to the hilt : for indeed she have the courage of a lioness and a . and then I take down the pistol , which be always keep bright and well oil , and put some fresh flint I have into the lock , and get ball and powder ready against the should come . there be claret and a cold fowl put ready for he on the sideboard , and a case - bottle of old brandy too , with a couple of little glassis on the silver tray with the arm emblazon . in after life , and in the midst of my fortune and splendour , I pay thirty - five guinea , and almost as much more interest , to the goldsmith who supply my father with that very tray . a scoundrel pawnbroker would only give I sixteen for it afterwards ; so little can we trust the honour
honour of rascally tradesman ! at eleven o'clock arrive , on horseback , with a mount dragoon after he . he pay he compliment to the collation which my mother 's care have provide for he , and then say , ' look ye , Redmond my boy ; this be a silly business . the girl will marry , mark my word ; and as sure as she do you will forget she . you be but a boy . be willing to consider you as such . be a fine place , and if you have a mind to take a ride thither and see the town for a month , here be twenty guinea at you service . make Quin a apology , and be off . ' 'A man of honour , , ' say I , ' die , but never apologise . I will see the hang before I apologise . ' ' then there be nothing for it but a meeting . ' 'My mare be saddled and ready , ' say I ; ' where be the meeting , and who be the 's second ? ' ' you cousin go out with he , ' answer . 'I will ring for my groom to bring my mare round ,' I say , 'as soon as you have rest yourself . ' be accordingly despatch for , and I ride away , but I do not take leave of . the curtain of she bedroom window be down , and they do not move as we mount and trot off ... but , you should have see she as she come tottering downstair , and hear the scream which she give as she hug she boy to she heart , quite unharmed and without a wound in he body . what have take place I may as well tell here . when we get to the ground , , , and the captain be already there : , flam in red regimental , as big a monster as ever lead a grenadier company . the party be laugh together at some joke of one or the other : and I must say I think this laughter very unbecoming in my cousin , who be meet , perhaps , to see the death of one of they kindred . 'I hope to spoil this sport , ' say I to , in a great rage , ' and trust to see this sword of mine in yonder big bully 's body . ' 'Oh ! it be with pistol we fight , ' reply . ' you be no match for with the sword . ' 'I will match any man with the sword , ' say I . ' but sword be to - day impossible ; be -- be lame . he knock he knee against the swing park - gate last night , as he be ride home , and can scarce move it now . ' ' not against gate , ' say I : ' that have be off the hinge these ten year . ' on which say it must have be some other gate , and repeat what he have say to and my cousin , when , on alight from we horse , we join and salute those gentleman . ' oh yes ! dead lame , ' say , come to shake I by the hand , while take off he hat and turn extremely red . ' and very lucky for you , Redmond my boy , ' continue ; ' you be a dead man else ; for he be a devil of a fellow -- be not he , ? ' 'a regular , ' answer ; add , never yet know the man who stand to . ' ' hang the business ! ' say ; 'I hate it . I be asham of it . say you be sorry , Redmond : you can easily say that . ' ' if the young Feller will go to , as propose ' -- here interpose . 'I be not sorry -- i will not apologise -- and I will as soon go to as to -- ! ' say I , with a stamp of my foot . ' there be nothing else for it , ' say with a laugh to . ' take you ground , , -- twelve pace , I suppose ? ' ' ten , sir , ' say , in a big voice ; 'and make they short one , do you hear , ? ' ' do not bully , , ' say surlily ; ' here be the pistol . ' and he add , with some emotion , to I , ' God bless you , my boy ; and when I count three , fire . ' put my pistol into my hand , -- that be , not one of mine ( which be to serve , if need be , for the next round ) , but one of 's . ' they be all right , ' say he . ' never fear : and , , fire at he neck -- hit he there under the gorget . see how the fool show himself open . ' , who have never speak a word , , and the retire to one side , and give the signal . it be slowly give , and I have leisure to cover my man well . I see he change colour and trembl as the number be give . at ' three , ' both we pistol go off . I hear something whizz by I , and my antagonist , give a most horrible groan , stagger backward and fell . 'he be down -- he be down ! ' cry the seconds , run towards he . lift
lift he up -- take he head . 'he be hit here , in the neck , ' say ; and lay open he coat , blood be see gurgling from under he gorget , at the very spot at which I aim . ' how be it with you ? ' say . ' be he really hit ? ' say he , look hard at he . the unfortunate man do not answer , but when the support of 's arm be withdraw from he back , groan once more , and fall backward . ' the young fellow have begin well , ' say , with a scowl . ' you have better ride off , young sir , before the police be up . they have wind of the business before we leave . ' ' be he quite dead ? ' say I . ' quite dead , ' answer . ' then the world 's rid of a Coward , ' say , give the huge prostrate body a scornful kick with he foot . ' it be all over with he , , -- he do not stir . ' 'we be not coward , , ' say roughly , ' whatever he be ! let 's get the boy off as quick as we may . you man shall go for a cart , and take away the body of this unhappy gentleman . this have be a sad day 's work for we family , : you have rob we of 1500 ( pound ) a year . ' ' it be do it , ' say I ; ' not I . ' and I take the riband she give I out of my waistcoat , and the letter , and fling they down on the body of . ' there ! ' say I --'take she those riband . she will know what they mean : and that be all that be leave to she of two lover she have and ruin . ' I do not feel any horror or fear , young as I be , in see my enemy prostrate before I ; for I know that I have meet and conquer he honourably in the field , as become a man of my name and blood . ' and now , in 's name , get the youngster out of the way , ' say . say he would ride with I , and off accordingly we gallop , never draw bridle till we come to my mother 's door . when there , tell to feed my mare , as I would have far to ride that day ; and I be in the poor mother 's arm in a minute . I need not tell how great be she pride and exultation when she hear from 's lip the account of my behaviour at the duel . he urge , however , that I should go into hiding for a short time ; and it be agree between they that I should drop my name of , and , take that of , go to , and there wait until matter be blow over . this arrangement be not come to without some discussion ; for why should I not be as safe at , she say , as my cousin and at ?-- bailiff and dun never get near they ; why should constable be enable to come upon I ? but persist in the necessity of my instant departure ; in which argument , as I be anxious to see the world , I must confess , I sid with he ; and my mother be bring to see that in we small house at , in the midst of the village , and with the guard but of a couple of servants , escape would be impossible . so the kind soul be force to yield to my cousin 's entreaty , who promise she , however , that the affair would soon be arrange , and that I should be restore to she . ah ! how little do he know what fortune be in store for I ! my dear mother have some foreboding , I think , that we separation be to be a long one ; for she tell I that all night long she have be consult the card regard my fate in the duel : and that all the sign betoken a separation ; then , take out a stocking from she escritoire , the kind soul put twenty guinea in a purse for I ( she have herself but twenty - five ) , and make up a little valise , to be place at the back of my mare , in which be my clothes , linen , and a silver dressing - case of my father 's . she bade I , too , to keep the sword and the pistol I have know to use so like a man . she hurry my departure now ( though she heart , I know , be full ) , and almost in half - a - hour after my arrival at home I be once more on the road again , with the wide world as it be before I . I need not tell how and the cook cry at my departure : and , mayhap , I have a tear or two myself in my eye ; but no lad of sixteen be very sad who have liberty for the first time , and twenty guinea in he pocket : and I ride away , think , I confess , not so much of the kind mother leave alone , and of the home behind I , as of to - morrow , and all the wonder it would bring . chapter III a false start in the I ride that
that night as far as , where I lay at the best inn ; and be ask what be my name by the landlord of the house , give it as , accord to my cousin 's instruction , and say I be of the Redmonds of county , and be on my road to , , to be educate there . see my handsome appearance , silver - hike sword , and well - fill valise , my landlord make free to send up a jug of claret without my asking ; and charge , you may be sure , pretty handsomely for it in the bill . no gentleman in those good old day go to be without a good share of liquor to set he sleep , and on this my first day 's entrance into the world , I make a point to act the fine gentleman completely ; and , I assure you , succeed in my part to admiration . the excitement of the event of the day , the quit my home , the meeting with , be enough to set my brain in a whirl , without the claret ; which serve to finish I completely . I do not dream of the death of , as some milksop , perhaps , would have do ; indeed , I have never have any of that foolish remorse consequent upon any of my affair of honou : always consider , from the first , that where a gentleman risk he own life in manly combat , he be a fool to be asham because he win . I sleep at as sound as man could sleep ; drank a tankard of small beer and a toast to my breakfast ; and exchange the first of my gold piece to settle the bill , not forget to pay all the servants liberally , and as a gentleman should . I begin so the first day of my life , and so have continue . no man have be at greater strait than I , and have borne more pinching poverty and hardship ; but nobody can say of I that , if I have a guinea , I be not free - hand with it , and do not spend it as well as a lord could do . I have no doubt of the future : think that a man of my person , part , and courage , could make he way anywhere . besides , I have twenty gold guinea in my pocket ; a sum which ( although I be mistaken ) I calculate would last I for four month at least , during which time something would be do towards the making of my fortune . so I ride on , singe to myself , or chat with the passer - by ; and all the girl along the road say save I for a clever gentleman ! as for and , between to - day and yesterday there seem to be a gap as of half - a - score of year . I vow I would never re-enter the place but as a great man ; and I keep my vow too , as you shall hear in due time . there be much more liveliness and bustle on the king 's highroad in those time , than in these day of stage - coach , which carry you from one end of the kingdom to another in a few score hour . the gentry rode they own horsis or drive in they own coach , and spend three day on a journey which now occupy ten hour ; so that there be no lack of company for a person travel towards . I make part of the journey from towards with a well - armed gentleman from , dress in green and a gold cord , with a patch on he eye , and ride a powerful mare . he ask I the question of the day , and whither I be bound , and whether my mother be not afraid on account of the highwayman to let one so young as myself to travel ? but I say , pull out one of they from a holster , that I have a pair of good pistol that have already do execution , and be ready to do it again ; and here , a pock -marked man come up , he put spur into he bay mare and leave I . she be a much more powerful animal than mine ; and , besides , I do not wish to fatigue my horse , wish to enter that night , and in reputable condition . as I ride towards , I see a crowd of the peasant - people assemble round a one - horse chair , and my friend in green , as I think , make off half a mile up the hill . a footman be howl ' stop thiefinitely ! ' at the top of he voice ; but the country fellows be only laugh at he distress , and make all sort of joke at the adventure which have just befall . ' sure you might have keep he off with you blunderBUSh ! ' say one fellow . 'Oh , the coward ! to let the Bate you ; and he only one eye ! ' cry another . ' the next time my Lady travel , she would better lave you at home ! ' say a third . ' what be this noise , fellow ? ' say I , ride up amongst they , and , see a lady in the carriage very pale and frightened , give a slash of my whip , and bade the red-shanked ruffian keep off . ' what have happen , madam , to annoy you Ladyship ? ' I say
say , pull off my hat , and bring my mare up in a prance to the chair window . the lady explain . she be the wife of , and be hasten to join the at . she chair have be stop by a highway - man : the great oaf of a servant-man have fall down on he knee arm as he be ; and though there be thirty people in the next field work when the ruffian attack she , not one of they would help she ; but , on the contrary , wish the , as they call the highwayman , good luck . ' sure he be the friend of the poor , ' say one fellow , ' and good luck to he ! ' ' be it any business of ours ? ' ask another . and another tell , grinn , that it be the famous , who , have bribe the jury to acquit he two day back at assize , have mount he horse at the gaol door , and the very next day have rob two barrister who be go the circuit . I tell this pack of rascal to be off to they work , or they should taste of my thong , and proceed , as well as I could , to comfort under she misfortune . ' have she lose much ? ' ' everything : she purse , contain upward of a hundr guinea ; she jewel , snuff - box , watch , and a pair of diamond shoe - buckle of the 's . ' these mishap I sincerely commiserate ; and know she by she accent to be a , deplor the difference that exist between the two country , and say that in Our country ( mean ) such atrocity be unknown . ' you , too , be a ? ' say she , with rather a tone of surprise . on which I say I be proud to be such : as , in fact , I be ; and I never know a true Tory gentleman of who do not wish he could say as much . I ride by 's chair all the way to ; and , as she have be rob of she purse , ask permission to lend she a couple of piece to pay she expense at the inn : which sum she be graciously pleased to accept , and be , at the same time , kind enough to invite I to share she dinner . to the lady 's question regard my birth and parentage , I reply that I be a young gentleman of large fortune ( this be not true ; but what be the use of cry bad fish ? my dear mother instruct I early in this sort of prudence ) and good family in the county of ; that I be go to for my study , and that my mother allow I five hundred per annum . be equally communicative . she be the daughter of of , of whom , of course , I have hear ( and though I have not , of course I be too well - breed to say so ) ; and have make , as she must confess , a runaway match with . have I be in Donegal ?-- no ! that be a pity . the 's father possess a hundred thousand acre there , and 's the finest mansion in . be the eldest son ; and , though he have quarrell with he father , must inherit the vast property . she go on to tell I about the ball at , the banquet at the Castle , the horse - races at the , the ridotto and rout , until I become quite eager to join in those pleasure ; and I only feel grieved to think that my position would render secrecy necessary , and prevent I from be present at the , of which the Fitzsimonse be the most elegant ornament . how different be she lively rattle to that of the vulgar wench at the assemblie ! in every sentence she mention a lord or a person of quality . she evidently speak French and italian , of the former of which language I have say I know a few word ; and , as for she English accent , why , perhaps I be no judge of that , for , to say the truth , she be the first real English person I have ever meet . she recommend I , further , to be very cautious with regard to the company I should meet at , where rogue and adventurer of all country abound ; and my delight and gratitude to she may be imagine , when , as we conversation grow more intimate ( as we sit over we dessert ) , she kindly offer to accommodate I with lodging in she own house , where she Fitzsimons , she say , would welcome with delight she gallant young preserver . ' indeed , madam , ' say I , 'I have preserve nothing for you . ' which be perfectly true ; for have I not come up too late after the robbery to prevent the highwayman from carry off she money and pearl ? ' and sure , ma 'am , they be not much , ' say , the blundering servant , who have be so frightene at 's approach , and be wait on we at dinner . ' do not he return you the thirteenpence in copper , and the watch , say it be only pinch - beck ? ' but he lady rebuk he for a saucy varlet , and turn he out of the room at once , say to I when he have go , ' that
that the fool do not know what be the meaning of a hundred - pound bill , which be in the pocket - book that take from she . ' perhaps have I be a little older in the world 's experience , I should have begin to see that be not the person of fashion she pretend to be ; but , as it be , I take all she story for truth , and , when the landlord bring the bill for dinner , pay it with the air of a lord . indeed , she make no motion to produce the two piece I have lent to she ; and so we ride on slowly towards , into which city we make we entrance at nightfall . the rattle and splendour of the coach , the flare of the linkboy , the number and magnificence of the house , struck I with the greatest wonder ; though I be careful to disguise this feeling , accord to my dear mother 's direction , who tell I that it be the mark of a man of fashion never to wonder at anything , and never to admit that any house , equipage , or company he see , be more splendid or genteel than what he have be accustom to at home . we stop , at length , at a house of rather mean appearance , and be let into a passage by no means so clean as that at , where there be a great smell of supper and punch . a stout red -faced man , without a periwig , and in rather a tatter nightgown and cap , make he appearance from the parlour , and embrace he lady ( for it be ) with a great deal of cordiality . indeed , when he see that a stranger accompany she , he embrace she more rapturously than ever . in introduce I , she persist in say that I be she preserver , and compliment my gallantry as much as if I have kill , instead of come up when the robbery be over . the say he know the Redmonds of intimately well : which assertion alarme I , as I know nothing of the family to which I be state to belong . but I pose he , by ask which of the Redmonds he know , for I have never hear he name in we family . he say he know the Redmonds of . ' oh , ' say I , ' mine be the Redmonds of ;' and so I put he off the scent . I go to see my nag put up at a livery - stable hard by , with the 's horse and chair , and return to my entertainer . although there be the relic of some mutton - chop and onion on a crack dish before he , the say , ' my love , I wish I have know of you come , for and I just finish the most delicious venison pasty , which he Grace the send we , with a flask of Sillery from he own cellar . you know the wine , my dear ? but as bygone be bygone , and no help for they , what say ye to a fine lobster and a bottle of as good claret as any in ? Betty , clear these thing from the table , and make the mistress and we young friend welcome to we home . ' not have small change , ask I to lend he a tenpenny - piece to purchase the dish of lobster ; but he lady , hand out one of the guinea I have give she , bay the girl get the change for that , and procure the supper ; which she do presently , bring back only a very few shilling out of the guinea to she mistress , say that the fishmonger have keep the remainder for a old account . ' and the more great big blundering fool you , for give the gold piece to he , ' roar . I forget how many hundred guinea he say he have pay the fellow during the year . we supper be season , if not by any great elegance , at least by a plentiful store of anecdote , concern the highest personage of the city ; with whom , accord to himself , the live on term of the utmost intimacy . not to be behindhand with he , I speak of my own estate and property as if I be as rich as a duke . I tell all the story of the nobility I have ever hear from my mother , and some that , perhaps , I have invent ; and ought to have be aware that my host be a impostor himself , as he do not find out my own blunder and misstatement . but youth be ever too confident . it be some time before I know that I have make no very desirable acquaintance in and he lady ; and , indeed , go to bed congratulate myself upon my wonderful good luck in have , at the outset of my adventur , fall in with so distinguished a couple . the appearance of the chamber I occupy might , indeed , have lead I to imagine that the heir of , county Donegal , be not as yet reconcile with he wealthy parent ; and , have I be a english lad , probably my suspicion and distrust would have be arouse instantly . but perhaps , as the reader know , we be not so particular in on the score of neatness as people be in this precise country ; hence the disorder of my bedchamber do not strike I so much . for be not all
all the window break and stuff with rag even at , my uncle 's superb mansion ? be there ever a lock to the door there , or if a lock , a handle to the lock or a hasp to fasten it to ? so , though my bedroom boast of these inconvenience , and a few more ; though my counterpane be evidently a greased brocade dress of 's , and my crack toilet - glass not much bigger than a half - crown , yet I be use to this sort of way in irish house , and still think myself in that of a man of fashion . there be no lock to the drawer , which , when they do open , be full of my hostess 's rouge - pots , shoe , stay , and rag ; so I allow my wardrobe to remain in my valise , but set out my silver dressing - apparatus upon the ragged cloth on the drawer , where it shine to great advantage . when appear in the morning , I ask he about my mare , which he inform I be do well . I then bade he bring I hot shaving - water , in a loud dignified tone . ' Hot shave - water ! ' say he , burst out laugh ( and I confess not without reason ) . ' be it yourself you be go to shave ? ' say he . ' and maybe when I bring you up the water I will bring you up the cat too , and you can shave she . ' I fling a boot at the scoundrel 's head in reply to this impertinence , and be soon with my friend in the parlour for breakfast . there be a hearty welcome , and the same cloth that have be use the night before : as I recognise by the black mark of the irish - stew dish , and the stain leave by a pot of porter at supper . my host greet I with great cordiality ; say I be a elegant figure for the ; and indeed , without vanity , I may say of myself that there be worse - look fellow in than I . I have not the powerful chest and muscular proportion which I have since attain ( to be exchange , alas ! for gouty leg and chalk - stone in my finger ; but ' ti the way of mortality ) , but I have arrive at near my present growth of six foot , and with my hair in buckle , a handsome lace jabot and wristband to my shirt , and a red plush waistcoat , bar with gold , look the gentleman I be bear . I wear my drab coat with plate button , that be grow too small for I , and quite agree with that I must pay a visit to he tailor , in order to procure myself a coat more fitte my size . 'I need not ask whether you have a comfortable bed , ' say he . ' yong ( 's second son ) sleep in it for seven month , during which he do I the honour to stay with I , and if he be satisfied , I do not know who else would not be . ' after breakfast we walk out to see the town , and introduce I to several of he acquaintance whom we meet , as he particular young friend , of county ; he also present I at he hatter 's and 's as a gentleman of great expectation and large property ; and although I tell the latter that I should not pay he ready cash for more than one coat , which fit I to a nicety , yet he insist upon make I several , which I do not care to refuse . the , also , who certainly want such a renewal of raiment , tell the tailor to send he home a handsome military frock , which he selecte . then we go home to , who drive out in she chair to the , where a review be , and where number of the young gentry be round about she ; to all of whom she present I as she preserver of the day before . indeed , such be she complimentary account of I , that before half - a - hour I have get to be consider as a young gentleman of the highest family in the land , related to all the principal nobility , a cousin of , and here to L10,000 a year . Fitzsimons say he have ride over every inch of my estate ; and ' faith , as he choose to tell these story for I , I let he have he way -- indeed , be not a little pleased ( as youth be ) to be make much of , and to pass for a great personage . I have little notion then that I have get among a set of impostor -- that be only a adventurer , and he lady a person of no credit ; but such be the dangers to which youth be perpetually subject , and hence let young man take warn by I . I purposely hurry over the description of my life in which the incident be painful , of no great interest except to my unlucky self , and of which my companion be certainly not of a kind befitt my quality . the fact be , a young man could hardly have fall into worse hand than those in which I now find myself . I have be to , and have never see the famous Castle of , which be , likewise , unknown to the oldest inhabitant of that
that county ; nor be the much better know in . the couple into whose hand I have fall be of a sort much more common then than at present , for the vast wars of later day have render it very difficult for nobleman 's footman or hanger - on to procure commission ; and such , in fact , have be the original station of . have I know he origin , of course I would have die rather than have associate with he : but in those simple day of youth I take he tale for truth , and fancie myself in high luck at being , at my outset into life , introduce into such a family . ! we be the sport of destiny . when I consider upon what small circumstance all the great event of my life have turn , I can hardly believe myself to have be anything but a puppet in the hand of ; which have play its most fantastic trick upon I . the have be a gentleman 's gentleman , and he lady of no higher rank . the society which this worthy pair keep be at a sort of ordinary which they hold , and at which they friend be always welcome on payment of a certain moderate sum for they dinner . after dinner , you may be sure that card be not want , and that the company who play do not play for love merely . to these party person of all sort would come : young bloods from the regiment garrisone in : young clerk from the Castle ; horse - riding , wine - tippling , watchman - beat man of fashion about town , such as exist in in that day more than in any other city with which I be acquaint in . I never know young fellow make such a show , and upon such small means . I never know young gentlemen with what I may call such a genius for idleness ; and whereas a with fifty guinea a year be not able to do much more than starve , and toil like a slave in a profession , a young irish buck with the same sum will keep he horse , and drink he bottle , and live as lazy as a lord . here be a doctor who never have a patient , cheek by jowl with a attorney who never have a client : neither have a guinea -- each have a good horse to ride in the , and the best of clothes to he back . a sporting clergyman without a living ; several young wine - merchants , who consume much more liquor than they have or sell ; and man of similar character , form the society at the house into which , by ill luck , I be throw . what could happen to a man but misfortune from associating with such company ?-- ( I have not mention the lady of the society , who be , perhaps , no better than the male ) -- and in a very very short time I become they prey . as for my poor twenty guinea , in three day I see , with terror , that they have dwindle down to eight : theatre and tavern have already make such cruel inroad in my purse . at play I have lost , it be true , a couple of piece ; but see that every one round about I play upon honou and give they bill , I , of course , prefer that medium to the payment of ready money , and when I lose pay on account . with the tailor , saddler , and other , I employ similar means ; and in so far 's representation do I good , for the tradesman take he at he word regard my fortune ( I have since learn that the rascal pigeon several other young man of property ) , and for a little time supply I with any goods I might be pleased to order . at length , my cash run low , I be compelle to pawn some of the suit with which the tailor have provide I ; for I do not like to part with my mare , on which I daily ride in the , and which I love as the gift of my respected uncle . I raise some little money , too , on a few trinket which I have purchase of a jeweller who press he credit upon I ; and thus be enable to keep up appearances for yet a little time . I ask at the post-office repeatedly for letter for , but none such have arrive ; and , indeed , I always feel rather relieved when the answer of ' no ' be give to I ; for I be not very anxious that my mother should know my proceedings in the extravagant life which I be lead at . it could not last very long , however ; for when my cash be quite exhausted , and I pay a second visit to the tailor , request he to make I more clothes , the fellow hum and ha' , and have the impudence to ask payment for those already supply : on which , tell he I should withdraw my custom from he , I abruptly leave he . the goldsmith too ( a rascal ) decline to let I take a gold chain to which i have a fancy ; and I feel now , for the first time , in some perplexity . to add to it , one of the young gentleman who frequent 's boarding - house have receive from I , in the way of play , a for eighteen pound ( which I lose to he at
at piquet ) , and which , owe , the livery - stable keeper , a bill , he pass into that person 's hand . Fancy my rage and astonishment , then , on go for my mare , to find that he positively refuse to let I have she out of the stable , except under payment of my promissory note ! it be in vain that I offer he he choice of four note that I have in my pocket -- one of 's for , one of 's , and so forth ; the dealer , who be a Yorkshireman , shook he head , and laugh at every one of they ; and say , 'I tell you what , master Redmond , you appear a young fellow of birth and fortune , and let I whisper in you ear that you have fall into very bad hand -- it be a regular gang of swindler ; and a gentleman of you rank and quality should never be see in such company . go home : pack up you valise , pay the little trifle to I , mount you mare , and ride back again to you parent ,-- it be the very best thing you can do . ' in a pretty nest of villain , indeed , be I plunge ! it seem as if all my misfortune be to break on I at once ; for , on go home and ascend to my bedroom in a disconsolate way , I find the and he lady there before I , my valise open , my wardrobe lie on the ground , and my key in the possession of the odious Fitzsimon . ' whom have I be harbour in my house ? ' roar he , as I enter the apartment . ' who be you , sirrah ? ' ' Sirrah ! , ' say I , 'I be as good a gentleman as any in . ' ' you be a impostor , young man : a schemer , a deceiver ! ' shoute the captain . ' repeat the word again , and I will run you through the body , ' reply I . ' Tut , tut ! I can play at fencing as well as you , . ah ! you change colour , do you -- you secret be know , be it ? you come like a viper into the bosom of innocent family ; you represent yourself as the heir of my friend the Redmonds of ; I inthrojuice you to the nobility and genthry of this methropolis ' ( the 's brogue be large , and he word , by preference , long ) ; ' I take you to my tradesman , who give you credit , and what do I find ? that you have pawn the goods which you take up at they house . ' 'I have give they my acceptance , sir , ' say I with a dignified air . ' Under what name , unhappy boy -- under what name ? ' scream ; and then , indeed , I remember that I have sign the document instead of : but what else could I do ? have not my mother desire I to take no other designation ? after utter a furious tirade against I , in which he speak of the fatal discovery of my real name on my linen -- of he misplaced confidence of affection , and the shame with which he should be obliged to meet he fashionable friend and confess that he have harbour a swindler , he gather up the linen , clothes , silver toilet article , and the rest of my gear , say that he should step out that moment for a officer and give I up to the just revenge of the law . during the first part of he speech , the thought of the imprudence of which I have be guilty , and the predicament in which I be plunge , have so puzzl and confound I , that I have not utter a word in reply to the fellow 's abuse , but have stand quite dumb before he . the sense of danger , however , at once rouse I to action . ' , , ' say I ; 'I will tell you why I be obliged to alter my name : which be , and the best name in . I change it , sir , because , on the day before I come to , I kill a man in deadly combat -- a , sir , and a captain in 's service ; and if you offer to let or hinder I in the slightest way , the same arm which destroy he be ready to punish you ; and by , sir , you or I do not leave this room alive ! ' so say , I draw my sword like lightning , and give a ' ha ! ha ! ' and a stamp with my foot , lunge within a inch of 's heart , who start back and turn deadly pale , while he wife , with a scream , fling herself between we . ' , ' she cry , ' be pacify . Fitzsimon , you do not want the poor child 's blood . let he escape -- in 's name let he go . ' 'he may go hang for I , ' say sulkily ; ' and he would better be off quickly , too , for the jeweller and the tailor have call once , and will be here again before long . it be Mose the pawnbroker that peach : I have the news from he myself . ' by which I conclude that have be with the new laced frock - coat which
which he procure from the merchant tailor on the day when the latter first give I credit . what be the end of we conversation ? where be now a home for the descendant of the ? home be shut to I by my misfortune in the duel . I be expel from by a persecution occasion , I must confess , by my own imprudence . I have no time to wait and choose : no place of refuge to fly to . Fitzsimons , after he abuse of I , leave the room grow , but not hostile ; he wife insist that we should shake hand , and he promise not to molest I . indeed , I owe the fellow nothing ; and , on the contrary , have he acceptance actually in my pocket for money lose at play . as for my friend , she sit down on the bed and fairly burst out cry . she have she fault , but she heart be kind ; and though she possess but three shilling in the world , and fourpence in copper , the poor soul make I take it before I leave she -- to go -- whither ? my mind be make up : there be a score of recruiting - party in the town beat up for man to join we gallant armie in and ; I know where to find one of these , have stand by the sergeant at a review in the , where he point out to I character on the field , for which I treat he to drink . I give one of my shilling to Sullivan the butler of the Fitzsimonse , and , run into the street , hasten to the little alehouse at which my acquaintance be quarter , and before ten minute have accept he 's shilling . I tell he frankly that I be a young gentleman in difficulty ; that I have kill a officer in a duel , and be anxious to get out of the country . but I need not have trouble myself with any explanations ; be too much in want of man then to heed from whence they come , and a fellow of my inch , the sergeant say , be always welcome . indeed , I could not , he say , have choose my time better . a transport be lie at , wait for a wind , and on board that ship , to which I march that night , I make some surprising discoveries , which shall be tell in the next chapter . chapter iv in of I never have a taste for anything but genteel company , and hate all description of low life . hence my account of the society in which I at present found myself must of necessity be short ; and , indeed , the recollection of it be profoundly disagreeable to I . Pah ! the reminiscence of the horrid black - hole of a place in which we soldier be confin ; of the wretch creature with whom I be now force to keep company ; of the ploughman , poacher , pickpocket , who have take refuge from poverty , or the law ( as , in truth , I have do myself ) , be enough to make I asham even now , and it call the blush into my old cheek to think I be ever force to keep such company . I should have fall into despair , but that , luckily , event occur to rouse my spirits , and in some measure to conseal I for my misfortune . the first of these consolation I have be a good quarrel , which take place on the day after my entrance into the transport - ship , with a huge red - haire monster of a fellow -- a chairman , who have enlist to fly from a vixen of a wife , who , boxer as he be , have be more than a match for he . as soon as this fellow -- , I remember , be he name -- get away from the arm of the washerwoman he lady , he natural courage and ferocity return , and he become the tyrant of all round about he . all recruit , especially , be the object of the brute 's insult and ill - treatment . I have no money , as I say , and be sit very disconsolately over a platter of rancid bacon and mouldy biscuit , which be serve to we at mess , when it come to my turn to be help to drink , and I be serve , like the rest , with a dirty tin noggin , contain somewhat more than half a pint of rum -and - water . the beaker be so greasy and filthy that I could not help turn round to the messman and say , ' fellow , get I a glass ! ' at which all the wretch round about I burst into a roar of laughter , the very loudest among they be , of course , . ' get the gentleman a towel for he hand , and serve he a basin of turtle - soup , ' roar the monster , who be sit , or rather squatt , on the deck opposite I ; and as he speak he suddenly seize my beaker of grog and empty it , in the midst of another burst of applause . ' if you want to vex he , ax he about he wife the washerwoman , who Bate he , ' here whisper in my ear another worthy , a retire link - boy , who , disgust with he profession , have adopt the military life . ' be it a towel of you wife 's
's washing , ? ' say I . 'I be tell she wip you face often with one . ' 'Ax he why he would not see she yesterday , when she come to the ship , ' continue the link - boy . and so I put to he some other foolish joke about soapsud , henpeck , and flat - iron , which set the man into a fury , and succeed in raise a quarrel between we . we should have fall to at once , but a couple of grinning marine , who keep watch at the door , for fear we should repent of we bargain and have a fancy to escape , come forward and interpose between we with fix bayonet ; but the sergeant come down the ladder , and hear the dispute , condescende to say that we might fight it out like man with Fiste if we choose , and that the fore - deck should be free to we for that purpose . but the use of fiste , as the call they , be not then general in , and it be agree that we should have a pair of cudgel ; with one of which weapon I finish the fellow in four minute , give he a thump across he stupid sconce which lay he lifeless on the deck , and not receive myself a single hurt of consequence . this victory over the cock of the vile dunghill obtain I respect among the wretch of whom I form part , and serve to set up my spirit , which otherwise be flagge ; and my position be speedily make more bearable by the arrival on board we ship of a old friend . this be no other than my second in the fatal duel which have send I thus early out into the world , . there be a young nobleman who have a company in we regiment ( 's foot ) , and who , prefer the delight of the and the club to the dangers of a rough campaign , have give the opportunity of a exchange ; which , as the latter have no fortune but he sword , he be glad to make . the sergeant be put we through we exercise on deck ( the seaman and officer of the transport look grinn on ) when a boat come from the shore bring we captain to the ship ; and though I start and blush red as he recognise I -- a descendant of the -- in this degrading posture , I promise you that the sight of 's face be most welcome to I , for it assure I that a friend be near I . before that I be so melancholy that I would certainly have desert have I find the means , and have not the inevitable marine keep a watch to prevent any such escape . give I a wink of recognition , but offer no public token of acquaintance ; it be not until two day afterwards , and when we have bidden adieu to old and be stand out to sea , that he call I into he cabin , and then , shak hand with I cordially , give I news , which I much want , of my family . 'I have news of you in , ' he say . '' faill you have begin early , like you father 's son ; and I think you could not do better than as you have do . but why do you not write home to you poor mother ? she have send a half - dozen letter to you at . ' I say I have ask for letter at the post-office , but there be none for . I do not like to add that I have be asham , after the first week , to write to my mother . ' we must write to she by the pilot , ' say he , ' who will leave we in two hour ; and you can tell she that you be safe , and marry to . ' I sigh when he talk about be marry ; on which he say with a laugh , 'I see you be think of a certain young lady at 's . ' 'Is well ? ' say I ; and indeed , could hardly utter it , for I certainly be think about she : for , though I have forget she in the gaiety of , I have always find adversity make man very affectionate . ' there be only seven now , ' answer , in a solemn voice . ' poor nora'-- ' good heaven ! what of she ? ' I think grief have kill she . ' she take on so at you go away that she be oblige to conseal herself with a husband . she be now . ' ' . ! be there another ? ' ask I , quite wonder - stricken . ' no ; the very same one , my boy . he recovere from he wound . the ball you hit he with be not likely to hurt he . it be only make of tow . do you think the Brady would let you kill fifteen hundred a year out of the family ? ' and then further tell I that , in order to get I out of the way -- for the cowardly could never be bring to marry from fear of I -- the plan of the duel have be arrange . ' but hit he you certainly do , , and with a fine thick plugget of tow ; and the fellow be so frightened , that he be a hour in come to . we tell you mother the story afterwards , and a pretty scene she
she make ; she despatch a half - score of letter to after you , but I suppose address they to you in you real name , by which you never think to ask for they . ' ' the coward ! ' say I ( though , I confess , my mind be considerably relieve at the thought of not have kill he ) . ' and do the of consent to admit a poltroon like that into one of the most ancient and honourable family in the world ? ' 'he have pay off you uncle 's mortgage , ' say ; 'he give a coach - and - six ; he be to sell out , and of the be to purchase he company . that coward of a fellow have be the making of you uncle 's family . ' ! the business be well do . ' and then , laugh , he tell I how and have never let he out of they sight , although he be for desert to , until the marriage be complete and the happy couple off on they road to . ' be you in want of cash , my boy ? ' continue the good - natured . ' you may draw upon I , for I get a couple of hundr out of master Quin for my share , and while they last you shall never want . ' and so he bade I sit down and write a letter to my mother , which I do forthwith in very sincere and repentant term , state that I have be guilty of extravagance , that I have not know until that moment under what a fatal error I have be labour , and that I have embark for as a volunteer . the letter be scarcely finish when the pilot sang out that he be go on shore ; and he depart , take with he , from many a anxious fellow besides myself , we adieux to friend in old . although I be call for many year of my life , and have be know as such by the first people of , yet I may as well confess I have no more claim to the title than many a gentleman who assume it , and never have a right to a epaulet , or to any military decoration higher than a corporal 's stripe of worsted . I be make corporal by during we voyage to the , and my rank be confirm on . I be promise a halbert , too , and afterwards , perhaps , a ensigncy , if I distinguished myself ; but do not intend that I should remain long a english soldier : as shall appear presently . meanwhile , we passage be very favourable ; my adventure be tell by to he brother officer , who treat I with kindness ; and my victory over the big chairman procure I respect from my comrade of the fore - deck . encourage and strongly exhort by , I do my duty resolutely ; but , though affable and good - humoured with the man , I never at first condescende to associate with such low fellow : and , indeed , be call generally amongst they . ' I believe it be the ex - link - boy , a facetious knave , who give I the title ; and I feel that I should become such a rank as well as any peer in the kingdom . it would require a greater philosopher and historian than I be to explain the causis of the famous 's War in which be engage ; and , indeed , its origin have always appear to I to be so complicated , and the book write about it so amazingly hard to understand , that I have seldom be much wiser at the end of a chapter than at the beginning , and so shall not trouble my reader with any personal disquisition concern the matter . all I know is , that after he 's love of he Hanoverian dominion have render he most unpopular in he kingdom , with at the head of the anti-German war - party , all of a sudden , become , the rest of the empire applaude the war as much as they have hate it before . the victory of and be in every - body 's mouth , and ' the hero , ' as we use to call the godless old of , be adore by we as a saint , a very short time after we have be about to make war against he in alliance with the Empress - queen . now , somehow , we be on 's side : the , the french , the , and the , be leagu against we ; and I remember , when the news of the battle of come even to we remote quarter of , we consider it as a triumph for the cause of , and illuminate and bonfire , and have a sermon at church , and keep the Prussian king 's birthday ; on which my uncle would get drunk : as indeed on any other occasion . most of the low fellow enlist with myself be , of course , ( the english army be fill with such , out of that never - fail country of ours ) , and these , forsooth , be fight the battle of Protestantism with ; who be belabour the and the , as well as the of the , and the Papist troops of the and the King of . it be against these latter that the english auxiliary be employ , and we know that , be the quarrel what it may , a and a be pretty willing to make a fight of it .
. we land at , and before I have be a month in the I be transform into a tall and proper young soldier , and have a natural aptitude for military exercise , be soon as accomplish at the drill as the oldest sergeant in the regiment . it be well , however , to dream of glorious war in a snug arm - chair at home ; ay , or to make it as a officer , surround by gentleman , gorgeously dress , and cheer by chance of promotion . but those chance do not shine on poor fellows in worsted lace : the rough texture of we red coat make I asham when I see a officer go by ; my soul use to shudder when , on go the round , I would hear they voice as they sit jovially over the mess - table ; my pride revolt at be oblige to plaster my hair with flour and candle - grease , instead of use the proper pomatum for a gentleman . yes , my taste have always be high and fashionable , and I loath the horrid company in which I be fall . what chance have I of promotion ? none of my relatives have money to buy I a commission , and I become soon so low - spirited , that I longe for a general action and a ball to finish I , and vow that I would take some opportunity to desert . when I think that I , the descendant of the king of , be threaten with a caning by a young scoundrel who have just join from -- when I think that he offer to make I he footman , and that I do not , on either occasion , murder he ! on the first occasion I burst into tear ( I do not care to own it ) and have serious thought of committing suicide , so great be my mortification . but my kind friend come to my aid in the circumstance , with some very timely consolation . ' my poor boy , ' say he , ' you must not take the matter to heart so . Caning be only a relative disgrace . yong be flog himself at only a month ago : I would lay a wager that he scars be not yet heale . you must cheer up , my boy ; do you duty , be a gentleman , and no serious harm can fall on you . ' and I hear afterwards that my champion have take very severely to task for this threat , and say to he that any such proceeding for the future he should consider as a insult to himself ; whereon the young ensign be , for the moment , civil . as for the sergeant , I tell one of they , that if any man strike I , no matter who he might be , or what the penalty , I would take he life . and , ' faith ! there be a air of sincerity in my speech which convince the whole bevy of they ; and as long as I remain in the english service no rattan be ever laid on the shoulders of . indeed , I be in that savage moody state , that my mind be quite make up to the point , and I look to hear my own dead march play as sure as I be alive . when I be make a corporal , some of my evils be lessen ; I mess with the sergeant by special favour , and use to treat they to drink , and lose money to the rascal at play : with which cash my good friend punctually supply I . we regiment , which be quarter about and , speedily get order to march southwards towards the Rhine , for news come that we great General , of , have be defeat - no , not defeat , but foil in he attack upon the under the of , at , near - on - the - main , and have be oblige to fall back . as the allie retreate the french rush forward , and make a bold push for the of we gracious monarch in , threaten that they would occupy it ; as they have do before , when beat the hero of , the gallant of , and cause he to sign the capitulation of . a advance upon always cause a great agitation in the bosom of the of ; more troops be send to join we , convoy of treasure be pass over to we force , and to we ally be the of ; and although , in spite of all assistance , the army under be very much weaker than that of the invading enemy , yet we have the advantage of better supplies , one of the greatest generals in the world : and , I be go to add , of british valour , but the less we say about that the better . my do not exactly cover himself with laurel at ; otherwise there might have be win there one of the greatest victory of modern time . throw himself between the french and the interior of the , wisely take possession of the free town of , which he make he storehouse and place of arm ; and round which he gather all he troops , make ready to fight the famous battle of . be these not characterise by truth , and do I deign to utter a single word for which my own personal experience do not give I the fullest authority , I might easily make myself the hero of some strange and popular adventur , and , after the fashion of novel - writer , introduce
introduce my reader to the great character of this remarkable time . these person ( I mean the romance - writer ) , if they take a drummer or a dustman for a hero , somehow manage to bring he in contact with the greatest lord and most notorious personage of the empire ; and I warrant I there be not one of they but , in describe the battle of , would manage to bring , and my , and my , into presence . it would have be easy for I to have say I be present when the order be bring to to charge with the cavalry and finish the rout of the , and when he refuse to do so , and thereby spoil the great victory . but the fact be , I be two mile off from the cavalry when he Lordship 's fatal hesitation take place , and none of we soldier of the line know of what have occur until we come to talk about the fight over we kettle in the evening , and repose after the labour of a hard - fight day . I see no one of higher rank that day than my colonel and a couple of orderly officer ride by in the smoke -- no one on we side , that be . a poor corporal ( as I then have the , disgrace of being ) be not generally invite into the company of commander and the great ; but , in revenge , I see , I promise you , some very good company on the french part , for they regiment of and be charge we all day ; and in that sort of Melee high and low be pretty equally receive . I hate brag , but I can not help say that I make a very close acquaintance with the colonel of the Cravate ; for I drive my bayonet into he body , and finish off a poor little ensign , so young , slender , and small , that a blow from my pigtail would have despatch he , I think , in place of the butt of my musket , with which i club he down . I kill , besides , four more officer and man , and in the poor ensign 's pocket find a purse of fourteen louis -d 'or , and a silver box of sugar- plum ; of which the former present be very agreeable to I . if people would tell they story of battle in this simple way , I think the cause of truth would not suffer by it . all I know of this famious fight of ( except from book ) be tell here above . the ensign 's silver bon - bon box and he purse of gold ; the livid face of the poor fellow as he fall ; the huzza of the man of my company as I go out under a smart fire and rifle he ; they shout and curse as we come hand in hand with the , -- these be , in truth , not very dignified recollection , and have best be pass over briefly . when my kind friend be shoot , a brother captain , and he very good friend , turn to and say , ' 's down ; , there be you company . ' it be all the epitaph my brave patron get . 'I should have leave you a hundr guinea , , ' be he last word to I , ' but for a cursed run of ill luck last night at faro . ' and he give I a faint squeeze of the hand ; then , as the word be give to advance , I leave he . when we come back to we old ground , which we presently do , he be lie there still ; but he be dead . some of we people have already tear off he epaulet , and , no doubt , have rifle he purse . such knave and ruffian do man in war become ! it be well for gentleman to talk of the age of chivalry ; but remember the starving brute whom they lead -- men nurse in poverty , entirely ignorant , make to take a pride in deeds of blood -- men who can have no amusement but in drunkenness , debauch , and plunder . it be with these shock instrument that you great warrior and king have be do they murderous work in the world ; and while , for instance , we be at the present moment admir the ' Great , ' as we call he , and he philosophy , and he liberality , and he military genius , I , who have serve he , and be , as it be , behind the scene of which that great spectacle be compose , can only look at it with horror . what a number of item of human crime , misery , slavery , go to form that sum -total of glory ! I can recollect a certain day about three week after the battle of , and a farmhouse in which some of we enter ; and how the old woman and she daughter serve we , trembl , to wine ; and how we get drink over the wine , and the house be in a flame , presently ; and woe betide the wretch fellow afterwards who come home to look for he house and he child ! from after the death of my protector , , I be force to confess that I fall into the very worst of coursis and company . be a rough soldier of fortune himself , he have never be a favourite with the officers of he regiment ; who have a contempt for
for , as sometimes will have , and use to mock he brogue , and he blunt uncouth manners . I have be insolent to one or two of they , and have only be screen from punishment by he intercession ; especially he successor , , have no liking for I , and put another man into the sergeant 's place vacant in he company after the battle of . this act of injustice render my service very disagreeable to I ; and , instead of seek to conquer the dislike of my superior , and win they goodwill by good behaviour , I only seek for means to make my situation easier to I , and grasp at all the amusement in my power . in a foreign country , with the enemy before we , and the people continually under contribution from one side or the other , numberless irregularity be permit to the troops which would not have be allow in more peaceable time . I descend gradually to mix with the sergeant , and to share they amusement : drinking and gambling where , I be sorry to say , we principal pastime ; and I fall so readily into they way , that though only a young lad of seventeen , I be the master of they all in daring wickedness ; though there be some among they who , I promise you , be far advanced in the science of every kind of profligacy . I should have be under the provost - marshal 's hand , for a dead certainty , have I continue much longer in the army : but a accident occur which take I out of the service in rather a singular manner . the year in which ii die , we regiment have the honour to be present at the battle of ( where the of and he horse fully retrieve the discredit which have fall upon the cavalry since 's defalcation at ) , and where once more completely defeat the . during the action , my lieutenant , , of , the gentleman who have threaten I , it may be remember , with the caning , be strike by a musket - ball in the side . he have show no want of courage in this or any other occasion where he have be call upon to act against the french ; but this be he first wound , and the young gentleman be exceedingly frightene by it . he offer five guinea to be carry into the town , which be hard by ; and I and another man , take he up in a cloak , manage to transport he into a place of decent appearance , where we put he to bed , and where a young surgeon ( who desire nothing better than to take himself out of the fire of the musketry ) go presently to dress he wound . in order to get into the house , we have be oblige , it must be confess , to fire into the lock with we piece ; which summon bring a inhabitant of the house to the door , a very pretty and black - eyed young woman , who live there with she old half - blind father , a retired Jagdmeister of the of , hard by . when the french be in the town , 's house have suffer like those of he neighbour ; and he be at first exceedingly unwilling to accommodate he guest . but the first knocking at the door have the effect of bring a speedy answer ; and , take a couple of guinea out of a very full purse , speedily convince the people that they have only to deal with a person of honou . leave the doctor ( who be very glad to stop ) with he patient , who pay I the stipulate reward , I be return to my regiment with my other comrade -- after have pay , in my german jargon , some deserve compliment to the black - eye beauty of , and think , with no small envy , how comfortable it would be to be billet there -- when the private who be with I cut short my revery by suggest that we should divide the five guinea the lieutenant have give I . ' there be you share , ' say I , give the fellow one piece ; which be plenty , as I be the leader of the expedition . but he swore a dreadful oath that he would have half ; and when I tell he to go to a quarter which I shall not name , the fellow , lift he musket , hit I a blow with the butt - end of it , which send I lifeless to the ground : when I awoke from my > trance , I find myself bleed with a large wound in the head , and have barely time to stagger back to the house where I have leave the lieutenant , when I again fall fainting at the door . here I must have be discover by the surgeon on he issue out ; for when I awoke a second time I find myself in the ground - floor of the house , support by the black - eyed girl , while the surgeon be copiously bleed I at the arm . there be another bed in the room where the lieutenant have be laid , -- it be that occupy by , the servant ; while , as my fair one be call , have , till now , sleep in the couch where the wounded officer lay . ' who be you put into that bed ? ' say he languidly , in german ; for the ball have be extract from he side with much
much pain and loss of blood . they tell he it be the corporal who have bring he . 'a corporal ? ' say he , in ; ' turn he out . ' and you may be sure I feel highly compliment by the word . but we be both too faint to compliment or to abuse each other much , and I be put to be carefully ; and , on be undress , have a opportunity to find that my pocket have be rifle by the english soldier after he have knock I down . however , I be in good quarter : the young lady who shelter I presently bring I a refresh drink ; and , as I take it , I could not help press the kind hand that give it I ; nor , in truth , do this token of my gratitude seem unwelcome . this intimacy do not decrease with further acquaintance . I find Lischan the tenderest of nurse . whenever any delicacy be to be provide for the wounded lieutenant , a share be always send to the bed opposite he , and to the avaricious man 's no small annoyance . he illness be long . on the second day the fever declare itself ; for some night he be delirious ; and I remember it be when a commanding officer be inspect we quarter , with a intention , very likely , of billet himself on the house , that the howling and mad word of the patient overhead strike he , and he retire rather frightened . I have be sit up very comfortably in the lower apartment , for my hurt be quite subsided ; and it be only when the officer ask I , with a rough voice , why I be not at my regiment , that I begin to reflect how pleasant my quarter be to I , and that I be much better here than crawl under a odious tent with a parcel of tipsy soldier , or go the night - round or rise long before daybreak for drill . the delirium of give I a hint , and I determine forthwith to . there be a poor fellow about 's town call ' wander , ' whose insane prank I have often mimicked as a lad , and I again put they in practice . that night I make a attempt upon , salut she with a yell and a grin which frightene she almost out of she wit ; and when anybody come I be rave . the blow on the head have disorder my brain ; the doctor be ready to vouch for this fact . one night I whisper to he that I be , and consider he to be my affianced wife , which convince he of my insanity . indeed , if have be like my , she must have have a carroty beard , such as be rare in . a movement on the part of the french speedily cause a advance on we part . the town be evacuate , except by a few Prussian troops , whose surgeon be to visit the wounded in the place ; and , when we be well , we be to be draft to we regiment . I determine that I never would join mine again . my intention be to make for , almost the only neutral country of in those time , and thence to get a passage somehow to , and home to dear old 's town . if be now alive , I here tender he my apology for my conduct to he . he be very rich ; he use I very ill . I manage to frighten away he servant who come to attend he after the affair of , and from that time would sometimes condescmend to wait upon the patient , who always treat I with scorn ; but it be my object to have he alone , and I bear he brutality with the utmost civility and mildness , meditat in my own mind a very pretty return for all he favour to I . be I the only person in the house to whom the worthy gentleman be uncivil . he order the fair Lischen hither and thither , make impertinent love to she , abuse she soup , quarrell with she omelette , and grudge the money which be laid out for he maintenance ; so that we hostess detest he as much as , I think , without vanity , she regard I . for , if the truth must be tell , I have make very deep love to she during my stay under she roof ; as be always my way with woman , of whatever age or degree of beauty . to a man who have to make he way in the world , these dear girl can always be useful in one fashion or another ; never mind , if they repel you passion ; at any rate , they be not offend with you declaration of it , and only look upon you with more favourable eye in consequence of you misfortune . as for , I tell she such a pathetic story of my life ( a tale a great deal more romantic than that here narrate , -- for I do not restrict myself to the exact truth in that history , as in these page I be bound to do ) , that I win the poor girl 's heart entirely , and , besides , make considerable progress in the german language under she instruction . do not think I very cruel and heartless , lady ; this heart of 's be like many a town in the neighbourhood in which she dwelt , and have be storm and occupy several time before I come
come to invest it ; now mount french colour , now green and yellow , now black and white Prussian , as the case may be . a lady who set she heart upon a lad in uniform must prepare to change lover pretty quickly , or she life will be but a sad one . the german surgeon who attend we after the departure of the only condescende to pay we house a visit twice during my residence ; and I take care , for a reason I have , to receive he in a darkened room , much to the annoyance of , who lay there : but I say the light affect my eye dreadfully since my blow on the head ; and so I cover up my head with clothes when the doctor come , and tell he that I be a egyptian mummy , or talk to he some insane nonsense , in order to keep up my character . ' what be that nonsense you be talk about a egyptian mummy , fellow ? ' ask peevishly . 'Oh ! you will know soon , sir , ' say I . the next time that I expect the doctor to come , instead of receive he in a darken room , with handkerchief muff , I take care to be in the lower room , and be have a game at card with as the surgeon enter . I have take possession of a dressing - jacket of the lieutenant 's , and some other article of he wardrobe , which fit I pretty well ; and , I flatter myself , be no ungentlemanlike figure . ' good - morrow , , ' say the doctor , rather grufinitely , in reply to my smiling salute . ' ! , if you please , ' answer I , give a arch look at , whom I have instruct in my plot . ' how lieutenant ? ' ask the surgeon . 'I think the lieutenant be '-- ' upon my word , you do I great honour , ' cry I , laugh ; ' you mistake I for the mad corporal upstair . the fellow have once or twice pretend to be a officer , but my kind hostess here can answer which be which . ' ' yesterday he fancie he be , ' say ; ' the day you come he say he be a egyptian mummy . ' ' so he do , ' say the doctor ; 'I remember ; but , ha ! ha ! do you know , , I have in my note make a mistake in you two ? ' ' do not talk to I about he malady ; he be calm now . ' and I laugh at this error as at the most ridiculous thing in the world ; and when the surgeon go up to examine he patient , I caution he not to talk to he about the subject of he malady , for he be in a very excited state . the reader will be able to gather from the above conversation what my design really be . I be determined to escape , and to escape under the character of ; take it from he to he face , as it be , and make use of it to meet my imperious necessity . it be forgery and robbery , if you like ; for I take all he money and clothes ,-- I do not care to conceal it ; but the need be so urgent , that I would do so again : and I know I could not effect my escape without he purse , as well as he name . hence it become my duty to take possession of one and the other . as the lieutenant lay still in bed upstairs , I do not hesitate at all about assume he uniform , especially after take care to inform myself from the doctor whether any man of ours who might know I be in the town . but there be none that I could hear of ; and so I calmly take my walk with , dress in the lieutenant 's uniform , make inquirie as to a horse that I want to purchase , report myself to the commandant of the place as , of 's regiment of foot , convalescent , and be ask to dine with the officer of the Prussian regiment at a very sorry mess they have . how would have storme and rage , have he know the use I be make of he name ! whenever that worthy use to inquire about he clothes , which he do with many oath and curse that he would have I can at the regiment for inattention , I , with a most respectful air , inform he that they be put away in perfect safety below ; and , in fact , have they very neatly packed , and ready for the day when I propose to depart . he papers and money , however , he keep under he pillow ; and , as I have purchase a horse , it become necessary to pay for it . at a certain hour , then , I order the animal to be bring round , when I would pay the dealer for he . ( I shall pass over my adieux with my kind hostess , which be very tearful indeed ) . and then , make up my mind to the great action , walk upstairs to 's room attire in he full regimental , and with he hat cock over my left eye . ' you ! ' say he , with a multiplicity of oath ; ' you mutinous dog ! what do you mean by dWesse yourself in my Wegimental ? as sure as
as my name 's , when we get back to the Wegiment , I will have you soul cut out of you body . ' 'I be promote , , ' say I , with a sneer . 'I be come to take my leave of you ;' and then go up to he bed , I say , 'I intend to have you papers and purse . ' with this I put my hand under he pillow ; at which he give a scream that might have call the whole garrison about my ear . ' Hark ye , sir ! ' say I , ' no more noise , or you be a dead man ! ' and take a handkerchief , I bound it tight around he mouth so as well - nigh to throttle he , and , pull forward the sleeve of he shirt , tie they in a knot together , and so leave he ; remove the papers and the purse , you may be sure , and wish he politely a good day . ' it be the mad corporal , ' say I to the people down below who be attract by the noise from the sick man 's chamber ; and so take leave of the old blind , and a adieu ( I will not say how tender ) of he daughter , I mount my newly purchase animal ; and , as I prance away , and the sentinel present arm to I at the town - gate , feel once more that I be in my proper sphere , and determine never again to fall from the rank of a gentleman . I take at first the way towards , where we army be , and give out that I be bring report and letter from the Prussian commandant of Warburg to headquarter ; but , as soon as I get out of sight of the advanced sentinel , I turn bridle and ride into the Hesse - Cassel territory , which be luckily not very far from : and I promise you I be very glad to see the blue - and - red stripe on the barrier , which show I that I be out of the land occupy by we countryman . I ride to , and the next day to , give out that I be the bearer of despatch to , then on the , and put up at the best hotel of the place , where the field -officer of the garrison have they ordinary . these gentleman I treat to the best wine that the house afforde , for I be determined to keep up the character of the english gentleman , and I talk to they about my English estate with a fluency that almost make I believe in the story which I invent . I be even ask to a assembly at , the Elector 's palace , and dance a minuet there with the 's lovely daughter , and lose a few piece to he excellency the first huntmaster of he Highness . at we table at the inn there be a Prussian officer who treat I with great civility , and ask I a thousand question about ; which I answer as best I might . but this best , I be bound to say , be bad enough . I know nothing about , and the court , and the noble family there ; but , lead away by the vaingloriousness of youth ( and a propensity which I possess in my early day , but of which I have long since correcte myself , to boast and talk in a manner not altogether consonant with truth ) , I invent a thousand story which I tell he ; describe the and the to he , say the british at be my uncle , and promise my acquaintance a letter of recommendation to he . when the officer ask I my uncle 's name , I be not able to give he the real name , and so say he name be : it be as good a name as any other , and those of , county , be as good a family as any in the world , as I have hear . as for story about my regiment , of these , of course , I have no lack . I wish my other histories have be equally authentic . on the morning I leave , my Prussian friend come to I with a open smiling countenance , and say he , too , be bound for , whither I say my route lay ; and so lay we horse 's head together we jog on . the country be desolate beyond description . the prince in whose dominion we be be know to be the most ruthless seller of man in . he would sell to any bidder , and during the five year which the war ( afterwards call the ' ) have now last , have so exhaust the male of he principality , that the field remain untilled : even the child of twelve year old be drive off to the war , and I see herd of these wretch march forwards , attend by a few trooper , now under the guidance of a red -coated Hanovarian sergeant , now with a Prussian sub-officer accompany they ; with some of whom my companion exchange sign of recognition . ' it hurt my feeling , ' say he , 'to be oblige to commune with such wretch ; but the stern necessity of war demand man continually , and hence these recruiter whom you see market in human flesh . they get five - and - twenty dollar from we government for every man they bring in . for fine man -- for man like you ,' he add
add , laugh , 'we would go as high as a hundred . in the old 's time we would have give a thousand for you , when he have he giant regiment that we present monarch disband . ' 'I know one of they , ' say I , ' who serve with you : we use to call he . ' ' indeed ; and who be this ? ' ' why , a huge grenadier of ours , who be somehow snap up in by some of you recruiter . ' ' the rascal ! ' say my friend : ' and do they dare take a ? ' '' faith this be a , and a great deal too sharp for they ; as you shall hear . be take , then , and draft into the giant guard , and be the biggest man almost among all the giant there . many of these monster use to complain of they life , and they caning , and they long drill , and they small pay ; but be not one of the grumbler . " it be a deal better , " say he , " to get fat here in , than to starve in rag in ! " ' ' where be Tipperary ? ' ask my companion . ' that be exactely what 's friend ask he . it be a beautiful district in , the capital of which be the magnificent city of : a city , let I tell you , sir , only inferior to and , and far more sumptuous than any on the continent . well , say that he birthplace be near that city , and the only thing which cause he unhappiness , in he present situation , be the thought that he brother be still starve at home , when they might be so much better off in 's service . ' " ' , " say to the sergeant , to whom he impart the information , " it be my brother that would make the fine sergeant of the guard , entirely ! " ' " be as tall as you be ? " ask the sergeant . ' " as tall as I , be it ? why , man , I be the shortest of my family ! there be six more of we , but be the biggest of all . oh ! out and out the biggest . foot in he stockin - Fut , as sure as my name 's ! " ' " can not we send and fetch they over , these brother of yours ? " ' " not you . ever since I be seduce by one of you gentleman of the cane , they have a mortal aversion to all sergeant , " answer : " but it be a pity they can not come , too . what a monster would be in a grenadier 's cap ! " ' he say nothing more at the time regard he brothers , but only sigh as if lament they hard fate . however , the story be tell by the sergeant to the officer , and by the officer to the himself ; and his Majesty be so inflam by curiosity , that he actually consent to let go home in order to bring back with he he seven enormous brothers . ' ' and be they as big as pretend ? ' ask my comrade . I could not help laugh at he simplicity . ' do you suppose , ' cry I , ' that ever come back ? no , no ; once free , he be too wise for that . he have buy a snug farm in with the money that be give he to secure he brothers ; and I fancy few man of the guard ever profit so much by it . ' the Prussian captain laugh exceedingly at this story , say that the be the cleverest nation in the world , and , on my set he right , agree that the irish be even more so . we ride on very well pleased with each other ; for he have a thousand story of the war to tell , of the skill and gallantry of , and the thousand escape , and victory , and defeat scarcely less glorious than victory , through which the King have pass . now that I be a gentleman , I could listen with admiration to these tale : and yet the sentiment record at the end of the last chapter be uppermost in my mind but three week back , when I remember that it be the great general get the glory , and the poor soldier only insult and the cane . ' by the way , to whom be you take despatch ? ' ask the officer . it be another ugly question , which I determine to answer at hap - hazard ; and so I say . ' I have see the general a year before , and give the first name in my head . my friend be quite satisfied with it , and we continue we ride until evening come on ; and we horse be weary , it be agree that we should come to a halt . ' there be a very good inn , ' say the , as we ride up to what appear to I a very lonely - look place . ' this may be a very good inn for , ' say I , ' but it would not pass in old . Corbach be only a league off : let we push on for . ' ' do you want to see the loveliest woman in ? ' say the officer . 'Ah ! you sly rogue , I see that will
will influence you ; ' and , truth to say , such a proposal be always welcome to I , as I do not care to own . ' the people be great farmer , ' say the , 'as well as innkeeper ; ' and , indeed , the place seem more a farm than a inn yard . we enter by a great gate into a wall round , and at one end of which be the building , a dingy ruinous place . a couple of covered waggen be in the court , they horse be litter under a shed hard by , and lounge about the place be some man and a pair of sergeant in the Prussian uniform , who both touch they hat to my friend the . this customary formality struck I as nothing extraordinary , but the aspect of the inn have something exceedingly chill and forbid in it , and I observe the man shut to the great yard - gate as soon as we be enter . party of french horseman , the say , be about the country , and one could not take too many precaution against such villain . we go into supper , after the two sergeant have take charge of we horse ; the , also , order one of they to take my valise to my bedroom . I promise the worthy fellow a glass of schnapp for he pain . a dish of fry egg - and - bacon be order from a hideous old wench that come to serve we , in place of the lovely creature I have expect to see ; and the captain , laugh , say , ' well , we meal be a frugal one , but a soldier have many a time a worse :' and , take off he hat , sword - belt , and glove , with great ceremony , he sit down to eat . I would not be behindhand with he in politeness , and put my weapon securely on the old chest of drawer where he be laid . the hideous old woman before mention bring we in a pot of very sour wine , at which and at she ugliness I feel a considerable ill - humour . ' where be the beauty you promise I ? ' say I , as soon as the old hag have leave the room . ' ! ' say he , laugh , and look hard at I : ' it be my joke . I be tired , and do not care to go farther . there be no prettier woman here than that . if she will not suit you fancy , my friend , you must wait a while . ' this increase my ill - humour . ' upon my word , sir , ' say I sternly , ' I think you have act very coolly ! ' 'I have act as I think fit ! ' reply the captain . ' , ' say I , 'I be a british officer ! ' ' it be a lie ! ' roar the other , ' you be a Deserter ! you be a impostor , sir ; I have know you for such these three hour . I suspect you yesterday . my man hear of a man escape from , and I think you be the man . you lie and folly have confirm I . you pretend to carry despatch to a general who have be dead these ten month : you have a uncle who be a ambassador , and whose name forsooth you do not know . will you join and take the bounty , sir ; or will you be give up ? ' ' neither ! ' say I , spring at he like a tiger . but , agile as I be , he be equally on he guard . he take two pistol out of he pocket , fire one off , and say , from the other end of the table where he stand dodge I , as it be ,-- ' Advance a step , and I send this bullet into you brain ! ' in another minute the door be flng open , and the two sergeant enter , arm with musket and bayonet to aid they comrade . the game be up . I fling down a knife with which i have arm myself ; for the old hag on bring in the wine have remove my sword . volunteer , ' say I . ' that be my good fellow . what name shall I put on my list ? ' ' of , ' say I haughtily ; 'a descendant of the irish king ! ' 'I be once with the irish brigade , Roche's , ' say the recruiter , sneer , ' try if I could get any likely fellow among the few countryman of yours that be in the brigade , and there be scarcely one of they that be not descende from the king of . ' ' , ' say I , 'k or not , I be a gentleman , as you can see . ' 'Oh ! you will find plenty more in we corps ,' answer the , still in the sneering mood . ' give up you papers , , and let we see who you really be . ' as my pocket - book contain some bank - note as well as papers of 's , I be not willing to give up my property ; suspect very rightly that it be but a scheme on the part of the to get and keep it . ' it can matter very little to you , ' say I , ' what my private papers be : I be enlist under the name of
of . ' ' give it up , sirrah ! ' say the , seize he cane . 'I will not give it up ! ' answer I . ' Hound ! do you mutiny ? ' scream he , and , at the same time , give I a lash across the face with the cane , which have the anticipated effect of produce a struggle . I dash forward to grapple with he , the two sergeant flng themselves on I , I be throw to the ground and stun again ; be hit on my former wound in the head . it be bleed severely when I come to myself , my laced coat be already tear off my back , my purse and papers gone , and my hand tie behind my back . the great and illustrious have score of these white slave - dealers all round the frontier of he kingdom , debauch troops or kidnapping peasant , and hesitat at no crime to supply those brilliant regiment of he with food for powder ; and I can not help tell here , with some satisfaction , the fate which ultimately befell the atrocious scoundrel who , violat all the rights of friendship and good - fellowship , have just succeed in entrapp I . this individual be a person of high family and know talents and courage , but who have a propensity to gambling and extravagance , and find he call as a recruit - decoy far more profitable to he than he pay of second captain in the line . the sovereign , too , probably find he service more useful in the former capacity . he name be , and he be one of the most successful of the practiser of he rascally trade . he speak all language , and know all country , and hence have no difficulty in find out the simple braggadocio of a young lad like I . about 1765 , however , he come to he justly merit end . he be at this time live at , opposite , and use to take he walk upon the bridge there , and get into conversation with the french advanced sentinel ; to whom he be in the habit of promising 's mountains and marvel , ' as the french say , if they would take service in . one day there be on the bridge a superb grenadier , whom accost , and to whom he promise a company , at least , if he would enlist under . ' ask my comrade yonder , ' say the grenadier ; 'I can do nothing without he . we be bear and breed together , we be of the same company , sleep in the same room , and always go in pair . if he will go and you will give he a captaincy , I will go too . ' ' bring you comrade over to , ' say , delight . 'I will give you the best of dinner , and can promise to satisfy both of you . ' ' have you not better speak to he on the bridge ? ' say the grenadier . 'I dare not leave my post ; but you have but to pass , and talk over the matter . ' , after a little parley , pass the sentinel ; but presently a panic take he , and he retrace he step . but the grenadier bring he bayonet to the Prussian 's breast and bay he stand : that he be he prisoner . the Prussian , however , see he danger , make a bound across the bridge and into the Rhine ; whither , flinge aside he musket , the intrepid sentry follow he . the be the better swimmer of the two , seize upon the recruiter , and bear he to the side of the stream , where he give he up . ' you deserve to be shot , ' say the general to he , ' for abandon you post and arm ; but you merit reward for a act of courage and daring . the prefer to reward you , ' and the man receive money and promotion . as for , he declare he quality as a nobleman and a captain in the Prussian service , and application be make to Berlin to know if he representation be true . but the king , though he employ man of this stamp ( officer to seduce the subject of he ally ) could not acknowledge he own shame . letter be write back from to say that such a family exist in the kingdom , but that the person represent himself to belong to it must be a impostor , for every officer of the name be at he regiment and he post . it be 's death - warrant , and he be hang as a spy in . ' turn he into the cart with the rest , ' say he , as soon as I awoke from my trance . the -- the cover waggon to which I be order to march be stand , as I have say , in the courtyard of the farm , with another dismal vehicle of the same kind hard by it . each be pretty well fill with a crew of man , whom the atrocious crimp who have seize upon I , have enlist under the banners of the glorious ; and I could see by the lantern of the sentinel , as they thrust I into the straw , a dozen dark figure huddle together in the horrible move prison where I be now to be confine . a scream and a curse from my opposite neighbou show I that he be most likely wounded , as I myself be ; and , during the
the whole of the wretched night , the moan and sob of the poor fellow in similar captivity keep up a continual painful chorus , which effectually prevent my get any relief from my ills in sleep . at midnight ( as far as I could judge ) the horse be put to the waggon , and the creaking lumbering machine be put in motion . a couple of soldier , strongly armed , sit on the outer bench of the cart , and they grim face pee in with they lantern every now and then through the canva curtain , that they might count the number of they prisoner . the brute be half - drunk , and be singe love and war songs , such as mein Taubchen , mein , , mein und meine Musket , ' ' der dle Ritter . ' and the like ; they wild whoops and jodel make doleful discord with the groan of we captive within the waggon . many a time afterwards have I hear these ditty sung on the march , or in the barrack - room , or round the fire as we lay out at night . I be not near so unhappy , in spite of all , as I have be on my first enlisting in . at least , think I , if I be degrad to be a private soldier there will be no one of my acquaintance who will witness my shame ; and that be the point which I have always care for most . there will be no one to say , ' there be young , the descendant or the , the fashionable young blood of , pipeclay he belt and carry he brown Bess . ' indeed , but for that opinion of the world , with which it be necessary that every man of spirit should keep upon equal term , I , for my part , would have always be contente with the humblest portion . now here , to all intent and purpose , one be as far remove from the world as in the wilds of , or in 's . and I reason with myself thus :--' now you be catch , there be no use in repin : make the best of you situation , and get all the pleasure you can out of it . there be a thousand opportunity of plunder , & c. , offer to the soldier in war - time , out of which he can get both pleasure and profit : make use of these , and be happy . besides , you be extraordinarily brave , handsome , and clever : and who know but you may procure advancement in you new service ? ' in this philosophical way I look at my misfortune , determine not to be cast down by they ; and bore woe and my broken head with perfect magnanimity . the latter be , for the moment , a evil against which it require no small power of endurance to contend ; for the jolt of the waggon be dreadful , and every shake cause a throb in my brain which I think would have split my skull . as the morning dawn , I see that the man next I , a gaunt yellow - hair creature , in black , have a cushion of straw under he head . ' be you wound , comrade ? ' say I . ' praised be the , ' say he , 'I be sore hurt in spirit and body , and bruise in many member ; wounded , however , be I not . and you , poor youth ? ' 'I be wounded in the head , ' say I , ' and I want you pillow : give it I -- I have a clasp - knife in my pocket ! ' and with this I give he a terrible look , mean to say ( and mean it I do , for look you , a a , and I be none of you milksop ) that , unless he yield I the accommodation , I would give he a taste of my steel . 'I would give it thee without any threat , friend , ' say the yellow - haire man meekly , and hand I over he little sack of straw . he then lean himself back as comfortably as he could against the cart , and begin repeat , ' Ein ' feste ist unser , ' by which I conclude that I have get into the company of a parson . with the jolt of the waggon , and accident of the journey , various more exclamation and movement of the passenger show what a motley company we be . every now and then a countryman would burst into tear ; a french voice would be hear to say , mon !--mon ! ' a couple more of the same nation be jabber oath and chatter incessantly ; and a certain allusion to he own and everybody else 's eye , which come from a stalwart figure at the far corner , tell I that there be certainly a in we crew . but I be spare soon the tedium and discomfort of the journey . in spite of the clergyman 's cushion , my head , which be throbb with pain , be bring abruptly in contact with the side of the waggon ; it begin to bleed afresh : I become almost light - heade . I only recollect have a dratch of water here and there ; once stop at a fortified town , where a officer count we :-- all the rest of the journey be pass in a drowsy stupor , from which , when I awoke , I find myself lie in a hospital bed , with
with a nun in a white hood watch over I . ' they be in sad spiritual darkness , ' say a voice from the bed next to I , when the nun have finish she kind office and retire : ' they be in the night of error , and yet there be the light of faith in those poor creature . ' it be my comrade of the crimp waggon , he huge broad face loom out from under a white nightcap , and ensconce in the bed beside . ' what ! you there , ? ' say I . ' only a candidate , sir , ' answer the white nightcap . ' but , praise be Heaven ! you have come to . you have have a wild time of it . you have be talk in the english language ( with which I be acquaint ) of , and a young lady , and , and of another young lady , and of a house on fire , and of the british Grenadier , concern whom you sung we part of a ballad , and of a number of other matter appertain , no doubt , to you personal history . ' ' it have be a very strange one , ' say I ; ' and , perhaps , there be no man in the world , of my birth , whose misfortune can at all be compare to mine . ' I do not object to own that I be dispose to brag of my birth and other acquirement ; for I have always find that if a man do not give himself a good word , he friend will not do it for he . ' well , ' say my fellow - patient , 'I have no doubt yours be a strange tale , and shall be glad to hear it anon ; but at present you must not be permit to speak much , for you fever have be long , and you exhaustion great . ' ' where be we ? ' I ask ; and the candidate inform I that we be in the bishopric and town of , at present occupy by 's troops . there have be a skirmish with a out - party of near the town , in which a shot enter the waggon , the poor candidate have be wounded . as the reader know already my history , I will not take the trouble to repeat it here , or to give the additions with which I favour my comrade in misfortune . but I confess that I tell he ours be the greatest family and finest palace in , that we be enormously wealthy , related to all the peerage descende from the ancient king , & c. ; and , to my surprise , in the course of we conversation , I find that my interlocutor know a great deal more about than I do . when , for instance , I speak of my descent ,-- ' from which race of king ? ' say he . 'Oh ! ' say I ( for my memory for dates be never very accurate ) , ' from the old ancient king of all . ' ' what ! can you trace you origin to the son ? ' say he . '' faith , I can , ' answer I , ' and farther too ,-- , if you like . ' 'I see , ' say the candidate , smile , ' that you look upon those legend with incredulity . these Partholan and , of whom you writers fondly make mention , can not be authentically vouch for in history . nor do I believe that we have any more foundation for the tale concern they , than for the legend relative to of and which prevail two centurie back in the sister island . and then he begin a discourse about the , the Scyths or Goths , the , , and ; which be , to say the truth , the very first news I have hear of those personage . as for , he speak it as well as I , and have seven more language , he say , equally at he command ; for , on my quote the only latin line that I know , that out of the poet Homer , which say ,-- ' as in praesenti perfectum fumat in avi ,' he begin to speak to I in the tongue ; on which I be fain to tell he that we pronounce it in a different way in , and so get off the conversation . my honest friend 's history be a curious one , and it may be tell here in order to show of what motley material we levie be compose :-- 'i am , ' say he , by birth , my father be pastor of the village of , where I imbibe the first rudiment of knowledge . at sixteen ( I be now twenty - three ) , have mastere the and latin tongue , with the french , , , and ; and have come into possession of a legacy of a hundred rixdaler , a sum amply sufficient to defray my course , I go to the famious academy of , where I devote four year to the exact sciences and theology . also , I learn what worldly accomplishment I could command ; take a dancing - tutor at the expense of a groschan a lesson , a course of fencing from a french practitioner , and attend lecture on the great horse and the equestrian science at the hippodrome of a celebrate cavalry professor . my opinion be , that a man should know everything as far as in he power lie : that he should complete he cycle
cycle of experience ; and , one science be as necessary as another , it behove he . 'I be not of a save turn , hence my little fortune of a hundred rixdaler , which have serve to keep many a prudent man for a score of year , barely suffice for five year ' study ; after which my study be interrupt , my pupil fall off , and I be oblige to devote much time to shoe - bind in order to save money , and , at a future period , resume my academic course . during this period I contract a attachment ' ( here the candidate sigh a little ) ' with a person , who , though not beautiful , and forty year of age , be yet likely to sympathise with my existence ; and , a month since , my kind friend and patron , , have inform I that the Pfarrer of be dead , ask whether I would like to have my name place upon the candidate list , and if I be minded to preach a trial sermon ? as the gaining of this living would further my union with my , I joyously consent , and prepare a discourse . ' if you like I will recite it to you -- no ?-- well , I will give you extract from it upon we line of march . to proceed , then , with my biographical sketch , which be now very near a conclusion ; or , as I should more correctly say , which have very nearly bring I to the present period of time : I preach that sermon at , in which I hope that the Babylonian question be pretty satisfactorily set at rest . I preach it before the and he noble family , and some officer of distinction who be stay at he castle . of follow I in the evening discourse ; but , though he exercise be learn , and he dispose of a passage of , which he prove to be a manifest interpolation , I do not think he sermon have the effect which mine produce , and that the much relish it . after the sermon , all the candidate walk out of church together , and sup lovingly at the " " in . ' while so occupy , a waiter come in and say that a person without wish to speak to one of the reverend candidate , " the tall one . " this could only mean I , for I be a head and shoulders higher than any other reverend gentleman present . I issue out to see who be the person desire to hold converse with I , and find a man whom I have no difficulty in recognising as one of the jewish persuasion . ' " , " say this Hebrew , " I have hear from a friend , who be in you church to - day , the head of the admirable discourse you pronounce there . it have affect I deeply , most deeply . there be only one or two point on which I be yet in doubt , and if you honour could but condescmend to enlighten I on these , I think -- I think would be a convert to you eloquence . " ' " what be these point , my good friend ? " say I ; and I point out to he the twenty - four head of my sermon , ask he in which of these he doubt lay . ' we have be walk up and down before the inn while we conversation take place , but the window be open , and my comrade have hear the discourse in the morning , request I , rather peevishly , not to resume it at that period . I , therefore , move on with my disciple , and , at he request , begin at once the sermon ; for my memory be good for anything , and I can repeat any book I have read thrice . 'I pour out , then , under the tree , and in the calm moonlight , that discourse which I have pronounce under the blazing sun of noon . my Israelite only interrupt I by exclamation indicative of surprise , assent , admiration , and increase conviction . " Prodigious ! " say he ;--" ! " would he remark at the conclusion of some eloquent passage ; in a word , he exhaust the complimentary interjection of we language : and to compliment what man be averse ? I think we must have walk two mile when I get to my third head and my companion beg I would enter he house , which we now neare , and partake of a glass of beer ; to which I be never averse . ' that house , sir , be the inn at which you , too , if I judge aright , be take . no sooner be I in the place , than three crimp rush upon I , tell I I be a deserter , and they prisoner , and call upon I to deliver up my money and papers ; which I do with a solemn protest as to my sacred character . they consist of my sermon in , 's recommendatory letter , prove my identity , and three groschan four pfennig in bullion . I have already be in the cart twenty hour when you reach the house . the french officer , who lay opposite you ( he who scream when you trod on he foot , for he be wounded ) , be bring in shortly before you arrival . he have be take with he epaulet and regimental , and declare he quality and rank ; but he be alone (
( I believe it be some affair of love with a Hessian lady which cause he to be unattended ) ; and as the persons into whose hand he fall will make more profit of he as a recruit than as a prisoner , he be make to share we fate . he be not the first by many score so capture . one of 's cooks , and three actor out of a troop in the french camp , several deserter from you English troops ( the man be lead away by be tell that there be no flogging in the Prussian service ) , and three Dutchman be take besides . ' ' and you , ' say I --' you who be just on the point of get a valuable living , -- you who have so much learning , be you not indignant at the outrage ? ' 'I be a , ' say the candidate , 'and there be no use in indignation . we government be crush under 's heel these five year , and I might as well hope for mercy from the . be I , in truth , discontent with my lot ; I have live on a penny bread for so many year , that a soldier 's rations will be a luxury to I . I do not care about more or less blow of a cane ; all such evil be pass , and therefore endurable . I will never , willing , slay a man in combat ; but I be not unanxious to experience on myself the effect of the war- passion , which have have so great a influence on the human race . it be for the same reason that I determine to marry , for a man be not a complete Mensch until he be the father of a family ; to be which be a condition of he existence , and therefore a duty of he education . must wait ; she be out of the reach of want , be , indeed , cook to the , my worthy patron 's lady . I have one or two book with I , which no one be likely to take from I , and one in my heart which be the best of all . if it shall please heaven to finish my existence here , before I can prosecute my study further , what cause have I to repine ? I pray I may not be mistaken , but I think I have wrong no man , and commit no mortal sin . if I have , I know where to look for forgiveness ; and if I die , as I have say , without know all that I would desire to learn , shall I not be in a situation to learn everything , and what can human soul ask for more ? ' pardon I for put so many _I_' in my discourse , ' say the candidate , ' but when a man be talk of himself , ' ti the briefest and simplest way of talk . ' in which , perhaps , though I hate egotism , I think my friend be right . although he acknowledge himself to be a mean - spirit fellow , with no more ambition than to know the contents of a few musty book , I think the man have some good in he ; especially in the resolution with which he bear he calamity . many a gallant man of the highest honour be often not proof against these , and have be know to despair over a bad dinner , or to be cast down at a rag - elbow coat . my maxim be to bear all , to put up with water if you can not get , and if you have no velvet to be content with frieze . but and velvet be the best , bien entendu , and the man be a fool who will not seize the best when the scramble be open . the head of the sermon which my friend the theologian intend to impart to I , be , however , never tell ; for , after we come out of the hospital , he be draft into a regiment quarter as far as possible from he native country , in ; while I be put into the regiment , of which the ordinary headquarters be . the Prussian regiment seldom change they garrisons as ours do , for the fear of desertion be so great , that it become necessary to know the face of every individual in the service ; and , in time of peace , men live and die in the same town . this do not add , as may be imagine , to the amusement of the soldier 's life . it be lest any young gentleman like myself should take a fancy to a military career , and fancy that of a private soldier a tolerable one , that I be give these , I hope , moral description of what we poor fellow in the rank really suffer . as soon as we recover , we be dismiss from the nun and the hospital to the town prison of , where we be keep like slave and criminal , with artilleryman with lighted match at the door of the courtyard and the huge black dormitory where some hundred of we lay ; until we be despatch to we different destination . it be soon see by the exercise which be the old soldier amongst we , and which the recruit ; and for the former , while we lay in prison , there be a little more leisure : though , if possible , a still more strict watch keep than over the broken - spirit yokel who have be force
force or coax into the service . to describe the character here assemble would require 's own pencil . there be man of all nation and calling . the box and bully ; the play card , and dance , and fence ; the heavy smoke they pipe and drank beer , if they could manage to purchase it . those who have anything to risk gamble , and at this sport I be pretty lucky , for , not have a penny when I enter the depot ( have be rob of every farthing of my property by the rascally crimp ) , I win near a dollar in my very first game at card with one of the ; who do not think of ask whether I could pay or not upon lose . such , at least , be the advantage of have a gentlemanlike appearance ; it have save I many a time since by procure I credit when my fortune be at they lowest ebb . among the there be a splendid man and soldier , whose real name we never know , but whose ultimate history create no small sensation , when it come to be know in the Prussian army . if beauty and courage be proof of nobility , as ( although I have see some of the ugliest dog and the greatest coward in the world in the noblesse ) I have no doubt courage and beauty be , this must have be of the highest family in , so grand and noble be he manner , so superb he person . he be not quite so tall as myself , fair , while I be dark , and , if possible , rather broader in the shoulder . he be the only man I ever meet who could master I with the small - sword ; with which he would pink I four time to my three . as for the sabre , I could knock he to piece with it ; and I could leap farther and carry more than he could . this , however , be mere egotism . this , with whom I become pretty intimate -- for we be the two cock , as it be , of the , and neither have any feeling of low jealousy -- be call , for want of a better name , , on account of he complexion . he be not a deserter , but have come in from the and the bishopric , as I fancy ; fortune have prove unfavourable to he at play probably , and other means of existence be deny he . I suspect that the Bastile be wait for he in he own country , have he take a fancy to return thither . he be passionately fond of play and liquor , and thus we have a considerable sympathy together : when excited by one or the other , he become frightful . I , for my part , can bear , without wincing , both ill luck and wine ; hence my advantage over he be considerable in we bout , and I win enough money from he to make my position tenable . he have a wife outside ( who , I take it , be the cause of he misfortune and separation from he family ) , and she use to be admit to see he twice or thrice a week , and never come empty - hand --- a little brown bright - ey creature , whose ogles have make the greatest impression upon all the world . this man be draft into a regiment that be quarter at in , which be only at a short distance from the frontier ; he maintain always the same character for daring and skill , and be , in the secret republic of the regiment -- which always exist as well as the regular military hierarchy -- the acknowledged leader . he be a admirable soldier , as I have say ; but haughty , dissolute , and a drunkard . a man of this mark , unless he take care to coax and flatter he officer ( which I always do ) , be sure to fall out with they . 's be he swear enemy , and he punishment be frequent and severe . he wife and the woman of the regiment ( this be after the peace ) use to carry on a little commerce of smuggling across the frontier , where they dealings be wink at by both party ; and in obedience to the instruction of she husband , this woman , from every one of she excursion , would bring in a little powder and ball : commodity which be not to be procure by the Prussian soldier , and which be stow away in secret till want . they be to be want , and that soon . have organise a great and extraordinary conspiracy . we do not know how far it go , how many hundred or thousand it embrace ; but strange be the story tell about the plot amongst we private : for the news be spread from garrison to garrison , and talk of by the army , in spite of all the government effort to hush it up -- hush it up , indeed ! I have be of the people myself ; I have see the irish rebellion , and I know what be the free - masonry of the poor . he make himself the head of the plot . there be no writing nor papers . no single one of the conspirator communicate with any other than the ; but personally he give he order to they all . he have arrange matter for a general rising of the garrison , at twelve o'clock on a certain day : the guard - house
house in the town be to be seize , the sentinel cut down , and -- who know the rest ? some of we people use to say that the conspiracy be spread through all , and that be to be make a general in the Austrian service . at twelve o'clock , and opposite the guard - house by the Bohmer - Thor of Neiss , some thirty man be lounge about in they undress , and the stood near the sentinel of the guard - house , sharpen a wood hatchet on a stone . at the stroke of twelve , he get up , split open the sentinel 's head with a blow of he axe , and the thirty man , rush into the guard - house , take possession of the arm there , and march at once to the gate . the sentry there try to drop the bar , but the Frenchman rush up to he , and , with another blow of the axe , cut off he right hand , with which he hold the chain . see the man rush out armed , the guard without the gate draw up across the road to prevent they passage ; but the 's thirty give they a volley , charge they with the bayonet , and bring down several , and the rest fly , the thirty rush on . the frontier be only a from , and they make rapidly towards it . but the alarm be give in the town , and what save it be that the clock by which the go be a quarter of a hour faster than any of the clock in the town . the generale be beat , the troops call to arm , and thus the man who be to have attack the other guard - house , be obliged to fall into the rank , and they project be defeat . this , however , likewise render the discovery of the conspirator impossible , for no man could betray he comrade , nor , of course , would he criminate himself . be send in pursuit of the and he thirty fugitive , who be , by this time , far on they way to the Bohemian frontier . when the horse come up with they , they turn , receive they with a volley and the bayonet , and drive they back . the be out at the barrier , look eagerly on at the conflict . the woman , who be on the look - out too , bring more ammunition to these intrepid deserter , and they engage and drive back the dragoon several time . but in these gallant and fruitless combats much time be lose , and a battalion presently come up , and surround the brave thirty ; when the fate of the poor fellow be decide . they fight with the fury of despair : not one of they ask for quarter . when they ammunition fail , they fight with the steel , and be shoot down or bayonet where they stand . the be the very last man who be hit . he receive a bullet in the thigh , and fell , and in this state be overpower , kill the officer who first advanc to seize he . he and the very few of he comrade who survive be carry back to , and immediately , as the ringleader , he be bring before a council of war . he refuse all interrogation which be make as to he real name and family . ' what matter who I be ? ' say he ; ' you have I and will shoot I . my name would not save I be it ever so famous . ' in the same way he decline to make a single discovery regard the plot . ' it be all my do , ' he say ; ' each man engage in it only know I , and be ignorant of every one of he comrade . the secret be mine alone , and the secret shall die with I . ' when the officer ask he what be the reason which induce he to meditate a crime so horrible ?--' it be you infernal brutality and tyranny , ' he say . ' you be all butchers , ruffian , tiger , and you owe it to the cowardice of you man that you be not murder long ago . ' at this he captain burst into the most furious exclamation against the wounded man , and rush up to he , strike he a blow with he fist . but , wound as he be , as quick as think seize the bayonet of one of the soldier who support he , and plunge it into the officer 's breast . ' Scoundrel and monster , ' say he , 'I shall have the consolation of send you out of the world before I die . ' he be shoot that day . he offer to write to the King , if the officer would agree to let he letter go seal into the hand of the postmaster ; but they fear , no doubt , that something might be say to inculpate themselves , and refuse he the permission . at the next review treat they , it be say , with great severity , and rebuk they for not have grant the he request . however , it be the 's interest to conceal the matter , and so it be , as I have say before , hush up -- so well hush up , that a hundr thousand soldier in the army know it ; and many be the one of we that have drink to the 's memory over we wine , as a martyr for the cause of
of the soldier . I shall have , doubtless , some reader who will cry out at this , that I be encourage insubordination and advocat murder . if these man have serve as private in the Prussian army from 1760 to 1765 , they would not be so apt to take objection . this man destroy two sentinel to get he liberty ; how many hundred of thousand of he own and the Austrian people do kill because he take a fancy to ? it be the accursed tyranny of the system that sharpen the axe which brain the two sentinel of Neiss : and so let officer take warning , and think twice ere they visit poor fellow with the cane . I could tell many more story about the army ; but as , from have be a soldier myself , all my sympathy be in the rank , no doubout my tale would be pronounce to be of a immoral tendency , and I have best , therefore , be brief . Fancy my surprise while in this depot , when one day a well - know salute my ear , and I hear a meagre young gentleman , who be bring in by a couple of trooper and receive a few cut across the shoulders from one of they , say in the best , ' you infernal Wascal , I will be wevenge for this . I will Wite to my ambassador , as sure as my name 's Fakenham of . ' I burst out laugh at this : it be my old acquaintance in my corporal 's coat . Lischen have swear stoutly , that he be really and truly the private , and the poor fellow have be draft off , and be to be make one of we . but I bear no malice , and have make the whole room roar with the story of the way in which I have trick the poor lad , I give he a piece of advice , which procure he he liberty . ' go to the inspect officer , ' say I ; ' if they once get you into it be all over with you , and they will never give you up . go now to the commandant of the depot , promise he a hundr -- five hundred guinea to set you free ; say that the crimping captain have you papers and portfoliog ( this be true ) ; ' above all , show he that you have the means of pay he the promise money , and I will warrant you be set free . ' he do as I advise , and when we be put on the march find mean to be allow to go into hospital , and while in hospital the matter be arrange as I have recommend . he have nearly , however , miss he freedom by he own stinginess in bargaining for it , and never show the least gratitude towards I he benefactor . I be not go to give any romantic narrative of the ' . at the close of it , the Prussian army , so renowne for its disciplined valour , be officer and under-officer by native , it be true ; but be compose for the most part of man hire or steal , like myself , from almost every nation in . the deserting to and be prodigious . in my regiment ( 's ) alone before the war , there have be no less than 600 , and as they march out of for the campaign , one of the fellows have a old fiddle on which he be flay a french tune , and he comrade dance almost , rather than walk , after he , singe , ' Nous allon en . ' two year after , when they return to , there be only six of these man leave ; the rest have fle or be kill in action . the life the private soldier lead be a frightful one to any but man of iron courage and endurance . there be a corporal to every three man , march behind they , and pitilessly use the cane ; so much so that it use to be say that in action there be a front rank of private and a second rank of sergeant and corporal to drive they on . many man would give way to the most frightful act of despair under these incessant persecution and torture ; and amongst several regiment of the army a horrible practice have spring up , which for some time cause the greatest alarm to the government . this be a strange frightful custom of - . the man use to say that life be unbearable , that suicide be a crime ; in order to avert which , and to finish with the intolerable misery of they position , the best plan be to kill a young child , which be innocent , and therefore secure of heaven , and then to deliver themselves up as guilty of the murder . the himself -- the hero , sage , and philosopher , the prince who have always liberality on he lip and who affect a horror of capital punishment -- be frightene at this dreadful protest , on the part of the wretch whom he have kidnap , against he monstrous tyranny ; but he only means of remedy the evil be strictly to forbid that such criminal should be attend by any ecclesiastic whatever , and deny all religious consolation . the punishment be incessant . every officer have the liberty to inflict it , and in peace it be more cruel than in war . for when peace come the turn adrift such of he officer as be not noble ; whatever they service might have be . he
he would call a captain to the front of he company and say , ' he be not noble , let he go . ' we be afraid of he somehow , and be cow before he like wild beast before they keeper . I have see the bravest man of the army cry like child at a cut of the cane ; I have see a little ensign of fifteen call out a man of fifty from the rank , a man who have be in a hundred battle , and he have stand present arm , and sobb and how like a baby , while the young wretch lash he over the arm and thigh with the stick . in a day of action this man would dare anything . a button might be awry then and nobody touch he ; but when they have make the brute fight , then they lash he again into subordination . almost all of we yield to the spell -- scarce one could break it . the french officer I have speak of as take along with I , be in my company , and can like a dog . I meet he at versaille twenty year afterwards , and he turn quite pale and sick when I speak to he of old day . ' for 's sake , ' say he , ' do not talk of that time : I wake up from my sleep trembl and cry even now . ' as for I , after a very brief time ( in which it must be confess I taste , like my comrade , of the cane ) and after I have find opportunity to show myself to be a brave and dexterous soldier , I take the means I have adopt in the english army to prevent any further personal degradation . I wear a bullet around my neck , which I do not take the pain to conceal , and I give out that it should be for the man or officer who cause I to be chastise . and there be something in my character which make my superior believe I ; for that bullet have already serve I to kill a Austrian colonel , and I would have give it to a Prussian with as little remorse . for what care I for they quarrel , or whether the eagle under which I march have one head or two ? all I say be , ' no man shall find I trip in my duty ; but no man shall ever lay a hand upon I . ' and by this maxim I abide as long as I remain in the service . I do not intend to make a history of battle in the Prussian any more than in the english service . I do my duty in they as well as another , and by the time that my moustache have grow to a decent length , which it do when I be twenty year of age , there be not a braver , cleverer , handsomer , and I must own , wickeder soldier in the Prussian army . I have form myself to the condition of the proper fight beast ; on a day of action I be savage and happy ; out of the field I take all the pleasure I could get , and be by no means delicate as to its quality or the manner of procure it . the truth be , however , that there be among we man at much higher tone of society than among the clumsy lout in the english army , and we service be generally so strict that we have little time for do mischief . I be very dark and swarthy in complexion , and be call by we fellows the ' , ' the ' , ' or the . if any service be to be do , I be sure to be put upon it . I get frequent gratification of money , but no promotion ; and it be on the day after I have kill the Austrian colonel ( a great officer of , whom I engage -- singly and on foot ) that , my colonel , give I two - 'or in front of the regiment , and say , 'I reward thee now ; but I fear I shall have to hang thee one day or other . ' I spend the money , and that I have take from the colonel 's body , every groschen , that night with some jovial companion ; but as long as war last be never without a dollar in my purse . , and there after the war we regiment be garrison in the capital , the least dull , perhaps , of all the town of : but that do not say much for its gaiety . we service , which be always severe , still leave many hour of the day disengage , in which we might take we pleasure have we the means of paying for the same . many of we mess get leave to work in trade ; but I have be bring up to none : and beside , my honou forbade I ; for as a gentleman , I could not soil my finger by a manual occupation . but we pay be barely enough to keep we from starving ; and as I have always been fond of pleasure , and as the position in which we now were , in the midst of the capital , prevent we from resort to those means of levying contribution which be always pretty feasible in wartime , I be oblige to adopt the only means leave I of providing for my expense : and in a word become the , or confidential military gentleman , of my captain
captain . I spurn the office four year previously , when it be make to I in the service ; but the position be very different in a foreign country ; beside , to tell the truth , after five year in the rank , a man 's pride will submit to many rebuff which would be intolerable to he in a independent condition . the be a young man and have distinguished himself during the war , or he would never have be advanced to rank so early . he be , moreover , the nephew and heir of the of , , a relationship which no doubt aide in the young gentleman 's promotion . be a severe officer enough on parade or in barrack , but he be a person easily lead by flattery . I win he heart in the first place by my manner of tie my hair in queue ( indeed , it be more neatly dress than that of any man in the regiment ) , and subsequently gain he confidence by a thousand little art and compliment , which as a gentleman myself I know how to employ . he be a man of pleasure , which he pursue more openly than most man in the stern court of the King ; he be generous and careless with he purse , and he have a great affection for wine : in all which quality I sincerely sympathise with he ; and from which I , of course , have my profit . he be dislike in the regiment , because he be suppose to have too intimate relation with he uncle the ; to whom , it be hinted , he carry the news of the corps . before long I have ingratiate myself considerably with my officer , and know most of he affair . thus I be relieve from many drill and parade , which would otherwise have fall to my lot , and come in for a number of perquisite ; which enable I to support a genteel figure and to appear with some in a certain , though it must be confess very humble , society in . among the ladie I be always a especial favourite , and so polish be my behaviour amongst they , that they could not understand how I should have obtain my frightful nickname of the in the regiment . ' he be not so black as he be paint ,' I laughingly would say ; and most of the ladie agree that the private be quite as well - breed as the captain : as indeed how should it be otherwise , consider my education and birth ? when I be sufficientely ingratiate with he , I ask leave to address a letter to my poor mother in , to whom I have not give any news of myself for many many year ; for the letter of the foreign soldier be never admit to the post , for fear of appeal or disturbance on the part of they parent abroad . my captain agree to find means to forward the letter , and as I know that he would open it , I take care to give it he unseal ; thus show my confidence in he . but the letter be , as you may imagine , write so that the writer should come to no harm be it intercept . I beg my honoured mother 's forgiveness for have fle from she ; I say that my extravagance and folly in my own country I know render my return thither impossible ; but that she would , at least , be glad to know that I be well and happy in the service of the greatest monarch in the world , and that the soldier 's life be most agreeable to I : and , I add , that I have find a kind protector and patron , who I hope would some day provide for I as I know it be out of she power to do . I offer remembrance to all the girl at , name they from to downward , and sign myself , as in truth I be , she affectionate son , , in company of the regiment of foot in garrison at . also I tell she a pleasant story about the King kick the and three judge downstairs , as he have do one day when I be on guard at , and say I hope for another war soon , when I might rise to be a officer . in fact , you might have imagine my letter to be that of the happiest fellow in the world , and I be not on this head at all sorry to mislead my kind parent . I be sure my letter be read , for begin ask I some day afterwards about my family , and I tell he the circumstance pretty truly , all thing consider . I be a cadet of a good family , but my mother be almost ruin and have barely enough to support she eight daughter , whom I name . I have be to study for the law at , where I have get into debt and bad company , have kill a man in a duel , and would be hang or imprison by he powerful friend , if I return . I have enlist in the service , where a opportunity for escape present itself to I such as I could not resist ; and hereupon I tell the story of of in such a way as make my patron to be convulse with laughter , and he tell I afterwards that he have repeat the story at 's evening assembly , where all the world be anxious to have a sight of the young . ' be the British ambassador there
there ? ' I ask , in a tone of the greatest alarm , and add , ' for 's sake , sir , do not tell my name to he , or he might ask to have I deliver up : and I have no fancy to go to be hang in my dear native country . ' Potzdorff , laugh , say he would take care that I should remain where I be , on which I swore eternal gratitude to he . some day afterwards , and with rather a grave face , he say to I , , I have be talk to we colonel about you , and as I wonder that a fellow of you courage and talents have not be advanc during the war , the general say they have have they eye upon you : that you be a gallant soldier , and have evidently come of a good stock ; that no man in the regiment have have less fault find with he ; but that no man merit promotion less . you be idle , dissolute , and unprincipled ; you have do a deal of harm to the man ; and , for all you talents and bravery , he be sure would come to no good . ' ' ! ' say I , quite astonished that any mortal man should have form such a opinion of I , 'i hope be mistaken regard my character . I have fall into bad company , it be true ; but I have only do as other soldier have do ; and , above all , I have never have a kind friend and protector before , to whom I might show that I be worthy of better thing . the general may say I be a ruin lad , and send I to the d --- l : but be sure of this , I would go to the d --- l to serve you . ' this speech I see pleased my patron very much ; and , as I be very discreet and useful in a thousand delicate way to he , he soon come to have a sincere attachment for I . one day , or rather night , when he be tete - a - tete with the lady of the von Dose for instance , I -- but there be no use in tell affair which concern nobody now . four month after my letter to my mother , I get , under cover to the , a reply , which create in my mind a yearning after home , and a melancholy which I can not describe . I have not see the dear soul 's write for five year . all the old day , and the fresh happy sunshine of the old green fields in , and she love , and my uncle , and , and everything that I have do and think , come back to I as I read the letter ; and when I be alone I cry over it , as I have not do since the day when jilt I . I take care not to show my feeling to the regiment or my captain : but that night , when I be to have take tea at the - house outside , with ( the 's gentlewoman of company ) , I somehow have not the courage to go ; but beg to be excuse , and go early to be in barrack , out of which I go and come now almost as I will , and pass a long night weeping and think about dear . next day , my spirit rise again and I get a ten - guinea bill cash , which my mother send in the letter , and give a handsome treat to some of my acquaintance . the poor soul 's letter be blot all over with tear , full of text , and write in the wildest incoherent way . she say she be delighted to think I be under a Protestant prince , though she fear he be not in the right way : that right way , she say , she have the blessing to find , under the guidance of the , whom she sit under . she say he be a precious chosen vessel ; a sweet ointment and precious box of spikenard ; and make use of a great number more phrasis that I could not understand ; but one thing be clear in the midst of all this jargon , that the good soul love she son still , and think and pray day and night for she wild Redmond . have it not come across many a poor fellow , in a solitary night 's watch , or in sorrow , sickness , or captivity , that at that very minute , most likely , he mother be pray for he ? I often have have these thought ; but they be none of the gayest , and it be quite as well that they do not come to you in company ; for where would be a set of jolly fellows then ?-- as mute as undertaker at a funeral , I promise you . I drank my mother 's health that night in a bumper , and live like a gentleman whilst the money last . she pinch herself to give it I , as she tell I afterwards ; and be very wroth with she . although the good soul 's money be very quickly spend , I be not long in get more ; for I have a hundred way of get it , and become a universal favourite with the and he friend . now , it be von Dose who give I a - 'or for bring she a bouquet or a letter from
from the ; now it be , on the contrary , the old who treat I with a bottle of , and slipp into my hand a dollar or two , in order that I might give he some information regard the liaison between my and he lady . but though I be not such a fool as not to take he money , you may be sure I be not dishonourable enough to betray my benefactor ; and he get very little out of I . when the and the lady fall out , and he begin to pay he address to the rich daughter of the , I do not know how many more letter and guineas the unfortunate hand over to I , that I might get she lover back again . but such return be rare in love , and the use only to laugh at she stale sigh and entreaty . in the house of I make myself so pleasant to high and low , that I come to be quite intimate there : and get the knowledge of a state secret or two , which surprise and pleas my captain very much . these little hint he carry to he uncle , the of , who , no doubt , make he advantage of they ; and thus I begin to be receive quite in a confidential light by the Potzdorff family , and become a mere nominal soldier , be allow to appear in plain clothes ( which be , I warrant you , of a neat fashion ) , and to enjoy myself in a hundred way , which the poor fellow my comrade envy . as for the sergeant , they be as civil to I as to a officer : it be as much as they stripe be worth to offend a person who have the ear of the 's nephew . there be in my company a young fellow by the name of , who be six foot high in spite of he name , and whose life I have save in some affair of the war . what do this lad do , after I have recount to he one of my adventur , but call I a spy and informer , and beg I not to call he any more , as be the fashion with young man when they be very intimate . I have nothing for it but to call he out ; but I owed he no grudge . I disarm he in a twinkling ; and as I send he sword fly over he head , say to he , ' Kurz , do ever you know a man guilty of a mean action who can do as I do now ? ' this silence the rest of the grumbler ; and no man ever sneer at I after that . no man can suppose that to a person of my fashion the waiting in antechamber , the conversation of footman and hanger - on , be pleasant . but it be not more degrading than the barrack - room , of which I need not say I be heartily sick . my protestation of liking for the army be all intend to throw dust into the eyes of my employer . I sigh to be out of slavery . I know I be bear to make a figure in the world . have I be one of the garrison , I would have cut my way to freedom by the side of the gallant ; but here I have only artifice to enable I to attain my end , and be not I justify in employ it ? my plan be this : I may make myself so necessary to , that he will obtain my freedom . once free , with my fine person and good family , I will do what ten thousand irish gentleman have do before , and will marry a lady of fortune and condition . and the proof that I be , if not disinterest , at least actuate by a noble ambition , be this . there be a fat grocer 's widow in with six hundred thaler of rent , and a good business , who give I to understand that she would purchase my discharge if I would marry she ; but I frankly tell she that I be not make to be a grocer , and thus absolutely fling away a chance of freedom which she offer I . and I be grateful to my employer ; more grateful than they to I . the be in debt , and have dealings with the , to whom he give note of hand payable on he uncle 's death . the old von , see the confidence he nephew have in I , offer to bribe I to know what the young man 's affair really be . but what do I do ? I inform von of the fact ; and we make out , in concert , a list of little debt , so moderate , that they actually appease the old uncle instead of irritating , and he pay they , be glad to get off so cheap . and a pretty return I get for this fidelity . one morning , the old gentleman be closet with he nephew ( he use to come to get any news stirring as to what the young officer of the regiment be do : whether this or that gamble ; who intrigue , and with whom ; who be at the ridotto on such a night ; who be in debt , and what not ; for the like to know the business of every officer in he army ) , I be send with a letter to the ( that afterwards marry the actress ) , and , meet the at a
a few pace off in the street , give my message , and return to the 's lodging . he and he worthy uncle be make my unworthy self the subject of conversation . ' he be noble , ' say the . ' ! ' reply the uncle ( whom I could have throttle for he insolence ) . ' all the beggarly irish who ever enlist tell the same story . ' ' he be kidnap by , ' resume the other . 'A kidnap deserter , ' say ; ' la belle affaire ! ' ' well , I promise the lad I would ask for he discharge ; and I be sure you can make he useful . ' ' you have ask he discharge , ' answer the elder , laugh . ' ! you be a model of probity ! you will never succeed to my place , , if you be no wiser than you be just now . make the fellow as useful to you as you please . he have a good manner and a frank countenance . he can lie with a assurance that I never see surpass , and fight , you say , on a pinch . the scoundrel do not want for good quality ; but he be vain , a spendthrift , and a bavard . as long as you have the regiment in terrorem over he , you can do as you like with he . once let he loose , and the lad be likely to give you the slip . keep on promise he ; promise to make he a general , if you like . what the deuce do I care ? there be spy enough to be have in this town without he . ' it be thus that the service I render to be qualified by that ungrateful old gentleman ; and I steal away from the room extremely trouble in spirit , to think that another of my fond dream be thus dispell ; and that my hope of get out of the army , by be useful to the , be entirely vain . for some time my despair be such , that I think of marry the widow ; but the marriage of private be never allow without the direct permission of the ; and it be a matter of very great doubt whether he would allow a young fellow of twenty - two , the handsomest man of he army , to be couple to a pimpleface old widow of sixty , who be quite beyond the age when she marriage would be likely to multiply the subject of His Majesty . this hope of liberty be therefore vain ; nor could I hope to purchase my discharge , unless any charitable soul would lend I a large sum of money ; for , though I make a good deal , as I have say , yet I have always have through life a incorrigible knack of spending , and ( such be my generosity of disposition ) have be in debt ever since I be bear . my captain , the sly rascal ! give I a very different version of he conversation with he uncle to that which I know to be the true one ; and say smilingly to I , ' Redmond , I have speak to the regard thy service , [ : the service about which here speak have , and we suspect purposely , be describe by he in very dubious term . it be most probable that he be employ to wait at the table of stranger in , and to bring to the Police any news concern they which might at all interest the government . the great never receive a guest without take these hospitable precaution ; and as for the duel which fight , may we be allow to hint a doubt as to a great number of these combat . it will be observ , in one or two other part of he Memoir , that whenever he be at a awkward pass , or do what the world do not usually consider respectable , a duel , in which he be victorious , be sure to ensue ; from which he argue that he be a man of undoubted honour . ] and thy fortune be make . we shall get thee out of the army , appoint thee to the police bureau , and procure for thee a inspectorship of custom ; and , in fine , allow thee to move in a better sphere than that in which have hitherto place thee . although I do not believe a word of this speech , I affect to be very much move by it , and of course swore eternal gratitude to the for he kindness to the poor irish castaway . ' you service at the 's have please I very well . there be another occasion on which you may make yourself useful to we ; and if you succeed , depend on it you reward will be secure . ' ' what be the service , sir ? ' say I ; 'I will do anything for so kind a master . ' ' there be lately come to , ' say the , gentleman in the service of the - , who call himself the , and wear the red riband and star of the 's order of the spur . he speak italian or french indifferently ; but we have some reason to fancy this be a native of you country of . do you ever hear such a name as in ? ' ' ? --? ' a sudden thought flash across I . ' no , sir , ' say I , 'I never hear the name . ' ' you must go into he service
service . of course you will not know a word of : and if the ask as to the particularity of you accent , say you be a Hungarian . the servant who come with he will be turn away to - day , and the person to whom he have apply for a faithful fellow will recommend you . you be a ; you serve in the ' . you leave the army on account of weakness of the loin . you serve two year ; he be now with the army in , but there be you certificate sign by he . you afterwards live with , who will give you a character , if need be ; and the landlord of the " " will , of course , certify that you be a honest fellow : but he certificate go for nothing . as for the rest of you story , you can fashion that as you will , and make it as romantic or as ludicrous as you fancy dictate . try , however , to win the 's confidence by provoke he compassion . he gamble a great deal , and . do you know the card well ? ' ' only a very little , as soldier do . ' 'I have think you more expert . you must find out if the cheat ; if he do , we have he . he see the english and Austrian envoy continually , and the young man of either sup repeatedly at he house . find out what they talk of ; for how much each play , especially if any of they play on parole : if you can read he private letter , of course you will ; though about those which go to the post , you need not trouble yourself ; we look at they there . but never see he write a note without find out to whom it go , and by what channel or messenger . he sleep with the key of he despatch - box on a string round he neck . twenty Frederics , if you get a impression of the key . you will , of course , go in plain clothes . you have best brush the powder out of you hair , and tie it with a riband simply ; you moustache you must of course shave off . with these instructions , and a very small gratuity , the leave I . when I again see he , he be amuse at the change in my appearance . I have , not without a pang ( for they be as black as jet , and curl elegantly ) , shave off my moustach ; have remove the odious grease and flour , which I always abominate , out of my hair ; have mount a demure french grey coat , black satin breech , and a maroon plush waistcoat , and a hat without a cockade . I look as meek and humble as any servant out of place could possibly appear ; and I think not my own regiment , which be now at the review at , would have know I . thus accour , I go to the ' , ' where this stranger be , -- my heart beat with anxiety , and something tell I that this be no other than , of , my father 's eldest brother , who have give up he estate in consequence of he obstinate adherence to the superstition . before I go in to present myself , I go to look in the remise at he carriage . have he the arm ? yes , there they be : argent , a bend gule , with four escallop of the field , -- the ancient coat of my house . they be paint in a shield about as big as my hat , on a smart chariot handsomely gild , surmount with a coronet , and support by eight or nine Cupid , cornucopias , and flower - basket , accord to the queer heraldic fashion of those day . it must be he ! I feel quite feint as I go up the stair . I be go to present myself before my uncle in the character of a servant ! ' you be the young man whom recommend ? ' I bow , and hand he a letter from that gentleman , with which my captain have take care to provide I . as he look at it I have leisure to examine he . my uncle be a man of sixty year of age , dress superbly in a coat and breech of apricot - colou velvet , a white satin waistcoat embroider with gold like the coat . across he breast go the purple riband of he order of the spur ; and the star of the order , a enormous one , sparkle on he breast . he have ring on all he finger , a couple of watch in he fob , a rich diamond solitaire in the black riband round he neck , and fasten to the bag of he wig ; he ruffle and frill be decorate with a profusion of the richest lace . he have pink silk stocking roll over the knee , and tie with gold garter ; and enormous diamond buckle to he red - heeled shoe . a sword mount in gold , in a white fish - skin scabbard ; and a hat richly lace , and line with white feather , which be lie on a table beside he , complete the costume of this splendid gentleman . in height he be about my size , that be , six foot and half a inch ; he cast of feature singularly like mine , and extremely distingue . one of he eyes be close with
with a black patch , however ; he wear a little white and red paint , by no means a unusual ornament in those day ; and a pair of moustach , which fall over he lip and hide a mouth that I afterwards find have rather a disagreeable expression . when he beard be remove , the upper tooth appear to project very much ; and he countenance wear a ghastly fix smile , by no means pleasant . it be very imprudent of I ; but when I see the splendour of he appearance , the nobleness of he manner , I feel it impossible to keep disguise with he ; and when he say , ' ah , you be a , I see ! ' I could hold no longer . ' , ' say I , 'I be a , and my name be , of . ' as I speak , I burst into tear ; I can not tell why ; but I have see none of my kith or kin for six year , and my heart longe for some one . 's to Military profession you who have never be out of you country , know little what it be to hear a friendly voice in captivity ; and there be many a man that will not understand the cause of the burst of feeling which I have confess take place on my see my uncle . he never for a minute think to question the truth of what I say . ' mother of ! ' cry he , ' it be my brother 's son . ' and I think in my heart he be as much affect as I be at thus suddenly find one of he kindred ; for he , too , be a exile from home , and a friendly voice , a look , bring the old country back to he memory again , and the old day of he boyhood . 'I would give five year of my life to see they again , ' say he , after caresse I very warmly . ' what ? ' ask I . ' why , ' reply he , ' the green field , and the river , and the old round tower , and the burying - place at . ' Tbe a shame for you father to part with the land , , that go so long with the name . ' he then begin to ask I concern myself , and I give he my history at some length ; at which the worthy gentleman laugh many time , say , that I be a Barry all over . in the middle of my story he would stop I , to make I stand back to back , and measure with he ( by which I ascertain that we height be the same , and that my uncle have a stiff knee , moreover , which make he walk in a peculiar way ) , and utter , during the course of the narrative , a hundred exclamation of pity , and kindness , and sympathy . it be 's Holy Saints ! ' and ' mother of ! ' and ' bless ! ' continually ; by which , and with justice , I conclude that he be still devotedly attach to the ancient faith of we family . it be with some difficulty that I come to explain to he the last part of my history , viz. , that I be put into he service as a watch upon he action , of which I be to give information in a certain quarter . when I tell he ( with a great deal of hesitation ) of this fact , he burst out laugh , and enjoy the joke amazingly . ' the rascal ! ' say he ; ' they think to catch I , do they ? why , , my chief conspiracy be a faro - bank . but the king be so jealous , that he will see a spy in every person who come to he miserable capital in the great sandy desert here . ah , my boy , I must show you and ! ' I say there be nothing I longe for more than to see any city but , and should be delighted to be free of the odious military service . indeed , I think , from he splendour of appearance , the knickknack about the room , the gild carriage in the remise , that my uncle be a man of vast property ; and that he would purchase a dozen , nay , a whole regiment of substitute , in order to restore I to freedom . but I be mistaken in my calculation regard he , as he history of himself speedily show I . 'I have be beaten about the world , ' say he , ' ever since the year 1742 , when my brother you father ( and heaven forgive he ) cut my family estate from under my heel , by turn heretic , in order to marry that scold of a mother of yours . well , let bygones be bygone . ' tTis probable that I should have run through the little property as he do in my place , and I should have have to begin a year or two later the life I have be lead ever since I be compelle to leave . my lad , I have be in every service ; and , between ourselves , owe money in every capital in . I make a campaign or two with the under . I be captain in the of he Holiness the Pope , I make the campaign of with the of Wales - - a bad fellow , my dear , care more for
for he mistress and he brandy - botle than for the crown of the three kingdom . I have serve in and in Piedmont ; but I have be a rolling stone , my good fellow . play -- play have be my ruin ; that and beauty ' ( here he give a leer which make he , I must confess , look anything but handsome ; beside , he rouge cheek be all beslobber with the tear which he have she on receive I ) . ' the woman have make a fool of I , my dear Redmond . I be a soft - hear creature , and this minute , at sixty - two , have no more command of myself than when make a fool of I at sixteen . ' '' faith sir , ' say I , laugh , ' I think it run in the family ! ' and describe to he , much to he amusement , my romantic passion for my cousin , . he resume he narrative . ' the card now be my only livelihood . sometimes I be in luck , and then I lay out my money in these trinket you see . it be property , look you , ; and the only way I have find of keep a little about I . when the luck go against I , why , my dear , my diamonds go to the pawnbroker , and I wear paste . friend Mose the goldsmith will pay I a visit this very day ; for the chance have be against I all the week past , and I must raise money for the bank to - night . do you understand the card ? ' I reply that I could play as soldier do , but have no great skill . ' we will practise in the morning , my boy , ' say he , ' and I will put you up to a thing or two worth know . ' of course I be glad to have such a opportunity of acquiring knowledge , and profess myself delighted to receive my uncle 's instruction . the 's account of himself rather disagreeably affect I . all he show be on he back , as he say . he carriage , with the fine gilding , be a part of he stock in trade . he have a sort of mission from the :-- it be to discover whether a certain quantity of alloy ducat which have be trace to , be from the 's treasury . but the real end of be play . there be a young attache of the english embassy , my , afterwards and of in the english peerage , who be play high ; and it be after hearing of the passion of this young nobleman that my uncle , then at , determined to visit and engage he . for there be a sort of chivalry among the knights of the dice - box : the fame of great player be know all over . I have know the , for instance , to travel six hundred mile , from to , for the purpose of meeting , then only my 's dashing son , afterwards the greatest of european orator and statesman . it be agree that I should keep my character of valet ; that in the presence of strangers I should not know a word of ; that I should keep a good look - out on the trump when I be serve the champagne and punch about ; and , have a remarkably fine eyesight and a great natural aptitude , I be speedily able to give my dear uncle much assistance against he opponent at the green table . some prudish person may affect indignation at the frankness of these confession , but pity they ! do you suppose that any man who have lose or win a hundred thousand pound at play will not take the advantages which he neighbour enjoy ? they be all the same . but it be only the clumsy fool who Cheat ; who resort to the vulgar expedient of cogged dice and cut card . such a man be sure to go wrong some time or other , and be not fit to play in the society of gallant gentleman ; and my advice to people who see such a vulgar person at he prank be , of course , to back he while he play , but never -- never to have anything to do with he . play grandly , honourably . be not , of course , cast down at losing ; but above all , be not eager at winning , as mean soul be . and , indeed , with all one 's skill and advantage , winning be often problematical ; I have see a sheer ignoramus that know no more of play than of , blunder you out of five thousand pound in a few turn of the card . I have see a gentleman and he confederate play against another and he confederate . one never be secure in these case : and when one consider the time and labour spend , the genius , the anxiety , the outlay of money require , the multiplicity of bad debt that one meet with ( for dishonourable rascal be to be find at the play - table , as everywhere else in the world ) , I say , for my part , the profession be a bad one ; and , indeed , have scarcely ever meet a man who , in the end , profit by it . I be write now with the experience of a man of the world . at the time I speak of I be a lad , dazzl by the idea of wealth ,
, and respecte , certainly too much , my uncle 's superior age and station in life . there be no need to particularise here the little arrangement make between we ; the playman of the present day want no instruction , I take it , and the public have little interest in the matter . but simplicity be we secret . everything successful be simple . if , for instance , I wip the dust off a chair with my napkin , it be to show that the enemy be strong in diamonds ; if I push it , he have ace , king ; if I say , ' punch or wine , my ? ' heart be mean ; if ' wine or punch ? ' club . if I blow my nose , it be to indicate that there be another confederate employ by the adversary ; and then , I warrant you , some pretty trials of skill would take place . my , although so young , have a very great skill and cleverness with the card in every way ; and it be only from hearing , who come with he , yawn three time when the have the ace of trump , that I know we be to , as it be . my assume dulness be perfect ; and I use to make laugh with it , when I carry my little report to he at the - house outside the town where he give I rendezvous . these report , of course , be arrange between I and my uncle beforehand . I be instruct ( and it be always far the best way ) to tell as much truth as my story would possibly bear . when , for instance , he would ask I , ' what do the do of a morning ? ' ' he go to church regularly ' ( he be very religious ) , ' and after hear mass come home to breakfast . then he take a airing in he chariot till dinner , which be serve at noon . after dinner he write he letter , if he have any letter to write : but he have very little to do in this way . he letter be to the envoy , with whom he correspond , but who do not acknowledge he ; and be write in , of course I look over he shoulder . he generally write for money . he say he want it to bribe the secretary of the Treasury , in order to find out really where the alloyed ducat come from ; but , in fact , he want it to play of evening , when he make he party with , the lottery - contractor , the russian attach , two from the english embassy , my Lords and , who play a jeu d'enfer , and a few more . the same set meet every night at supper : there be seldom any lady ; those who come be chiefly french lady , member of the corps de ballet . he win often , but not always . be a very fine player . the , the , sometimes come , on which occasion the secretaries do not play . dine at the mission , but en petit comite , not on grand day of reception . Calsabigi , I think , be he confederate at play . he have win lately ; but the week before last he pledge he solitaire for four hundred ducat . ' ' do he and the english attach talk together in they own language ? ' ' yes ; he and the envoy speak yesterday for half - a - hour about the new danseuse and the american trouble : chiefly about the new danseuse . ' it will be see that the information I give be very minute and accurate , though not very important . but such as it be , it be carry to the ear of that famous hero and warrior the of ; and there be not a stranger who enter the capital but he action be similarly spied and related to the . as long as the play be confine to the young man of the different embassy , he do not care to prevent it ; nay , he encourage play at all the mission , know full well that a man in difficulty can be make to speak , and that a timely rouleau of Frederics would often get he a secret worth many thousand . he get some papers from the french house in this way : and I have no doubt that my would have supply he with information at a similar rate , have he chief not know the young nobleman 's character pretty well , and have ( as be usually the case ) the work of the mission perform by a steady roturier , while the young brilliant blood of the suite sport they embroidery at the ball , or shake they Mechlin ruffle over the green table at faro . I have see many score of these young sprig since , of these and they principal , and , mon ! what fool they be ! what dullard , what fribble , what addle - head simple coxcomb ! this be one of the lie of the world , this diplomacy ; or how could we suppose , that be the profession as difficult as the solemn red - box and tape - man would have we believe , they would invariably choose for it little pink - face boy from school , with no other claim than mamma 's title , and able at most to judge of a curricle , a new dance , or a neat boot ? when it become known , however , to the officer of
of the garrison that there be a faro - table in town , they be wild to be admit to the sport ; and , in spite of my entreaty to the contrary , my uncle be not averse to allow the young gentleman their fl , and once or twice clear a handsome sum out of they purse . it be in vain I tell he that I must carry the news to my captain , before whom he comrade would not fail to talk , and who would thus know of the intrigue even without my information . ' tell he , ' say my uncle . ' they will send you away , ' say I ; ' then what be to become of I ? ' ' make you mind easy , ' say the latter , with a smile ; ' you shall not be leave behind , I warrant you . go take a last look at you barrack , make you mind easy ; say a farewell to you friend in . the dear soul , how they will weep when they hear you be out of the country ; and , as sure as my name be , out of it you shall go ! ' ' but how , sir ? ' say I . ' Recollect of , ' say he knowingly . ''Ti you yourself teach I how . go get I one of my wig . open my despatch - box yonder , where the great secret of the lie ; put you hair back off you forehead ; clap I on this patch and these moustach , and now look in the glass ! ' ' the , ' say I , burst with laughter , and begin walk the room in he manner with he stiff knee . the next day , when I go to make my report to , I tell he of the young Prussian officer that have be of late gambling ; and he reply , as I expect , that the have determine to send the out of the country . ' he be a stingy curmudgeon ,' I reply ; 'I have have but three Frederics from he in two month , and I hope you will remember you promise to advance I ! ' ' why , three Frederics be too much for the news you have pick up , ' say the , sneer . ' it be not my fault that there have be no more ,' I reply . ' when be he to go , sir ? ' ' the day after to - morrow . you say he drive after breakfast and before dinner . when he come out to he carriage , a couple of gendarme will mount the box , and the coachman will get he order to move on . ' 'And he baggage , sir ? ' say I . 'Oh ! that will be send after he . I have a fancy to look into that red box which contain he papers , you say ; and at noon , after parade , shall be at the inn . you will not say a word to any one there regard the affair , and will wait for I at the 's room until my arrival . we must force that box . you be a clumsy hound , or you would have get the key long ago ! ' I beg the to remember I , and so take my leave of he . the next night I place a couple of pistol under the carriage seat ; and I think the adventur of the follow day be quite worthy of the honour of a separate chapter . I appear in a manner become my name and smile at parting upon , enable he to win a handsome sum with he faro - bank . at ten o'clock the next morning , the carriage of the draw up as usual at the door of he hotel ; and the , who be at he window , see the chariot arrive , come down the stair in he usual stately manner . ' where be my rascal Ambrose ? ' say he , look around and not find he servant to open the door . 'I will let down the step for you honour , ' say a gendarme , who be stand by the carriage ; and no sooner have the Chevalier enter , than the officer jump in after he , another mount the box by the coachman , and the latter begin to driving . ' good gracious ! ' say the , ' what be this ? ' ' you be go to drive to the frontier , ' say the gendarme , touch he hat . ' it be shameful -- infamous ! I insist upon be put down at the 's house ! ' 'I have order to gag you honour if you cry out , ' say the gendarme . ' all shall hear of this ! ' say the , in a fury . ' as you please , ' answer the officer , and then both relapse into silence . the silence be not break between and , through which place the pass as his be review he guard there , and the regiment of , , and . as the pass his , the raise he hat and say , ' Qu 'il ne descende pa : je lui souhaite un bon voyage . ' the acknowledge this courtesy by a profound bow . they have not get far beyond , when boom ! the alarm cannon begin to roar . ' it be a deserter , ' say the officer . ' be it possible ? ' say the , and sank back into he carriage again . hear the
the sound of the gun , the common people come out along the road with fowling -piece and pitchfork , in hope to catch the truant . the gendarme seem very anxious to be on the look - out for he too . the price of a deserter be fifty crown to those who bring he in . ' confess , sir , ' say the to the police officer in the carriage with he , ' that you long to be rid of I , from whom you can get nothing , and to be on the look - out for the deserter who may bring you in fifty crown ? why not tell the postilion to push on ? you may land I at the frontier and get back to you hunt all the sooner . ' the officer tell the postillion to get on ; but the way seem intolerably long to the . once or twice he think he hear the noise of horse gallop behind : he own horsis do not seem to go two mile a hour ; but they do go . the black and white barriers come in view at last , hard by , and opposite they the green and yellow of . the custom - house officer come out . 'I have no luggage , ' say the . ' the gentleman have nothing contraband , ' say the Prussian officer , grinning , and take they leave of they prisoner with much respect . the give they a Frederic apiece . ' gentlemen , ' say he , 'I wish you a good day . will you please to go to the house whence we set out this morning , and tell my man there to send on my baggage to the " " at ? ' then order fresh horse , the set off on he journey for that capital . I need not tell you that _i_ be the Chevalier . ' from the to , , , a l'Hotel des 3 Couronnes , a Dresde en . ' nephew Redmond ,-- this come to you by a sure hand , no other than of the , who be acquainted , as all will be directly , with we wonderful story . they only know half as yet ; they only know that a deserter go off in my clothes , and all be in admiration of you cleverness and valour . 'I confess that for two hour after you departure I lay in bed in no small trepidation , think whether he might have a fancy to send I to , for the freak of which we have both be guilty . but in that case I have take my precaution : I have write a statement of the case to my chief , the , with the full and true story how you have be set to spy upon I , how you turn out to be my very near relative , how you have be kidnap yourself into the service , and how we both have determined to effect you escape . the laugh would have be so much against the King , that he never would have da to lay a finger upon I . what would have say to such a act of tyranny ? but it be a lucky day , and everything have turn out to my wish . as I lay in my bed two and a half hour after you departure , in come you ex-Captain Potzdorff . " Redmont ! " say he , in he imperious high - Dutch way , " be you there ? " no answer . " the rogue be go out , " say he ; and straightway make for my red box where I keep my love - letter , my glass eye which I use to wear , my favourite lucky dice with which I throw the thirteen main at ; my two set of tooth , and my other private matters that you know of . ' he first try a bunch of key , but none of they would fit the little English lock . then my gentleman take out of he pocket a chisel and hammer , and fall to work like a professional burglar , actually burst open my little box ! ' now be my time to act . I advance towards he arm with a immense water - jug . I come noiselessly up to he just as he have break the box , and with all my might I deal he such a blow over the head as smash the water - jug to atom , and send my captain with a snort lifeless to the ground . I think I have kill he . ' then I ring all the bell in the house ; and shout and swear and scream , " thief !-- thief !--landlord!--murder!--fire ! " until the whole household come tumbl up the stair . " where be my servant ? " roar I . " who dare to rob I in open day ? look at the villain whom I find in the act of break my chest open ! send for the police , send for he Excellency the ! all shall know of this insult ! " ' " dear ! " say the landlord , " we see you go away three hour ago ! " ' " I ! " say I ; " why , man , I have be in bed all the morning . I be ill -- I have take physic -- I have not leave the house this morning ! where be that scoundrel Ambrise ? but , stop ! where be my clothes and wig ? " for I be stand before they in my chamber - gown and stocking , with my nightcap on . '
' " I have it -- I have it ! " say a little chambermaid : " be off in you honour 's dress . " ' " and my money -- my money ! " say I ; " where be my purse with forty - eight Frederic in it ? but we have one of the villain leave . officer , seize he ! " ' " it be the young von ! " say the landlord , more and more astonished . ' " what ! a gentleman break open my trunk with hammer and chisel -- impossible ! " ' be return to life by this time , with a swelling on he skull as big as a saucepan ; and the officer carry he off , and the judge who be send for dress a proce verbal of the matter , and I demand a copy of it , which I send forthwith to my ambassador . be keep a prisoner to my room the next day , and a judge , a general , and a host of lawyer , officer , and official , be set upon I to bully , perplex , threaten , and cajeal I . I say it be true you have tell I that you have be kidnap into the service , that I think you be release from it , and that I have you with the best recommendation . I appeal to my , who be bound to come to my aid ; and , to make a long story short , poor Potzdorff be now on he way to ; and he uncle , the elder Potzdorff , have bring I five hundred louis , with a humble request that I would leave , and hush up this painful matter . 'I shall be with you at the " " the day after you receive this . ask to dinner . do not spare you money -- you be my son . everybody in know you loving uncle , ' the . ' and by these wonderful circumstance I be once more free again : and I keep my resolution then make , never to fall more into the hand of any recruiter , and henceforth and for ever to be a gentleman . with this sum of money , and a good run of luck which ensue presently , we be enable to make no ungenteel figure . my uncle speedily join I at the inn at , where , under pretence of illness , I have keep quiet until he arrival ; and , as the be in particular good odour at the of ( have be a intimate acquaintance of the late monarch , the Elector , of , the most dissolute and agreeable of european prince ) , I be speedily in the very best society of the capital : where I may say that my own person and manners , and the singularity of the adventur in which i have be a hero , make I especially welcome . there be not a party of the nobility to which the two gentleman of be not invite . I have the honour of kissing hand and be graciously receive at by the Elector , and I write home to my mother such a flaming description of my prosperity , that the good soul very nearly forget she celestial welfare and she confessor , the , in order to come after I to Germany ; but travel be very difficult in those day , and so we be spare the arrival of the good lady . I think the soul of , my father , who be always so genteel in he turn of mind , must have rejoice to see the position which I now occupy ; all the woman anxious to receive I , all the man in a fury ; hobnobb with duke and count at supper , dancing minuet with high - well - bear baroness ( as they absurdly call themselves in ) , with lovely excellency , nay , with highness and transparency themselves : who could compete with the gallant yong irish noble ? who would suppose that seven week before I have be a common -- bah ! I be asham to think of it ! one of the pleasantest moments of my life be at a grand gala at the , where I have the honour of walk a polonaise with no other than the of , old 's own sister : old 's , whose hateful blue - baize livery I have worn , whose belt I have pipeclay , and whose abominable ration of small beer and sauerkraut I have swallow for five year . have win a english chariot from a italian gentleman at play , my uncle have we arm pain on the panel in a more splendid way than ever , surmount ( as we be descende from the ancient king ) with a irish crown of the most splendid size and gilding . I have this crown in lieu of a coronet engrave on a large amethyst signet - ring worn on my forefinger ; and I do not mind confess that I use to say the jewel have be in my family for several thousand year , have originally belong to my direct ancestor , he late , or . I warrant the legend of the Herald 's College be not more authentic than mine be . at first the and the gentleman at the hotel use to be rather shy of we two irish nobleman , and question we pretension to rank . the be a lord 's son , it be true , but he be likewise a grocer 's grandson ; and so I tell he at 's masquerade . my uncle , like a noble gentleman as he be , know the pedigree
pedigree of every considerable family in . he say it be the only knowledge befitt a gentleman ; and when we be not at card , we would pass hour over or , read the genealogy , learn the blazon , and make ourselves acquaint with the relationship of we class . ! the noble science be go into disrepute now : so be card , without which study and pastime I can hardly conceive how a man of honou can exist . my first affair of honour with a man of undoubted fashion be on the score of my nobility , with young of the embassy ; my uncle at the same time send a cartel to the , who decline to come . I shot in the leg , amidst the tear of joy of my uncle , who accompany I to the ground ; and I promise you that none of the young gentleman question the authenticity of my pedigree , or laugh at my irish cry again . what a delightful life do we now lead ! I know I be bear a gentleman , from the kindly way in which I take to the business : as business it certainly be . for though it seem all pleasure , yet I assure any low - breed person who may chance to read this , that we , they betters , have to work as well as they : though I do not rise until noon , yet have I not be up at play until long past midnight ? many a time have we come home to be as the troops be march out to early parade ; and oh ! it do my heart good to hear the bugles blow the reveille before daybreak , or to see the regiment march out to exercise , and think that I be no longer bound to that disgusting discipline , but restore to my natural station . I come into it at once , and as if I have never do anything else all my life . I have a gentleman to wait upon I , a french friseur to dress my hair of a morning ; I know the taste of chocolate as by intuition almost , and could distinguish between the right spanish and the french before I have be a week in my new position ; I have ring on all my finger , watch in both my fob , cane , trinket , and snuffbox of all sort , and each outvy the other in elegance . I have the finest natural taste for lace and china of any man I ever know ; I could judge a horse as well as any dealer in ; in shooting and athletic exercise I be unrivalled ; I could not spell , but I could speak german and french cleverly . I have at the least twelve suit of clothes ; three richly embroidered with gold , two lace with silver , a garnet - colou velvet pelisse line with sable ; one of french grey , silver - lace , and line with chinchilla . I have damask morning rob . I take lesson on the guitar , and sang french catch exquisitely . where , in fact , be there a more accomplished gentleman than ? all the luxury become my station could not , of course , be purchase without credit and money : to procure which , as we patrimony have be waste by we ancestor , and we be above the vulgarity and slow return and doubtful chance of trade , my uncle keep a faro - bank . we be in partnership with a , well know in all the court of , the , as skilful a player as ever be see ; but he turn out a sad knave latterly , and I have discover that he countship be a mere imposture . my uncle be maim , as I have say ; , like all impostor , be a coward ; it be my unrivalled skill with the sword , and readiness to use it , that maintain the reputation of the firm , so to speak , and silence many a timid gambler who might have hesitate to pay he losings . we always play on parole with anybody : any person , that be , of honou and noble lineage . we never press for we winnings or decline to receive promissory note in lieu of gold . but woe to the man who do not pay when the note become due ! be sure to wait upon he with he bill , and I promise you there be very few bad debt : on the contrary , gentleman be grateful to we for we forbearance , and we character for honou stand unimpeached . in later time , a vulgar national prejudice have choose to cast a slur upon the character of man of honour engage in the profession of play ; but I speak of the good old day in , before the cowardice of the french aristocracy ( in the shameful , which serve they right ) bring discredit and ruin upon we order . they cry fie now upon man engage in play ; but I should like to know how much more honourable THEIR modes of livelihood be than ours . the broker of the who bull and bear , and buy and sell , and dabble with lie loan , and trade on state secret , what be he but a gamester ? the merchant who deal in tea and tallow , be he any better ? he bale of dirty indigo be he dice , he card come up every year instead of every ten minute , and the sea be he green table . you call the profession of the law a honourable one , where
where a man will lie for any bidder ; lie down poverty for the sake of a fee from wealth , lie down right because wrong be in he brief . you call a doctor a honourable man , a swindling quack , who do not believe in the nostrum which he prescribe , and take you guinea for whispering in you ear that it be a fine morning ; and yet , forsooth , a gallant man who sit he down before the baize and challenge all comer , he money against theirs , he fortune against theirs , be proscribe by you modern moral world . it be a conspiracy of the middle class against gentleman : it be only the shopkeeper cant which be to go down nowadays . I say that play be a institution of chivalry : it have be wreck , along with other privileges of man of birth . when engage a man for six - and - thirty hour without leave the table , do you think he show no courage ? how have we have the best blood , and the brightest eye , too , of throbb round the table , as I and my uncle have hold the card and the bank against some terrible player , who be match some thousand out of he million against we all which be there on the baize ! when we engage that da , and win seven thousand louis in a single coup , have we lose , we should have be beggar the next day ; when he lose , he be only a village and a few hundred serf in pawn the worse . when , at , the of bring fourteen lacquey , each with four bag of florin , and challenge we bank to play against the seal bag , what do we ask ? ' , ' say we , 'we have but eighty thousand florin in bank , or two hundred thousand at three month . if you Highness 's bag do not contain more than eighty thousand , we will meet you . ' and we do , and after eleven hour ' play , in which we bank be at one time reduce to two hundred and three ducat , we win seventeen thousand florin of he . be this not something like boldness ? do this profession not require skill , and perseverance , and bravery ? Fou crown head look on at the game , and a Imperial princess , when I turn up the ace of heart and make , burst into tear . no man on the hold a higher position than then ; and when the of lost , he be pleased to say that we have win nobly ; and so we have , and spend nobly what we win . at this period my uncle , who attend mass every day regularly , always put ten florin into the box . wherever we go , the tavern - keeper make we more welcome than royal prince . we use to give away the broken meat from we supper and dinner to score of beggar who blesse we . every man who hold my horse or clean my boot get a ducat for he pain . I be , I may say , the author of we common good fortune , by put boldness into we play . be a faint - hear fellow , who be always cowardly when he begin to win . my uncle ( I speak with great respect of he ) be too much of a devotee , and too much of a martinet at play ever to win . he moral courage be unquestionable , but he daring be not sufficient . both of these my senior very soon acknowledge I to be they chief , and hence the style of splendour I have describe . I have mention the , who be affect by my success , and shall always think with gratitude of the protection with which that exalt lady honoure I . she be passionately fond of play , as indeed be the lady of almost all the in in those day , and hence would often arise no small trouble to we ; for the truth must be tell , that lady love to play , certainly , but not to . the point of honou be not understand by the charme sex ; and it be with the greatest difficulty , in we peregrination to the various court of , that we could keep they from the table , could get they money if they lose , or , if they pay , prevent they from use the most furious and extraordinary means of revenge . in those great day of we fortune , I calculate that we lose no less than fourteen thousand louis by such failure of payment . a princess of a ducal house give we paste instead of diamonds , which she have solemnly pledge to we ; another organise a robbery of the Crown jewel , and would have charge the theft upon we , but for 's caution , who have keep back a note of hand ' she high Transparency ' give we , and send it to he ambassador ; by which precaution I do believe we neck be save . a third lady of high ( but not princely ) rank , after I have win a considerable sum in diamonds and pearl from she , send she lover with a band of cut - throat to waylay I ; and it be only by extraordinary courage , skill , and good luck , that I escape from these villain , woun myself , but leave the chief aggressor dead on the ground : my sword enter he eye and break there , and the villain who be
be with he fle , see they chief fall . they might have finish I else , for I have no weapon of defence . thus it will be see that we life , for all its splendour , be one of extreme danger and difficulty , require high talents and courage for success ; and often , when we be in a full vein of success , we be suddenly drive from we ground on account of some freak of a reign prince , some intrigue of a disappointed mistress , or some quarrel with the police minister . if the latter personage be not bribe or win over , nothing be more common than for we to receive a sudden order of departure ; and so , perforce , we liv a wandering and desultory life . though the gain of such a life be , as I have say , very great , yet the expense be enormous . we appearance and retinue be too splendid for the narrow mind of , who be always cry out at my extravagance , though oblige to own that he own meanness and parsimony would never have achieve the great victory which my generosity have win . with all we success , we capital be not very great . that speech to the of , for instance , be a mere boast as far as the two hundred thousand florin at three month be concerned . we have no credit , and no money beyond that on we table , and should have be force to fly if he Highness have win and accept we bill . sometimes , too , we be hit very hard . a bank be a certainty , Almost ; but now and then a bad day will come ; and man who have the courage of good fortune , at least , ought to meet bad luck well : the former , believe I , be the harder task of the two . one of these evil chance befell we in the of 's territory , at . , who be always on the look - out for business , offer to make a bank at the inn where we put up , and where the officer of the 's cuirassier sup ; and some small play accordingly take place , and some wretch crown and tlouis change hand : I trust , rather to the advantage of these poor gentleman of the army , who be surely the poorest of all devils under the sun . but , as ill luck would have it , a couple of young student from the neighbouring of , who have come to Mannheim for they quarter 's revenue , and so have some hundred of dollar between they , be introduce to the table , and , have never play before , begin to win ( as be always the case ) . as ill luck would have it , too , they be tipsy , and against tipsiness I have often find the best calculation of play fail entirely . they play in the most perfectly insane way , and yet win always . every card they back turn up in they favour . they have win a hundred louis from we in ten minute ; and , see that be grow angry and the luck against we , I be for shutting up the bank for the night , say the play be only mean for a joke , and that now we have have enough . but , who have quarrell with I that day , be determined to proceed , and the upshot be , that the student play and win more ; then they lent money to the officer , who begin to win , too ; and in this ignoble way , in a tavern room thick with tobacco - smoke , across a deal table besmear with beer and liquor , and to a parcel of hungry subaltern and a pair of beardless student , three of the most skilful and renowne player in lose seventeen hundred louis ! I blush now when I think of it . it be like or fall before a petty fortress and a unknown hand ( as my friend write ) , and be , in fact , a most shameful defeat . be this the only defeat . when we poor conqueror have go off , bewilder with the treasure which fortune have flung in they way ( one of these student be call the , perhaps he who afterwards lose he head at ) , Pippi resum the quarrel of the morning , and some exceedingly high word pass between we . among other thing I recollect I knock he down with a stool , and be for flinge he out of the window ; but my uncle , who be cool , and have be keep with he usual solemnity , interpose between we , and a reconciliation take place , Pippi apologise and confess he have be wrong . I ought to have doubt , however , the sincerity of the treacherous italian ; indeed , as I never before believe a word that he say in he life , I know not why I be so foolish as to credit he now , and go to bed , leave the key of we cash - box with he . it contain , after we loss to the cuirassier , in bill and money , near upon L8000 sterling . Pippi insist that we reconciliation should be ratify over a bowl of hot wine , and I have no doubt put some soporific drug into the liquor ; for my uncle and I both sleep till very late the next morning , and wake with violent headach and fever : we do not quit we bed till noon . he
he have be go twelve hour , leave we treasury empty ; and behind he a sort of calculation , by which he strove to make out that this be he share of the profit , and that all the loss have be incur without he consent . thus , after eighteen month , we have to begin the world again . but be I cast down ? no . we wardrobe still be worth a very large sum of money ; for gentleman do not dress like parish - clerk in those day , and a person of fashion would often wear a suit of clothes and a set of ornament that would be a shop - boy 's fortune ; so , without repin for one single minute , or say a single angry word ( my uncle 's temper in this respect be admirable ) , or allow the secret of we loss to be know to a mortal soul , we pawn three - fourt of we jewel and clothes to Lowe the banker , and with the produce of the sale , and we private pocket - money , amount in all to something less than 800 louis , we take the field again . chapter x more run of I be not go to entertain my reader with a account of my professional career as a gamester , any more than I do with anecdote of my life as a military man . I might fill volume with tale of this kind be I so mind ; but at this rate , my recital would not be bring to a conclusion for year , and who know how soon I may be call upon to stop ? I have gout , rheumatism , gravel , and a disordered liver . I have two or three wound in my body , which break out every now and then , and give I intolerable pain , and a hundr more sign of break up . such be the effect of time , illness , and free - live , upon one of the strongest constitution and finest form the world ever see . ah ! I suffer from none of these ills in the year ' 66 , when there be no man in more gay in spirit , more splendo in personal accomplishment , than young . before the treachery of the , I have visit many of the best court of ; especially the smaller one , where play be patronise , and the professor of that science always welcome . among the ecclesiastical principality of the we be particularly well receive . I never know finer or gayer court than those of the of and , where there be more splendour and gaiety than at ; far more than in the wretch barrack - court of . the court of the Archduchess - Governess of the be , likewise , a royal place for we knights of the dice - box and gallant votary of fortune ; whereas in the or the beggarly swiss republic , it be impossible for a gentleman to gain a livelihood unmolested . after we mishap at , my uncle and I make for the of --- . the reader may find out the place easily enough ; but I do not choose to print at full the name of some illustrious person in whose society I then fall , and among whom I be make the sharer in a very strange and tragical adventure . there be no court in at which stranger be more welcome than at that of the noble of --- ; none where pleasure be more eagerly seek after , and more splendidly enjoy . the do not inhabit he capital of --- , but , imitat in every respect the ceremonial of the court of versaille , build himself a magnificent palace at a few leagu from he chief city , and round about he palace a superb aristocratic town , inhabit entirely by he nobles , and the officer of he sumptuous court . the people be rather hardly presse , to be sure , in order to keep up this splendour ; for he Highness 's dominion be small , and so he wisely live in a sort of awful retirement from they , seldom show he face in he capital , or see any countenance but those of he faithful domestic and officer . he palace and garden of be exactly on the french model . twice a week there be court reception , and grand court gala twice a month . there be the finest opera out of , and a ballet unrivalled in splendour ; on which he Highness , a great lover of music and dancing , expend prodigious sum . it may be because I be then yoing , but I think I never see such a assemblage of brilliant beauty as use to figure there on the stage of the theatre , in the grand mythological ballet which be then the mode , and in which you see in red - heel pumps and a periwig , and in patch and a hoop . they say the costume be incorrect , and have change it since ; but for my part , I have never see a Venus more lovely than the , who be the chief dancer , and find no fault with the attendant nymph , in they train , and lappet , and powder . these operas use to take place twice a week , after which some great officer of the court would have he evening , and he brilliant supper , and the dice - box rattle everywhere , and all the world play . I have see seventy play - table set out in the grand gallery of , besides the faro - bank ; where the himself would
would graciously come and play , and win or lose with a truly royal splendour . it be hither we come after the m misfortune . the nobility of the court be pleased to say we reputation have proceed we , and the two irish gentleman be make welcome . the very first night at we lose 740 of we 800 louis ; the next evening , at the 's table , I win they back , with 1300 more . you may be sure we allow no one to know how near we be to ruin on the first evening ; but , on the contrary , I endear every one to I by my gay manner of lose , and the Finance himself cash a note for 400 ducat , draw by I upon my steward of in the kingdom of ; which very note I win from he Excellency the next day , along with a considerable sum in ready cash . in that noble court everybody be a gambler . you would see the lacquey in the ducal ante-room at work with they dirty pack of card ; the coach and chair man play in the court , while they master be punt in the saloon above ; the very cook -maid and scullion , I be tell , have a bank , where one of they , a italian confectioner , make a handsome fortune : he purchase afterwards a marquisate , and he son have figure as one of the most fashionable of the illustrious foreigner in . the poor devils of soldier play away they pay when they get it , which be seldom ; and I do not believe there be a officer in any one of the guard regiment but have he card in he pouch , and no more forget he dice than he sword - knot . among such fellow it be diamond cut diamond . what you call fair play would have be a folly . the gentleman of would have be fool indeed to appear as pigeon in such a hawk 's nest . none but man of courage and genius could live and prosper in a society where every one be bold and clever ; and here my uncle and I hold we own : ay , and more than we own . he Highness the be a widower , or rather , since the death of the reign Duchess , have contract a morganatic marriage with a lady whom he have ennoble , and who consider it a compliment ( such be the morality of those day ) to be call the . he have be marry very young , and he son , the , may be say to have be the political sovereign of the State : for the reign be fonder of pleasure than of politics , and love to talk a great deal more with he grand huntsman , or the director of he opera , than with ministers and ambassador . the , whom I shall call , be of a very different character from he august father . he have make the of the and with great credit in the 's service , be of a stern character , seldom appear at , except when ceremony call he , but live almost alone in he wing of the palace , where he devote himself to the severest study , be a great astronomer and chemist . he share in the rage then common throughout , of hunting for the philosopher 's stone ; and my uncle often regret that he have no smattering of chemistry , like ( who call himself ) , , and other individual , who have obtain very great sum from by aid he in he search after the great secret . he amusement be hunt and review the troops ; but for he , and if he good - natured father have not have he aid , the army would have be play at card all day , and so it be well that the prudent prince be leave to govern . be fifty year of age , and he princess , the , be scarce three - and - twenty . they have be marry seven year , and in the first year of they union the princess have borne he a son and a daughter . the stern moral and manners , the dark and ungainly appearance , of the husband , be little likely to please the brilliant and fascinating young woman , who have be educate in the south ( she be connect with the ducal house of --- ) , who have pass two year at under the guardianship of the daughter of he most , and who be the life and soul of the of ---, the gayest of the gay , the idol of she august father - in - law , and , indeed , of the whole court . she be not beautiful , but charming ; not witty , but charme , too , in she conversation as in she person . she be extravagant beyond all measure ; so false , that you could not trust she ; but she very weakness be more win than the virtue of other woman , she selfishness more delightful than other 's generosity . I never know a woman whose fault make she so attractive . she use to ruin people , and yet they all love she . my old uncle have see she cheat at ombre , and let she win 400 louis without resisting in the least . she caprice with the officers and lady of she household be ceaseless : but they adore she . she be the only one of the reign family whom the people worship . she never go abroad but they follow she carriage with shout of acclamation :
: and , to be generous to they , she would borrow the last penny from one of she poor maid of honour , whom she would never pay . in the early day she husband be as much fascinate by she as all the rest of the world be ; but she caprice have cause frightful outbreak of temper on he part , and a estrangement which , though interrupt by almost mad return of love , be still general . I speak of she Highness with perfect candour and admiration , although I might be pardoned for judge she more severely , consider she opinion of myself . she say the elder be a finish old gentleman , and the younger one have the manners of a courier . the world have give a different opinion , and I can afford to chronicle this almost single sentence against I . besides , she have a reason for she dislike to I , which you shall hear . five year in the army , long experience of the world , have ere now dispell any of those romantic notion regard love with which I commence life ; and I have determine , as be proper with gentleman ( it be only you low people who marry for mere affection ) , to consolidate my fortune by marriage . in the course of we peregrination , my uncle and I have make several attempt to carry this object into effect ; but numerous disappointment have occur which be not worth mention here , and have prevent I hitherto from make such a match as I think be worthy of a man of my birth , ability , and personal appearance . lady be not in the habit of run away on the continent , as be the custom in ( a custom whereby many honourable gentleman of my country have much benefite ! ) ; guardian , and ceremony , and difficulty of all kind intervene ; true love be not allow to have its course , and poor woman can not give away they honest heart to the gallant fellows who have win they . now it be settlement that be ask for ; now it be my pedigree and title - deed that be not satisfactory : though i have a plan and rent - roll of the estate , and the genealogy of the family up to , or , most handsomely design on paper ; now it be a young lady who be whisk off to a convent just as she be ready to fall into my arm ; on another occasion , when a rich widow of the be about to make I lord of a noble estate in Flanders , come a order of the police which drive I out of Brussels at a hour 's notice , and consign my mourner to she chateau . but at --- I have a opportunity of play a great game : and have win it too , but for the dreadful catastrophe which upset my fortune . in the household of the Hereditary princess there be a lady nineteen year of age , and possessor of the greatest fortune in the whole duchy . the , such be she name , be daughter of a late and favourite of he Highness the of --- and he Duchess , who have do she the honour to be she sponsor at birth , and who , at the father 's death , have take she under they august guardianship and protection . at sixteen she be brotch from she castle , where , up to that period , she have be permit to reside , and have be place with the , as one of she Highness 's maid of honou . the aunt of the , who preside over she house during she minority , have foolishly allow she to contract a attachment for she cousin-german , a penniless sub-lieutenant in one of the 's foot regiment , who have flatter himself to be able to carry off this rich prize ; and if he have not be a blundering silly idiot indeed , with the advantage of see she constantly , of have no rival near he , and the intimacy attendant upon close kinsmanship , might easily , by a private marriage , have secure the young Countess and she possession . but he manage matter so foolishly , that he allow she to leave she retirement , to come to court for a year , and take she place in the 's household ; and then what do my young gentleman do , but appear at the 's levee one day , in he tarnished epaulet and threadbare coat , and make a application in due form to he Highness , as the young lady 's guardian , for the hand of the richest heiress in he dominion ! the weakness of the good - natured be such that , as the herself be quite as eager for the match as she silly cousin , he Highness might have be induce to allow the match , have not the be induce to interpose , and to procure from the a peremptory veto to the hope of the young man . the cause of this refusal be as yet unknown ; no other suitor for the young lady 's hand be mention , and the lover continue to correspond , hope that time might effect a change in he Highness 's resolution ; when , of a sudden , the lieutenant be draft into one of the regiment which the be in the habit of sell to the great power then at war ( this military commerce be a principal part of he Highness 's and other prince 's revenue in those day ) , and they connection be thus abruptly break off . it be
be strange that the should have take this part against a young lady who have be she favourite ; for , at first , with those romantic and sentimental notion which almost every woman have , she have somewhat encourage the and she penniless lover , but now suddenly turn against they ; and , from love the Countess , as she previously have do , pursue she with every manner of hatred which a woman know how to inflict : there be no end to the ingenuity of she torture , the venom of she tongue , the bitterness of she sarcasm and scorn . when I first come to at --, the young fellow there have nickname the young lady the , the stupid Countess . she be generally silent , handsome , but pale , stolid -looking , and awkward ; take no interest in the amusement of the place , and appear in the midst of the feast as glum as the death 's - head which , they say , the use to have at they table . it be rumoure that a young gentleman of french extraction , the , equerry to the , and present at when the be marry to he by proxy there , be the intended of the rich Countess ; but no official declaration of the kind be yet make , and there be whisper of a dark intrigue : which , subsequently , receive frightful confirmation . this be the grandson of a old general officer in the 's service , the . the 's father have quit at the expulsion of after the revocation of the edict of , and take service in --, where he die . the son succeed he , and , quite unlike most french gentleman of birth whom I have know , be a stern and cold , rigid in the performance of he duty , retire in he manners , mingl little with the court , and a close friend and favourite of ; whom he resemble in disposition . the he grandson be a true ; he have be bear in , where he father hold a diplomatic appointment in the 's service . he have mingle in the gay society of the most brilliant court in the world , and have endless story to tell we of the pleasure of the petite maison , of the secret of the aux Cerf , and of the wild gaiety of and he companion . he have be almost ruin at play , as he father have be before he ; for , out of the reach of the stern old in , both son and grandson have lead the most reckless of life . he come back from soon after the embassy which have be despatch thither on the occasion of the marriage of the princess , be receive sternly by he old grandfather ; who , however , pay he debt once more , and procure he the post in the 's household . the render himself a great favourite of he august master ; he bring with he the mode and the gaiety of ; he be the deviser of all the masquerade and ball , the recruiter of the ballet- dancer , and by far the most brilliant and splendid young gentleman of the court . after we have be a few week at , the old endeavoure to have we dismiss from the duchy ; but he voice be not strong enough to overcome that of the general public , and the especially stand we friend with he Highness when the question be debate before he . the 's love of play have not desert he . he be a regular frequenter of we bank , where he play for some time with pretty good luck ; and where , when he begin to lose , he pay with a regularity surprising to all those who know the smallness of he means , and the splendour of he appearance . she Highness the be also very fond of play . on half - a - dozen occasion when we hold a bank at , I could see she passion for the game . I could see -- that be , my cool - head old uncle could see -- much more . there be a intelligence between and this illustrious lady . ' if she Highness be not in love with the little , ' my uncle say to I one night after play , ' may I lose the sight of my last eye ! ' ' and what then , sir ? ' say I . ' what then ? ' say my uncle , look I hard in the face . ' be you so green as not to know what then ? you fortune be to be make , if you choose to back it now ; and we may have back the estate in two year , my boy . ' ' how be that ? ' ask I , still at a loss . my uncle drily say , ' get to play ; never mind he pay : take he note of hand . the more he owe the better ; but , above all , make he play . ' ' he can not pay a shilling , ' answer I . ' the will not discount he note at cent . per cent . ' ' so much the better . you shall see we will make use of they , ' answer the old gentleman . and I must confess that the plan he lay be a gallant , clever , and fair one . I be to make play ; in this there be no great difficulty . we have a intimacy together , for he be a good sportsman as well as myself , and we
we come to have a pretty considerable friendship for one another ; if he see a dice - box it be impossible to prevent he from handle it ; but he take to it as natural as a child do to sweetmeat . at first he win of I ; then he begin to lose ; then I play he money against some jewel that he bring : family trinket , he say , and indeed of considerable value . he beg I , however , not to dispose of they in the duchy , and I give and keep my word to he to this effect . from jewel he get to play upon promissory note ; and as they would not allow he to play at the table and in public upon credit , he be very glad to have a opportunity of indulge he favourite passion in private . I have have he for hour at my pavilion ( which I have fitte up in the manner , very splendid ) ratt the dice till it become time to go to he service at , and we would spend day after day in this manner . he bring I more jewel , -- a pearl necklace , a antique emerald breast ornament , and other trinket , as a set - off against these loss : for I need not say that I should not have play with he all this time have he be win ; but , after about a week , the luck set in against he , and he become my debtor in a prodigious sum . I do not care to mention the extent of it ; it be such as I never think the young man could pay . why , then , do I play for it ? why waste day in private play with a mere bankrupt , when business seemingly much more profitable be to be do elsewhere ? my reason I boldly confess . I want to win from , not he money , but he intend wife , the . who can say that I have not a right to use any stratagem in this matter of love ? or , why say love ? I want the wealth of the lady : I love she quite as much as do ; I love she quite as much as yonder blush virgin of seventeen do who marry a old lord of seventy . I follow the practice of the world in this ; have resolve that marriage should achieve my fortune . I use to make , after he loss , give I a friendly letter of acknowledgment to some such effect as this ,-- 'my ,-- I acknowledge to have lose to you this day at lansquenet [ or picquet , or hazard , as the case may be : I be master of he at any game that be play ] the sum of three hundred ducat , and shall hold it as a great kindness on you part if you will allow the debt to stand over until a future day , when you shall receive payment from you very grateful humble servant . ' with the jewel he bring I I also take the precaution ( but this be my uncle 's idea , and a very good one ) to have a sort of invoice , and a letter begge I to receive the trinket as so much part payment of a sum of money he owed I . when I have put he in such a position as I deem favourable to my intention , I speak to he candidly , and without any reserve , as one man of the world should speak to another . 'I will not , my dear fellow , ' say I , ' pay you so bad a compliment as to suppose that you expect we be to go on playing at this rate much longer , and that there be any satisfaction to I in possesse more or less sheet of paper bear you signature , and a series of note of hand which I know you never can pay . do not look fierce or angry , for you know be you master at the sword ; beside , I would not be such a fool as to fight a man who owe I so much money ; but hear calmly what I have to propose . ' you have be very confidential to I during we intimacy of the last month ; and I know all you personal affair completely . you have give you word of honour to you grandfather never to play upon parole , and you know how you have keep it , and that he will disinherit you if he hear the truth . Nay , suppose he die to - morrow , he estate be not sufficient to pay the sum in which you be indebt to I ; and , be you to yield I up all , you would be a beggar , and a bankrupt too . ' she Highness the deny you nothing . I shall not ask why ; but give I leave to say , I be aware of the fact when we begin to play together . ' ' will you be make baron - chamberlain , with the grand cordon of the order ? ' gas the poor fellow . ' the princess can do anything with the Duke . ' 'I shall have no objection , ' say I , 'to the yellow riband and the gold key ; though a gentleman of the house of care little for the title of the german nobility . but this be not what I want . my good Chevalier , you have hide no secret from I . you have tell I with what difficulty you have induce the
the to consent to the project of you union with the , whom you do not love . I know whom you love very well . ' ' ! ' say the discomfit Chevalier ; he could get out no more . the truth begin to daw upon he . ' you begin to understand , ' continue I . ' she Highness the princess ' ( I say this in a sarcastic way ) ' will not be very angry , believe I , if you break off you connection with the stupid Countess . I be no more a admirer of that lady than you be ; but I want she estate . I play you for that estate , and have win it ; and I will give you you bill and five thousand ducat on the day I be marry to it . ' ' the day _i_ be marry to the Countess , ' answer the Chevalier , think to have I , 'I will be able to raise money to pay you claim ten time over ' ( this be true , for the Countess 's property may have be value at near half a million of we money ) ; 'and then I will discharge my obligation to you . meanwhile , if you annoy I by threat , or insult I again as you have do , I will use that influence , which , as you say , I possess , and have you turn out of the duchy , as you be out of the last year . ' I ring the bell quite quietly . ' , ' say I to a tall negro fellow habite like a , that use to wait upon I , ' when you hear the bell ring a second time , you will take this packet to the of the court , this to he Excellency the , and this you will place in the hand of one of the equerry of he Highness the . wait in the ant - room , and do not go with the parcel until I ring again . ' the black fellow have retire , I turn to and say , ' , the first packet contain a letter from you to I , declare you solvency , and solemnly promise payment of the sum you owe I ; it be accompany by a document from myself ( for I expect some resistance on you part ) , state that my honour have be call in question , and begge that the paper may be laid before you august master he Highness . the second packet be for you grandfather , enclose the letter from you in which you state yourself to be he heir , and begge for a confirmation of the fact . the last parcel , for he Highness the , ' add I , look most sternly , ' contain the emerald , which he give to he princess , and which you pledge to I as a family jewel of you own . you influence with she Highness must be great indeed ,' I conclude , ' when you could extort from she such a jewel as that , and when you could make she , in order to pay you play - debt , give up a secret upon which both you head depend . ' ' ! ' say the , quite aghast with fury and terror , ' would you implicate the princess ? ' ' ,' I answer , with a sneer , 'no : I will say you steal the jewel . ' it be my belief he do , and that the unhappy and infatuated princess be never privy to the theft until long after it have be commit . how we come to know the history of the emerald be simple enough . as we want money ( for my occupation with cause we bank to be much neglect ) , my uncle have carry 's trinket to to pawn . the who lent upon they know the history of the stone in question ; and when he ask how she Highness come to part with it , my uncle very cleverly take up the story where he find it , say that the princess be very fond of play , that it be not always convenient to she to pay , and hence the emerald have come into we hand . he bring it wisely back with he to -- ; and , as regard the other jewel which the pawn to we , they be of no particular mark : no inquiry have ever be make about they to this day ; and I do not only not know then that they come from she Highness , but have only my conjecture upon the matter now . the unfortunate young gentleman must have have a cowardly spirit , when I charge he with the theft , not to make use of my two pistol that be lie by chance before he , and to send out of the world he accuser and he own ruin self . with such imprudence and miserable recklessness on he part and that of the unhappy lady who have forget herself for this poor villain , he must have know that discovery be inevitable . but it be write that this dreadful destiny should be accomplish : instead of end like a man , he now cower before I quite spirit - break , and , flinge himself down on the sofa , burst into tear , call wildly upon all the saint to help he : as if they could be interested in the fate of such a wretch as he ! I see that I have nothing to fear from he ; and , call back Zamor my black , say I would myself carry the
the parcel , which I return to my escritoire ; and , my point be thus gain , I act , as I always do , generously towards he . I say that , for security 's sake , I should send the emerald out of the country , but that I pledge my honour to restore it to the Duchess , without any pecuniary consideration , on the day when she should procure the sovereign 's consent to my union with the Countess . this will explain pretty clearly , I flatter myself , the game I be play ; and , though some rigid moralist may object to its propriety , I say that anything be fair in love , and that man so poor as myself can not afford to be squeamish about they means of get on in life . the great and rich be welcome , smile , up the grand staircase of the world ; the poor but aspire must clamber up the wall , or push and struggle up the back stair , or , , crawl through any of the conduits of the house , never mind how foul and narrow , that lead to the top . the unambitious sluggard pretend that the eminence be not worth attaining , decline altogether the struggle , and call himself a philosopher . I say he be a poor - spirited coward . what be life good for but for honour ? and that be so indispensable , that we should attain it anyhow . the manner to be adopt for 's retreat be propose by myself , and be arrange so as to consult the feeling of delicacy of both party . I make take the Countess aside , and say to she , ' madam , though I have never declare myself you admirer , you and the court have have sufficient proof of my regard for you ; and my demand would , I know , have be back by he Highness , you august guardian . I know the 's gracious wish be , that my attentions should be receive favourably ; but , as time have not appear to alter you attachment elsewhere , and as I have too much spirit to force a lady of you name and rank to be united to I against you will , the best plan be , that I should make you , for form 's sake , a proposal UNauthorise by he Highness : that you should reply , as I be sorry to think you heart dictate to you , in the negative : on which I also will formally withdraw from my pursuit of you , state that , after a refusal , nothing , not even the 's desire , should induce I to persist in my suit . ' the Countess almost weep at hear these word from , and tear come into she eye , he say , as she take he hand for the first time , and thanke he for the delicacy of the proposal . she little know that the be incapable of that sort of delicacy , and that the graceful manner in which he withdraw he address be of my invention . as soon as he withdraw , it become my business to step forward ; but cautiously and gently , so as not to alarm the lady , and yet firmly , so as to convince she of the hopelessness of she design of uniting herself with she shabby lover , the sub-lieutenant . the be good enough to perform this necessary part of the plan in my favour , and solemnly to warn the , that , though have retire from pay he address , he Highness she guardian would still marry she as he think fit , and that she must for ever forget she out - at - elbowed adorer . in fact , I can not conceive how such a shabby rogue as that could ever have have the audacity to propose for she : he birth be certainly good ; but what other qualifications have he ? when the withdraw , number of other suitor , you may be sure , present themselves ; and amongst these you very humble servant , the cadet of . there be a carrousel , or tournament , hold at this period , in imitation of the antique meeting of chivalry , in which the chevalier til at each other , or at the ring ; and on this occasion I be habite in a splendid Roman dress ( viz. , a silver helmet , a flow periwig , a cuirass of gilt leather richly embroider , a light blue velvet mantle , and crimson morocco half - boot ) : and in this habit I ride my bay horse , carry off three ring , and win the prize over all the 's gentry , and the nobility of surround country who have come to the show . a wreath of gild laurel be to be the prize of the victor , and it be to be award by the lady he select . so I ride up to the gallery where the be seat behind the Hereditary princess , and , call she name loudly , yet gracefully , beg to be allow to be crown by she , and thus proclaim myself to the face of all , as it be , she suitor . she turn very pale , and the princess red , I observe ; but the end by crown I : after which , put spur into my horse , I gallop round the ring , salut he Highness the at the opposite end , and perform the most wonderful exercise with my bay . my success do not , as you may imagine , increase my popularity with the young gentry .
. they call I adventurer , bully , dice - loader , impostor , and a hundred pretty name ; but I have a way of silencing these gentry . I take the , the richest and bravest of the young man who seem to have a hankering for the , and publicly insult he at the ridotto ; flinge my card into he face . the next day i ride thirty - five mile into the territory of the of ----, and meet , and pass my sword twice through he body ; then ride back with my second , the , and present myself at the Duchess 's whist that even . be very unwilling to accompany I at first ; but I insist upon he support , and that he should countenance my quarrel . directly after pay my homage to she Highness , I go up to the , and make she a mark and low obeisance , gaze at she steadily in the face until she grow crimson red ; and then star round at every man who form she circle , until , , I star they all away . I instruct to say , everywhere , that the Countess be madly in love with I ; which commission , along with many other of mine , the poor devil be oblige to perform . he make rather a , as the french say , act the pioneer for I , praise I everywhere , accompany I always ! he who have be the pink of the mode until my arrival ; he who think he pedigree of beggarly Barons of be superior to the race of great irish king from which I descende ; who have sneer at I a hundred time as a spadassin , a deserter , and have call I a vulgar irish upstart . now I have my revenge of the gentleman , and take it too . I use to call he , in the choicest society , by he Christian name of Maxime . I would say , ' Bon jour , Maxime ; comment va - ? ' in the princess 's hearing , and could see he bite he lip for fury and vexation . but I have he under my thumb , and she Highness too -- I , poor private of 's regiment . and this be a proof of what genius and perseverance can do , and should act as a warning to great people never to have sECRETs -- if they can help it . I know the princess hate I ; but what do I care ? she know I know all : and indeed , I believe , so strong be she prejudice against I , that she think I be a indelicate villain , capable of betraie a lady , which I would scorn to do ; so that she tremble before I as a child before its schoolmaster . she would , in she woman 's way , too , make all sort of joke and sneer at I on reception day ; ask about my palace in , and the king my ancestor , and whether , when I be a private in 's foot , my royal relative have interpose to rescue I , and whether the cane be smartly administer there , -- anything to mortify I . but , heaven bless you ! I can make allowances for people , and use to laugh in she face . whilst she jibe and jeer be continue , it be my pleasure to look at poor Magny and see how he bear they . the poor devil be trembl lest I should break out under the princess 's sarcasm and tell all ; but my revenge be , when the princess attack I , to say something bitter to he , -- to pass it on , as boy do at school . and that be the thing which use to make she feel . she would wince just as much when I attack as if I have be say anything rude to herself . and , though she hate I , she use to beg my pardon in private ; and though she pride would often get the better of she , yet she prudence oblige this magnificent princess to humble herself to the poor penniless irish boy . as soon as have formally withdrawn from the , the princess take the young lady into favour again , and pretend to be very fond of she . to do they justice , I do not know which of the two dislike I most , -- the princess , who be all eagerness , and fire , and coquetry ; or the Countess , who be all state and splendour . the latter , especially , pretend to be disgust by I : and yet , after all , I have pleas she betters ; be once one of the handsomest man in , and would defy any heyduc of the to measure a chest or a leg with I : but I do not care for any of she silly prejudice , and determined to win she and wear she in spite of herself . be it on account of she personal charms or quality ? no . she be quite white , thin , short - sighted , tall , and awkward , and my taste be quite the contrary ; and as for she mind , no wonder that a poor creature who have a hankering after a wretched ragged ensign could never appreciate I . it be she estate i make love to ; as for herself , it would be a reflection on my taste as a man of fashion to own that I like she . in the my hope of obtain the hand of one of the richest heiress
heiress in be now , as far as all human probability go , and as far as my own merit and prudence could secure my fortune , pretty certain of completion . I be admit whenever I present myself at the princess 's apartment , and have as frequent opportunity as I desire of see the there . I can not say that she receive I with any particular favour ; the silly young creature 's affection were , as I have say , engage ignobly elsewhere ; and , however captivat my own person and manners may have be , it be not to be expect that she should all of a sudden forget she lover for the sake of the young irish gentleman who be pay he address to she . but such little rebuff as I get were far from discourage I . I have very powerful friend , who be to aid I in my undertaking ; and know that , sooner or later , the victory must be mine . in fact , I only wait my time to press my suit . who could tell the dreadful stroke of fortune which be impend over my illustrious protectress , and which be to involve I partially in she ruin ? all thing seem for a while quite prosperous to my wish ; and in spite of the 's disinclination , it be much easier to bring she to she sense than , perhaps , may be suppose in a silly constitutional country like , where people be not bring up with those wholesome sentiment of obedience to which be customary in at the time when I be a young man . I have state how , through , I have the princess , as it be , at my foot . she Highness have only to press the match upon the old , over whom she influence be unbounded , and to secure the goodwill of the Countess of , ( which be the romantic title of he Highness 's morganatic spouse ) , and the easy old man would give a order for the marriage : which he ward would perforce obey . be , too , from she position , extremely anxious to oblige the ; who might be call upon any day to occupy the throne . the old be totter , apoplectic , and exceedingly fond of good living . when he be go , he relict would find the patronage of the most necessary to she . hence there be a close mutual understanding between the two lady ; and the world say that the be already indebt to the favourite for help on various occasion . she Highness have obtain , through the Countess , several large grant of money for the payment of she multifarious debt ; and she be now good enough to exert she gracious influence over in order to obtain for I the object so near my heart . it be not to be suppose that my end be to be obtain without continual unwillingness and refusal on 's part ; but I push my point resolutely , and have means in my hand of overcome the stubbornness of that feeble young gentleman . also , I may say , without vanity , that if the high and mighty princess detest I , the Countess ( though she be of extremely low origin , it be say ) have better taste and admire I . she often do we the honour to go partner with we in one of we faro - bank , and declare that I be the handsomest man in the duchy . all I be require to prove be my nobility , and I get at na such a pedigree as would satisfy the most greedy in that way . in fact , what have a man descende from the and the Brady to fear before any Von in ? by way of make assurance doubly sure , I promise ten thousand louis on the day of my marriage , and she know that as a play -man I have never fail in my word : and I vow , that have I pay fifty per cent . for it , I would have get the money . thus by my talents , honesty , and acuteness , I have , consider I be a poor patronless outcast , raise for myself very powerful protector . even he Highness the be favourably inclin to I ; for , he favourite charger fall ill of the stagger , I give he a ball such as my uncle use to administer , and cure the horse ; after which he Highness be pleased to notice I frequently . he invite I to he hunting and shoot party , where I show myself to be a good sportsman ; and once or twice he condescende to talk to I about my prospect in life , lament that I have take to gambl , and that I have not adopt a more regular means of advancement . ' , ' say I , ' if you will allow I to speak frankly to you Highness , play with I be only a means to a end . where should I have be without it ? a private still in 's grenadier . I come of a race which give prince to my country ; but persecution have deprive they of they vast possession . my uncle 's adherence to he ancient faith drive he from we country . I too resolve to seek advancement in the military service ; but the insolence and ill - treatment which I receive at the hand of the be not bearable by a high - born gentleman , and I fle they service . it be only to fall into another bondage to all appearance still more hopeless ; when
when my good star send a preserver to I in my uncle , and my spirit and gallantry enable I to take advantage of the means of escape afforde I . since then we have liv , I do not disguise it , by play ; but who can say I have do he a wrong ? yet , if I could find myself in a honourable post , and with a assure maintenance , I would never , except for amusement , such as every gentleman must have , touch a card again . I beseech you Highness to inquire of you resident at if I do not on every occasion act as a gallant soldier . I feel that I have talents of a higher order , and should be proud to have occasion to exert they ; if , as I do not doubt , my fortune shall bring they into play . ' the candour of this statement struck he Highness greatly , and impress he in my favour , and he be pleased to say that he believe I , and would be glad to stand my friend . have thus the two Dukes , the Duchess , and the reign favourite enlist on my side , the chance certainly be that I should carry off the great prize ; and I ought , accord to all common calculation , to have be a of the at this present write , but that my ill luck pursue I in a matter in which I be not the least to blame , -- the unhappy Duchess 's attachment to the weak , silly , cowardly Frenchman . the display of this love be painful to witness , as its end be frightful to think off . the princess make no disguise of it . if speak a word to a lady of she household , she would be jealous , and attack with all the fury of she tongue the unlucky offender . she would send he a half - dozen of note in the day : at he arrival to join she circle or the court which she hold , she would brighten up , so that all might perceive . it be a wonder that she husband have not long ere this be make aware of she faithlessness ; but the be himself of so high and stern a nature that he could not believe in she stooping so far from she rank as to forget she virtue : and I have hear say , that when hint be give to he of the evident partiality which the princess show for the equerry , he answer be a stern command never more to be trouble on the subject . ' the princess be light - minded ,' he say ; ' she be bring up at a frivolous court ; but she folly go not beyond coquetry : crime be impossible ; she have she birth , and my name , and she child , to defend she . ' and he would ride off to he military inspection and be absent for week , or retire to he suite of apartment , and remain close there whole day ; only appear to make a bow at she Highness 's , or to give she he hand at the gala , where ceremony require that he should appear . he be a man of vulgar taste , and I have see he in the private garden , with he great ungainly figure , run races , or play at ball with he little son and daughter , whom he would find a dozen pretext daily for visit . the serene child be brotch to they mother every morning at she toilette ; but she receive they very indifferently : except on one occasion , when the young get he little uniform as colonel of hussar , be present with a regiment by he godfather the . then , for a day or two , the be charme with the little boy ; but she grow tired of he speedily , as a child do of a toy . I remember one day , in the morning circle , some of the princess 's rouge come off on the arm of she son 's little white military jacket ; on which she slap the poor child 's face , and send he sobb away . oh , the woe that have be work by woman in this world ! the misery into which man have lightly step with smile face ; often not even with the excuse of passion , but from mere foppery , vanity , and bravado ! man play with these dreadful two - ed tool , as if no harm could come to they . I , who have see more of life than most man , if I have a son , would go on my knee to he and beg he to avoid woman , who be worse than poison . once intrigue , and you whole life be endangere : you never know when the evil may fall upon you ; and the woe of whole family , and the ruin of innocent people perfectly dear to you , may be cause by a moment of you folly . when I see how entirely lose the unlucky seem to be , in spite of ail the claim I have against he , I urge he to fly . he have room in the palace , in the garret over the princess 's quarter ( the building be a huge one , and accommodate almost a city of noble retainer of the family ) ; but the infatuate young fool would not budge , although he have not even the excuse of love for staying . ' how she squint ,' he would say of the princess , ' and
and how crook she be ! she think no one can perceive she deformity . she write I verse out of or , and fancie I believe they to be original . Bah ! they be no more she own than she hair be ! ' it be in this way that the wretched lad be dance over the ruin that be yawn under he . I do believe that he chief pleasure in make love to the princess be , that he might write about he victory to he friend of the at , where he longe to be consider as a wit and a . see the young man 's recklessness , and the danger of he position , I become very anxious that my little scheme should be bring to a satisfactory end , and press he warmly on the matter . my solicitation with he be , I need not say , from the nature of the connection between we , generally pretty successful ; and , in fact , the poor fellow could refuse I nothing : as I use often laughingly to say to he , very little to he liking . but I use more than threat , or the legitimate influence I have over he . I use delicacy and generosity ; as a proof of which , I may mention that I promise to give back to the princess the family emerald , which I mention in the last chapter that I have win from she unprincipled admirer at play . this be do by my uncle 's consent , and be one of the usual act of prudence and foresight which distinguish that clever man . " press the matter now , Redmond my boy , " he would urge . " this affair between she Highness and must end ill for both of they , and that soon ; and where will be you chance to win the Countess then ? now be you time ! win she and wear she before the month be over , and we will give up the punting business , and go live like noblemen at we castle in . get rid of that emerald , too , " he add : " should a accident happen , it will be a ugly deposit find in we hand . " this it be that make I agree to forego the possession of the trinket ; which , I must confess , I be loth to part with . it be lucky for we both that I do : as you shall presently hear . meanwhile , then , I urge : I myself speak strongly to the Countess of , who promise formally to back my claim with he Highness the reign ; and be instruct to induce the to make a similar application to the old sovereign in my behalf . it be done . the two lady urge the ; he Highness ( at a supper of oyster and champagne ) be bring to consent , and she Highness the do I the honour of notify personally to the that it be the 's will that she should marry the young irish nobleman , the . the notification be make in my presence ; and though the young Countess say ' never ! ' and fall down in a swoon at she lady 's foot , I be , you may be sure , entirely unconcerned at this little display of mawkish sensibility , and feel , indeed , now that my prize be secure . that evening I give the the emerald , which he promise to restore to the princess ; and now the only difficulty in my way lay with the , of whom he father , he wife , and the favourite , be alike afraid . he might not be dispose to allow the richest heiress in he duchy to be carry off by a noble , though not a wealthy foreigner . time be necessary in order to break the matter to . the princess must find he at some moment of good - humour . he have day of infatuation still , when he could refuse he wife nothing ; and we plan be to wait for one of these , or for any other chance which might occur . but it be destin that the princess should never see she husband at she foot , as often as he have be . Fate be prepare a terrible end to she folly , and my own hope . in spite of he solemn promise to I , never restore the emerald to the . he have hear , in casual intercourse with I , that my uncle and I have be beholden to , the banker of , who have give we a good price for we valuable ; and the infatuated young man take a pretext to go thither , and offer the jewel for pawn . Mose Lowe recognise the emerald at once , give Magny the sum the latter demand , which the lose presently at play : never , you may be sure , acquaint we with the means by which he have make himself master of so much capital . we , for we part , suppose that he have be supply by he usual banker , the princess : and many rouleaux of he gold piece find they way into we treasury , when at the gala , at we own lodging , or at the apartment of ( who on these occasion do we the honour to go halve with we ) we hold we bank of faro . thus 's money be very soon gone . but though the hold he jewel , of thrice the value no doubt of the sum he have lent upon it , that be not all the profit which he intend
intend to have from he unhappy creditor ; over whom he begin speedily to exercise he authority . he Hebrew connections at -- , money - broker , banker , horse - dealer , about the court there , must have tell they Heidelberg brother what 's relation with the princess be ; and the rascal determined to take advantage of these , and to press to the utmost both victim . my uncle and I be , meanwhile , swim upon the high tide of fortune , prosper with we card , and with the still greater matrimonial game which we be play ; and we be quite unaware of the mine under we foot . before a month be pass , the begin to pester . he present himself at --, and ask for further interest-hush - money ; otherwise he must sell the emerald . get money for he ; the princess again befriend she dastardly lover . the success of the first demand only render the second more exorbitant . I know not how much money be extort and pay on this unluckly emerald : but it be the cause of the ruin of we all . one night we be keep we table as usual at the Countess of 's , and be in cash somehow , keep draw out rouleau after rouleau , and play with he common ill success . in the middle of the play a note be brotch into he , which he read , and turn very pale on peruse ; but the luck be against he , and look up rather anxiously at the clock , he wait for a few more turn of the card , when have , I suppose , lose he last rouleau , he get up with a wild oath that scare some of the polite company assemble , and leave the room . a great trampling of horse be hear without ; but we be too much engage with we business to heed the noise , and continue we play . presently some one come into the play - room and say to the Countess , ' here be a strange story ! a have be murder in the . be arrest when he go out of the room . ' all the party break up on hear this strange news , and we shut up we bank for the night . have be sit by I during the play ( my uncle dealt and I pay and take the money ) , and , look under the chair , there be a crumple paper , which I take up and read . it be that which have be deliver to he , and run thus :- ' if you have do it , take the orderly 's horse who bring this . it be the best of my stable . there be a hundred louis in each holster , and the pistol be load . either course lie open to you if you know what i mean . in a quarter of a hour I shall know we fate -- whether I be to be dishonoure and survive you , whether you be guilty and a coward , or whether you be still worthy of the name of . ' this be in the handwriting of the old ; and my uncle and I , as we walk home at night , have make and divide with the Countess Liliengarten no inconsiderable profit that night , feel we triumph greatly dash by the perusal of the letter . ' have , ' we ask , ' rob the , or have he intrigue be discover ? ' in either case , my claim on the Countess be likely to meet with serious drawback : and I begin to feel that my ' great card ' be play and perhaps lose . well , it be lose : though I say , to this day , it be well and gallantly play . after supper ( which we never for fear of consequence take during play ) I become so agitated in my mind as to what be occur that I determine to sally out about midnight into the town , and inquire what be the real motive of 's apprehension . a sentry be at the door , and signify to I that I and my uncle be under arrest . we be leave in we quarter for six week , so closely watch that escape be impossible , have we desire it ; but , as innocent man , we have nothing to fear . we course of life be open to all , and we desire and court inquiry . great and tragical event happen during those six week ; of which , though we hear the outline , as all do , when we be release from we captivity , we be yet far from understand all the particular , which be not much know to I for many year after . here they be , as they be tell I by the lady , who of all the world perhaps be most likely to know they . but the narrative have best form the contents of another chapter . of of ---- more than twenty year after the event describe in the past chapter , I be walk with my in the at . it be in the year 1790 ; the emigration from have already commenced , the old count and marquise be thronge to we shore : not starve and miserable , as one see they a few year afterwards , but unmolested as yet , and bring with they some token of they national splendour . I be walk with , who , proverbially jealous and always anxious to annoy I , spy out a foreign lady who be evidently remark I , and of course
course ask who be the hideous fat who be leer at I so ? I know she not in the least . I feel I have see the lady 's face somewhere ( it be now , as my wife say , enormously fat and bloate ) ; but I do not recognise in the bearer of that face one who have be among the most beautiful woman in in she day . it be no other than , the mistress , or as some say the morganatic wife , of the old of ---- , 's father . she have leave ---- a few month after the elder 's demise , have go to , as I hear , where some unprincipled adventurer have marry she for she money ; but , however , have always retain she quasi-royal title , and pretend , amidst the great laughter of the who frequent she house , to the honour and ceremonial of a sovereign 's widow . she have a throne erect in she state - room , and be style by she servants and those who wish to pay court to she , or borrow money from she , ' . ' report say she drank rather copiously -- certainly she face bear every mark of that habit , and have lose the rosy , frank , good - humoured beauty which have charme the sovereign who have ennoble she . although she do not address I in the circle at , I be at this period as well know as the of , and she have no difficulty in find my house in ; whither a note be next morning despatch to I . ' a old friend of ,' it state ( in extremely bad french ) , 'is anxious to see the again and to talk over old happy time . ( can it be that have forgote she ? ) will be at she house in all the morning , look for one who would never have pass she by twenty year ago . ' Rosina of it be indeed -- such a full - blow I have seldom see . I find she in a decent first - floor in ( the poor soul fall much lower afterwards ) drink tea , which have somehow a very strong smell of brandy in it ; and after salutation , which would be more tedious to recound than they be to perform , and after further straggling conversation , she give I briefly the follow narrative of the event in ----, which I may well entitle the ' princess 's . ' ' you remember , the . he be of Dutch extraction , and , what be more , of a family of . although everybody be aware of this blot in he scutcheon , he be mortally angry if ever he origin be suspect ; and make up for he father 's error by outrageous profession of religion , and the most austere practice of devotion . he visit church every morning , confess once a week , and hat and as much as a inquisitor could do . he never lose a opportunity of prove he sincerity , by persecut one or the other whenever occasion fell in he way . ' he hate the princess mortally ; for she Highness in some whim have insult he with he origin , cause pork to be remove from before he at table , or injure he in some such silly way ; and he have a violent animosity to the old , both in he capacity of , and because the latter in some haughty mood have publicly turn he back upon he as a sharper and a spy . Perpetual quarrel be take place between they in council ; where it be only the presence of he august master that restrain the from publicly and frequently express the contempt which he feel for the officer of police . ' thus have hatre as one reason for ruin the princess , and it be my belief he have a stronger motive still -- interest . you remember whom the married , after the death of he first wife ?-- a princess of the house of ---- . build he fine palace two year after , and , as I feel convinced , with the money which be pay to he by the ---- family for forward the match . ' to go to , and report to he Highness a case which everybody know , be not by any 's desire . he know the man would be ruin for ever in the 's estimation who carry he intelligence so disastrous . he aim , therefore , be to leave the matter to explain itself to he Highness ; and , when the time be ripe , he cast about for a means of carry he point . he have spy in the house of the elder and younger Magny ; but this you know , of course , from you experience of continental custom . we have all spy over each other . you black ( , I think , be he name ) use to give I report every morning ; and I use to entertain the dear old with story of you and you uncle practise picquet and dice in the morning , and with you quarrel and intrigue . we levy similar contribution on everybody in ---- , to amuse the dear old man . 's valet use to report both to I and . 'i knew of the fact of the emerald be in pawn ; and it be out of my exchequer that the poor princess draw the fund which be spend upon the odious Lowe , and the still more worthless young . how the princess could trust the latter as she persist in do , be beyond
beyond my comprehension ; but there be no infatuation like that of a woman in love : and you will remark , my dear , that we sex generally fix upon a bad man . ' ' not always , madam ,' I interpose ; ' you humble servant have create many such attachment . ' 'I do not see that that affect the truth of the proposition , ' say the old lady drily , and continue she narrative . ' the who hold the emerald have have many dealings with the princess , and at last be offer a bribe of such magnitude , that he determine to give up the pledge . he commit the inconceivable imprudence of bring the emerald with he to ----, and wait on , who be provide by the princess with money to redeem the pledge , and be actually ready to pay it . ' ' they interview take place in 's own apartment , when he valet overheard every word of they conversation . the young man , who be always utterly careless of money when it be in he possession , be so easy in offer it , that Lowe rise in he demand , and have the conscience to ask double the sum for which he have previously stipulate . ' at this the lose all patience , fall on the wretch and be for kill he ; when the opportune valet rush in and save he . the man have hear every word of the conversation between the disputant , and the run fly with terror into he arm ; and , a quick and passionate , but not a violent man , bade the servant lead the villain downstairs , and think no more of he . ' perhaps he be not sorry to be rid of he , and to have in he possession a large sum of money , four thousand ducat , with which he could tempt fortune once more ; as you know he do at you table that night . ' ' you ladyship go halve , madam , ' say I ; ' and you know how little I be the better for my winnings . ' ' the man conduct the trembling Israelite out of the palace , and no sooner have see he lod at the house of one of he breth , where he be accustom to put up , than he go away to the office of he Excellency the of , and narrate every word of the conversation which have take place between the and he master . ' express the greatest satisfaction at he spy 's prudence and fidelity . he give he a purse of twenty ducat , and promise to provide for he handsomely : as great man do sometimes promise to reward they instrument ; but you , , know how seldom those promise be keep . " now , go and find out , " say , " at what time the Israelite propose to return home again , or whether he will repent and take the money . " the man go on this errand . meanwhile , to make matter sure , arrange a play - party at my house , invite you thither with you bank , as you may remember ; and find means , at the same time , to let know that there be to be faro at 's . it be a invitation the poor fellow never neglect . ' I remember the fact , and listen on , amaze at the artifice of the infernal of Police . ' the spy come back from he message to , and state that he have make inquirie among the servants of the house where the banker lod , and that it be the latter 's intention to leave ---- that afternoon . he travel by himself , ride a old horse , exceedingly humbly attire , after the manner of he people . ' " , " say the , clapp the pleased spy upon the shoulder , " I be more and more pleased with you . I have be think , since you leave I , of you intelligence , and the faithful manner in which you have serve I ; and shall soon find a occasion to place you accord to you merit . which way do this Israelitish scoundrel take ? " ' " he go to r ---- to - night . " ' " and must pass by the . be you a man of courage , ? " ' " will you Excellency try I ? " say the man , he eye glitter : " I serve through the 's , and be never kny to fail there . " ' " now , listen . the emerald must be take from that : in the very keep it the scoundrel have commit high treason . to the man who bring I that emerald I swear I will give five hundred louis . you understand why it be necessary that it should be restore to she Highness . I need say no more . " ' " you shall have it to - night , sir , " say the man . " of course you Excellency will hold I harmless in case of accident . " ' " ! " answer the ; " I will pay you half the money beforehand ; such be my confidence in you . 's impossible if you take you measure properly . there be four leagu of wood ; the ride slowly . it will be night before he can reach , let we say , the old powder - mill in the wood . what be to prevent you from put a rope across the road , and deal with he there ? be back with I this
this evening at supper . if you meet any of the patrol , say ' fox be loose , '-- that be the word for to - night . they will let you pass they without question . " ' the man go off quite charme with he commission ; and when be lose he money at we faro - table , he servant waylay the at the spot name the - , in the . the 's horse stumble over a rope which have be place across the road ; and , as the rider fell groan to the ground , rush out on he , mask , and pistol in hand , and demand he money . he have no wish to kill the , I believe , unless he resistance should render extreme measure necessary . ' do he commit any such murder ; for , as the yell roar for mercy , and he assailant menace he with a pistol , a squad of patrol come up , and laid hold of the robber and the wounded man . ' swore a oath . " you have come too soon , " say he to the sergeant of the police . " fox be loose . " " some be catch , " say the sergeant , quite unconcerned ; and bound the fellow 's hand with the rope which he have stretch across the road to entrap the . he be place behind a policeman on a horse ; be similarly accommodate , and the party thus come back into the town as the night fell . ' they be take forthwith to the police quarter ; and , as the chief happen to be there , they be examine by he Excellency in person . both be rigorously search ; the 's papers and case take from he : the jewel be find in a private pocket . as for the spy , the , look at he angrily , say , " why , this be the servant of the , one of she Highness 's equerry ! " and without hear a word in exculpation from the poor frightened wretch , order he into close confinement . ' call for he horse , he then ride to the 's apartment at the palace , and ask for a instant audience . when admit , he produce the emerald . " this jewel , " say he , " have be find on the person of a , who have be here repeatedly of late , and have have many dealings with she Highness 's equerry , the . this afternoon the 's servant come from he master 's lodging , accompany by the ; be hear to make inquirie as to the route the man intend to take on he way homewards ; follow he , or proceed he rather , and be find in the act of rifl he victim by my police in the . the man will confess nothing ; but , on be search , a large sum in gold be find on he person ; and though it be with the utmost pain that I can bring myself to entertain such a opinion , and to implicate a gentleman of the character and name of , I do submit that we duty be to have the examine relative to the affair . as be in she Highness 's private service , and in she confidence I have hear , I would not venture to apprehend he without you Highness 's permission . " ' the 's master of the horse , a friend of the old , who be present at the interview , no sooner hear the strange intelligence than he hasten away to the old general with the dreadful news of he grandson 's suppose crime . perhaps he Highness himself be not unwill that he old friend and tutor in arm should have the chance of save he family from disgrace ; at all event , , the master of the horse , be permit to go off to the undisturbed , and break to he the intelligence of the accusation pend over the unfortunate . ' it be possible that he expect some such dreadful catastrophe , for , after hear 's narrative ( as the latter afterwards tell I ) , he only say , " 's will be do ! " for some time refuse to stir a step in the matter , and then only by the solicitation of he friend be induce to write the letter which receive at we play - table . ' whilst he be there , squander the princess 's money , a police visit be pay to he apartment , and a hundr proof , not of he guilt with respect to the robbery , but of he guilty connection with the princess , be discover there , -- token of she give , passionate letter from she , copy of he own correspondence to he young friend at , -- all of which the peruse , and carefully put together under seal for he Highness , . I have no doubt he peruse they , for , on deliver they to the , say that , in to 's order , he have collect the 's papers ; but he need not say that , on he honour , he ( ) himself have never examine the document . he difference with be know ; he beg he Highness to employ any other official person in the judgment of the accusation bring against the young . ' all these thing be go on while the be at play . a run of luck -- you have great luck in those day , -- be against he . he stay and lose he 4000 ducat . he receive he uncle 's note , and such
such be the infatuation of the wretched gambler , that , on receipt of it , he go down to the courtyard , where the horse be in waiting , absolutely take the money which the poor old gentleman have place in the saddle - holster , bring it upstairs , play it , and lose it ; and when he issue from the room to fly , it be too late : he be place in arrest at the bottom of my staircase , as you be upon enter you own home . ' even when he come in under the charge of the soldiery send to arrest he , the old General , who be wait , be overjoyed to see he , and fling himself into the lad 's arm , and embrace he : it be say , for the first time in many year . " he be here , gentlemen , " he sob out , -- " thank he be not guilty of the robbery ! " and then sank back in a chair in a burst of emotion ; painful , it be say by those present , to witness on the part of a man so brave , and know to be so cold and stern . ' " ! " say the young man . " I swear before I be guilty of none ! " and a scene of almost touche reconciliation pass between they , before the unhappy young man be lead from the guard - house into the prison which he be destin never to quit . ' that night the look over the papers which have bring to he . it be at a very early stage of the perusal , no doubt , that he give order for you arrest ; for you be take at midnight , at ten o'clock ; after which time the old have see he Highness , protest of he grandson 's innocence , and the have receive he most graciously and kindly . he Highness say he have no doubt the young man be innocent ; he birth and he blood render such a crime impossible ; but suspicion be too strong against he : he be know to have be that day close with the ; to have receive a very large sum of money which he squander at play , and of which the have , doubtless , be the lender , -- to have despatch he servant after he , who inquire the hour of the 's departure , lay in wait for he , and rifle he . be so strong against the , that common justice require he arrest ; and , meanwhile , until he clear himself , he should be keep in not dishonourable durance , and every regard have for he name , and the service of he honourable grandfather . with this assurance , and with a warm grasp of the hand , the leave old that night ; and the veteran retire to rest almost consol , and confident in 's eventual and immediate release . ' but in the morning , before daybreak , the , who have be read papers all night , wildly call to the page , who sleep in the next room across the door , bay he get horse , which be always keep in readiness in the stable , and , flinge a parcel of letter into a box , tell the page to follow he on horseback with these . the young man ( ) tell this to a young lady who be then of my household , and who be now Madame , and a mother of a score of child . ' the page describe that never be such a change see as in he august master in the course of that single night . he eye be bloodshot , he face livid , he clothes be hang loose about he , and he who have always make he appearance on parade as precisely dress as any sergeant of he troops , might have be see gallop through the lonely street at early dawn without a hat , he unpowdered hair streame behind he like a madman . ' the page , with the box of papers , clatter after he master , -- it be no easy task to follow he ; and they ride from the palace to the town , and through it to the general 's quarter . the sentinel at the door be scared at the strange figure that rush up to the general 's gate , and , not know he , cross bayonet , and refuse he admission . " Fool , " say , " it be the ! " and , jangl at the bell as if for a alarm of fire , the door be at length open by the porter , and he Highness run up to the generals bedchamber , follow by the page with the box . ' " -- , " roar the , thunder at the closed door , " get up ! " and to the query of the old man from , answer , " it be I -- -- the !-- get up ! " and presently the door be open by the general in he robe - De - Chambre , and the enter . the page bring in the box , and be bidden to wait without , which he do ; but there lead from 's bedroom into he antechamber two door , the great one which form the entrance into he room , and a smaller one which lead , as the fashion be with we house abroad , into the closet which communicate with the alcove where the bed be . the door of this be find by to be open , and the young man be
be thus enable to hear and see everything which occur within the apartment . ' the , somewhat nervously , ask what be the reason of so early a visit from he Highness ; to which the do not for a while reply , farther than by staring at he rather wildly , and pace up and down the room . ' at last he say , " here be the cause ! " dash he fist on the box ; and , as he have forget to bring the key with he , he go to the door for a moment , say , " perhaps have it ; " but see over the stove one of the 's couteaux de chasse , he take it down , and say , " that will do , " and fall to work to burst the red trunk open with the blade of the forest knife . the point break , and he give a oath , but continue haggl on with the broken blade , which be better suit to he purpose than the long point knife , and finally succeed in wrenching open the lid of the chest . ' " what be the matter ? " say he , laugh . " here be the matter ;-- read that !-- here be more matter , read that !-- here 's more -- no , not that ; that be somebody else 's picture -- but here be hers ! do you know that , ? my wife 's -- the princess 's ! why do you and you cursed race ever come out of , to plant you infernal wickedness wherever you foot fall , and to ruin honest german home ? what have you and yours ever have from my family but confidence and kindness ? we give you a home when you have none , and here be we reward ! " and he fling a parcel of papers down before the old General ; who see the truth at once ; -- he have know it long before , probably , and sank down on he chair , cover he face . ' the go on gesticulating , and shriek almost . " if a man injur you so , , before you beget the father of that gambling lie villain yonder , you would have know how to revenge yourself . you would have kill he ! yes , would have kill he . but who be to help I to my revenge ? I have no equal . I can not meet that dog of a , -- that pimp from Versailles , -- and kill he , as if he have play the traitor to one of he own degree . " ' " the blood of , " say the old gentleman proudly , " be as good as that of any prince in . " ' " can I take it ? " cry the ; " you know I can not . I can not have the privilege of any other gentleman in . what be I to do ? look here , : I be wild when I come here ; I do not know what to do . you have serve I for thirty year ; you have save my life twice : they be all knave and harlot about my poor old father here -- no honest man or woman -- you be the only one -- you save my life ; tell I what be I to do ? " thus from insulting , the poor distracte fell to supplicat he ; and , at last , fairly flng himself down , and burst out in a agony of tear . ' , one of the most rigid and cold of man on common occasion , when he see this outbreak of passion on the 's part , become , as my informant have describe to I , as much affect as he master . the old man from be cold and high , suddenly fall , as it be , into the whimpering querulousness of extreme old age . he lose all sense of dignity ; he go down on he knee , and break out into all sort of wild incoherent attempt at consolation ; so much so , that say he could not bear to look at the scene , and actually turn away from the contemplation of it . ' but , from what follow in a few day , we may guess the result of the long interview . the , when he come away from the conversation with he old servant , forget he fatal box of papers and send the page back for they . the General be on he knee pray in the room when the young man enter , and only stir and look wildly round as the other remove the packet . the ride away to he hunting - lodge at three leagu from ----, and three day after that die in prison ; have make a confession that he be engage in a attempt to rob the , and that he have make away with himself , asham of he dishonour . ' but it be not know that it be the general himself who take he grandson poison : it be say even that he shoot he in the prison . this , however , be not the case . carry he grandson the dratch which be to carry he out of the world ; represent to the wretch youth that he fate be inevitable ; that it would be public and disgraceful unless he choose to anticipate the punishment , and so leave he . but it be not of , and not until he have use every means of escape , as you shall hear , that the unfortunate be 's life
life be bring to a end . 'A for , he quite fall into imbecility a short time after he grandson 's death , and my honoure 's demise . after he Highness the marry the of ----, as they be walk in the park together they once meet old ride in the sun in the easy chair , in which he be carry commonly abroad after he paralytic fit . " this be my wife , , " say the affectionately , take the veteran 's hand ; and he add , turn to he princess , " save my life during the ' . " ' " what , you have take she back again ? " say the old man . " I wish you would send I back my poor Maxime . " he have quite forget the death of the poor princess , and the , look very dark indeed , pass away . ' and now , ' say , 'I have only one more gloomy story to relate to you -- the death of the . it be even more horrible than the tale I have just tell you . ' with which preface the old lady resume she narrative . ' the kind weak princess 's fate be hasten , if not occasion , by the cowardice of . he find means to communicate with she from he prison , and she Highness , who be not in open disgrace yet ( for the , out of regard to the family , persist in charge with only robbery ) , make the most desperate effort to relieve he , and to bribe the gaoler to effect he escape . she be so wild that she lose all patience and prudence in the conduct of any scheme she may have have for 's liberation ; for she husband be inexorable , and cause the 's prison to be too strictly guard for escape to be possible . she offer the State jewel in pawn to the banker ; who of course be obliged to decline the transaction . she fall down on she knee , it be say , to , the , and offer he know what as a bribe . finally , she come scream to my poor dear , who , with he age , disease , and easy habit , be quite unfit for scene of so violent a nature ; and who , in consequence of the excitement create in he august bosom by she frantic violence and grief , have a fit in which I very nigh lose he . that he dear life be brotch to a untimely end by these transaction I have not the slightest doubt ; for the pie , of which they say he die , never , I be sure , could have injure he , but for the injury which he dear gentle heart receive from the unusual occurrence in which he be force to take a share . ' all she Highness 's movement be carefully , though not ostensibly , watch by she husband , ; who , wait upon he august father , sternly signify to he that if he Highness ( my ) should dare to aid the princess in she effort to release , he , , would publicly accuse the princess and she paramour of high treason , and take measure with the diet for remove he father from the throne , as incapacitate to reign . hence interposition on we part be vain , and be leave to he fate . ' it come , as you be aware , very suddenly . , , , master of the horse , and the colonel of the 's guard , wait upon the young man in he prison two day after he grandfather have visit he there and leave behind he the phial of poison which the criminal have not the courage to use . and signify to the young man that unless he take of he own accord the laurelwater provide by the elder , more violent means of death would be instantly employ upon he , and that a file of grenadier be in waiting in the courtyard to despatch he . see this , , with the most dreadful self - abasement , after drag himself round the room on he knee from one officer to another , weep and scream with terror , at last desperately drank off the potion , and be a corpse in a few minute . thus end this wretch young man . ' he death be make public in the two day after , the paragraph state that m ---- , strike with remorse for have attempt the murder of the , have put himself to death by poison in prison ; and a warning be add to all young nobleman of the duchy to avoid the dreadful sin of gambling , which have be the cause of the young man 's ruin , and have bring upon the grey hair of one of the noblest and most honourable of the servants of the irretrievable sorrow . ' the funeral be conduct with decent privacy , the attend it . the carriage of the two Duke and all the first people of the make they call upon the general afterwards . he attend parade as usual the next day on the Arsenal - place , and , who have be inspect the building , come out of it lean on the brave old warrior 's arm . he be particularly gracious to the old man , and tell he officer the oft-repeated story how at , when the x ---- contingent serve with the troops of the unlucky Soubise , the general have throw himself in the way of a french dragoon , who be press hard upon he Highness in the rout , have receive
receive the blow intend for he master , and kill the assailant . and he allude to the family motto of " Magny san tache , " and say , " it have be always so with he gallant friend and tutor in arm . " this speech affect all present very much ; with the exception of the old , who only bow and do not speak : but when he go home he be hear muttering " tache , san tache ! " and be attack with paralysis that night , from which he never more than partially recover . ' the news of 's death have somehow be keep from the princess until now : a Gazette even be print without the paragraph contain the account of he suicide ; but it be at length , I know not how , make known to she . and when she hear it , she lady tell I , she scream and fall , as if strike dead ; then sit up wildly and rave like a madwoman , and be then carry to she bed , where she physician attend she , and where she lay of a brain - fever . all this while the use to send to make inquiry concern she ; and from he give order that he Castle of Schlangenfels should be prepare and furnish , I make no doubt it be he intention to send she into confinement thither : as have be do with the unhappy sister of he at . ' she send repeatedly to demand a interview with he Highness ; which the latter decline , say that he would communicate with she Highness when she health be sufficiently recover . to one of she passionate letter he send back for reply a packet , which , when open , be find to contain the emerald that have be the cause round which all this dark intrigue move . ' she Highness at this time become quite frantic ; vowe in the presence of all she lady that one lock of she darl 's hair be more precious to she than all the jewel in the world : ring for she carriage , and say she would go and kiss he tomb ; proclaim the murdered martyr 's innocence , and call down the punishment of , the wrath of she family , upon he assassin . the , on hear these speech ( they be all , of course , regularly bring to he ) , be say to have give one of he dreadful look ( which I remember now ) , and to have say , " this can not last much longer . " ' all that day and the next the pass in dictate the most passionate letter to the she father , to the kings of , , and , she kinsman , and to all other branch of she family , call upon they in the most incoherent term to protect she against the butcher and assassin she husband , assail he person in the maddest term of reproach , and at the same time confess she love for the murdered . it be in vain that those lady who be faithful to she point out to she the inutility of these letter , the dangerous folly of the confession which they make ; she insist upon write they , and use to give they to she second robe-woman , a ( she Highness always affection person of that nation ) , who have the key of she cassette , and carry every one of these epistle to . ' with the exception that no public reception be hold , the ceremony of the princess 's establishment go on as before . she lady be allow to wait upon she and perform they usual duty about she person . the only man admit were , however , she servants , she physician and chaplain ; and one day when she wish to go into the garden , a heyduc , who keep the door , intimate to she Highness that the 's order be that she should keep she apartment . ' they abut , as you remember , upon the landing of the marble staircase of ---- ; the entrance to 's suite of room be opposite the princess 's on the same landing . this space be large , fill with sofa and bench , and the gentleman and officer who wait upon the use to make a sort of antechamber of the landing - place , and pay they court to he Highness there , as he pass out , at eleven o'clock , to parade . at such a time , the heyduc within the princess 's suite of room use to turn out with they halbert and present to -- the same ceremony be perform on he own side , when page come out and announce the approach of he Highness . the page use to come out and say , " the , gentlemen ! " and the drum beat in the hall , and the gentleman rose , who be wait on the bench that run along the balustrade . ' as if fate impell she to she death , one day the princess , as she guard turn out , and she be aware that the be stand , as be he wont , on the landing , converse with he gentleman ( in the old day he use to cross to the princess 's apartment and kiss she hand ) -- the princess , who have be anxious all the morning , complain of heat , insist that all the door of the apartment should be leave open ; and give token of a insanity which I think be now evident , rush wildly at the door when the guard pass out , fling
fling they open , and before a word could be say , or she lady could follow she , be in presence of , who be talk as usual on the landing : place herself between he and the stair , she begin apostrophise he with frantic vehemence :-- ' " take notice , gentlemen ! " she scream out , " that this man be a murderer and a liar ; that he lay plot for honourable gentleman , and kill they in prison ! take notice , that I too be in prison , and fear the same fate : the same butcher who kill , may , any night , put the knife to my throat . I appeal to you , and to all the king of , my kinsman . I demand to be set free from this tyrant and villain , this liar and traitor ! I adjure you all , as gentleman of honour , to carry these letter to my relative , and say from whom you have they ! " and with this the unhappy lady begin scatter letter about among the astonished crowd . ' " let no man sTOOp ! " cry the , in a voice of thunder . " , you should have watch you patient better . call the princess 's physician : she Highness 's brain be affect . gentlemen , have the goodness to retire . " and the stand on the landing as the gentleman go down the stair , say fiercely to the guard , " , if she move , strike with you halbert ! " on which the man bring the point of he weapon to the princess 's breast ; and the lady , frightene , shrank back and re-enter she apartment . " now , , " say the , " pick up all those papers ; " and the go into he own apartment , proceed by he page , and never quit they until he have see every one of the papers burnt . ' the next day the contain a bulletin sign by the three physician , state that " she Highness the laboure under inflammation of the brain , and have pass a restless and disturbed night . " similar notice be issue day after day . the service of all she lady , except two , be dispense with . Guard be place within and without she door ; she window be secure , so that escape from they be impossible : and you know what take place ten day after . the church - bell be ring all night , and the prayer of the faithful ask for a person in . a appear in the morning , ed with black , and state that the high and mighty , consort of he , of ----, have die in the evening of the 24th of 1769 . ' but do you know how she die , sir ? that , too , be a mystery . , the page , be concerned in this dark tragedy ; and the secret be so dreadful , that never , believe I , till 's death , do I reveal it . 'After the fatal Esclandre which the princess have make , the send for , and bind he by the most solemn adjuration to secrecy ( he only break it to he wife many year after : indeed , there be no secret in the world that woman can not know if they will ) , despatch he on the follow mysterious commission . ' " there live , " say he Highness , " on the side of the river , opposite to , a man whose residence you will easily find out from he name , which be . you will make you inquiry concern he quietly , and without occasion any remark ; perhaps you have better go into for the purpose , where the person be quite well know . you will take with you any comrade on whom you can perfectly rely : the life of both , remember , depend on you secrecy . you will find out some period when be alone , or only in company of the domestic who live with he ( I myself visit the man by accident on my return from five year since , and hence be induce to send for he now , in my present emergency ) . you will have you carriage wait at he door at night ; and you and you comray will enter he house mask ; and present he with a purse of a hundred louis ; promise he double that sum on he return from he expedition . if he refuse , you must use force and bring he ; menace he with instant death should he decline to follow you . you will place he in the carriage with the blinds draw , one or other of you never lose sight of he the whole way , and threaten he with death if he discover himself or cry out . you will lodge he in the old Tower here , where a room shall be prepare for he ; and he work be do , you will restore he to he home with the same speed and secrecy with which you bring he from it . " ' such be the mysterious order give he page ; and , select for he comrade in the expedition , set out on he strange journey . ' all this while the palace be hush , as if in mourning , the bulletin in the appear , announce the continuance of the princess 's malady ; and though she have but few attendants , strange and circumstantial story be tell regard the progress of she complaint . she be quite wild . she have try to
to kill herself . she have fancie herself to be I do not know how many different character . Express be send to she family inform they of she state , and courier despatch publicly to and to procure the attendance of physician skill in treat disease of the brain . that pretended anxiety be all a feint : it be never intend that the princess should recover . ' the day on which and return from they expedition , it be announce that she Highness the princess be much worse ; that night the report through the town be that she be at the agony : and that night the unfortunate creature be endeavouring to make she escape . ' she have unlimited confidence in the french chamber-woman who attend she , and between she and this woman the plan of escape be arrange . the princess take she jewel in a casket ; a private door , open from one of she room and lead into the outer gate , it be say , of the palace , be discover for she : and a letter be bring to she , purport to be from the , she father - in - law , and state that a carriage and horse have be provide , and would take she to b ----: the territory where she might communicate with she family and be safe . ' the unhappy lady , confid in she guardian , set out on the expedition . the passage wound through the walls of the modern part of the palace and abut in effect at the old , as it be call , on the outer wall : the tower be pull down afterwards , and for good reason . ' at a certain place the candle , which the chamberwoman be carry , go out ; and the princess would have scream with terror , but she hand be seize , and a voice cry " ! " the next minute a man in a mask ( it be the himself ) rush forward , gag she with a handkerchief , she hand and leg be bound , and she be carry swooning with terror into a vaulted room , where she be place by a person there wait , and tie in a arm -chair . the same mask who have gag she , come and ba she neck and say , " it have best be do now she have faint . " ' perhaps it would have be as well ; for though she recovere from she swoon , and she confessor , who be present , come forward and endeavoure to prepare she for the awful deed which be about to be do upon she , and for the state into which she be about to enter , when she come to herself it be only to scream like a maniac , to curse the as a butcher and tyrant , and to call upon , she dear Magny . ' at this the say , quite calmly , " May have mercy on she sinful soul ! " he , the confessor , and , who be present , go down on they knee ; and , as he Highness drop he handkerchief , fall down in a fainting fit ; while , take the back hair in he hand , separate the shrieking head of from the miserable sinful body . May heaven have mercy upon she soul !' . . . . this be the story tell by , and the reader will have no difficulty in draw from it that part which affect myself and my uncle ; who , after six week of arrest , be set at liberty , but with order to quit the duchy immediately : indeed , with a escort of dragoon to conduct we to the frontier . what property we have , we be allow to sell and realise in money ; but none of we play debt be pay to we : and all my hope of the be thus at a end . when come to the throne , which he do when , six month after , apoplexy carry off the old sovereign he father , all the good old usage of ---- be give up , -- play forbidden ; the opera and ballet send to the right - about ; and the regiment which the old have sell recall from they foreign service : with they come my Countess 's beggarly cousin the ensign , and he marry she . I do not know whether they be happy or not . it be certain that a woman of such a poor spirit do not merit any very high degree of pleasure . the now reign of ---- himself marry four year after he first wife 's demise , and , though no longer , build the grand house of which spoke . what become of the minor actor in the great tragedy , who know ? only MONSIEUR be restore to he duty . of the rest -- the , the chamber- woman , the spy on -- I know nothing . those sharp tool with which great people cut out they enterprise be generally break in the use : nor do I ever hear that they employer have much regard for they in they ruin . chapter xiii I continue my career as a man of fashion I find I have already fill up many score of page , and yet a vast deal of the most interesting portion of my history remain to be tell , viz . that which describe my sojourn in the kingdom of and , and the great part I play there ; move among the most illustrious of the land , myself not the least distinguished of the brilliant circle . in order to give due justice
justice to this portion of my Memoir , then ,-- which be more important than my foreign adventur can be ( though I could fill volume with interesting description of the latter ) , -- I shall cut short the account of my travels in , and of my success at the , in order to speak of what befell I at home . Suffice it to say that there be not a capital in , except the beggarly one of , where the young be not know and admire ; and where he have not make the brave , the high - born , and the beautiful talk of he . I win 80,000 rouble from at the at , which the scoundrelly favourite never pay I ; I have have the honour of see he the as drink as any porter at ; my uncle play several match at billiards against the celebrate ---- at , and I promise you do not come off a loser . in fact , by a neat stratagem of ours , we raise the laugh against he Lordship , and something a great deal more substantial . my do not know that the have a useless eye ; and when , one day , my uncle playfully bet he odd at billiards that he would play he with a patch over one eye , the noble lord , think to bite we ( he be one of the most desperate gambler that ever liv ) , accept the bet , and we win a very considerable amount of he . need I mention my success among the fairer portion of the creation . one of the most accomplished , the tallest , the most athletic , and the handsomest gentleman of , as I be then , a young fellow of my figure could not fail of have advantage , which a person of my spirit know very well how to use . but upon these subject I be dumb . , black - eye , , tender , ! -- ye gentle heart that know how to beat in old time for the warm young irish gentleman , where be you now ? though my hair have grow grey now , and my sight dim , and my heart cold with year , and ennui , and disappointment , and the treachery of friend , yet I have but to lean back in my arm - chair and think , and those sweet figure come rise up before I out of the past , with they smile , and they kindness , and they bright tender eye ! there be no woman like they now -- no manners like theirs ! look you at a bevy of woman at the 's , stitch up in tight white satin sack , with they waists under they arm , and compare they to the graceful figure of the old time ! why , when I dance with at the fete on the birth of the first Dauphin at Versailles , she hoop be eighteen foot in circumference , and the heel of she lovely little mule be three inch from the ground ; the lace of my jabot be worth a thousand crown , and the buttons of my amaranth velvet coat alone cost eighty thousand livre . look at the difference now ! the gentleman be dress like boxer , Quaker , or hackney - coachman ; and the lady be not dress at all . there be no elegance , no refinement ; none of the chivalry of the old world , of which I form a portion . think of the fashion of be lead by a br- mm -l ! [ Footnote : this manuscript must have be write at the time when be the leader of the fashion . ] a nobody 's son : a low creature , who can no more dance a minuet than I can talk ; who can not even crack a bottle like a gentleman ; who never show himself to be a man with he sword in he hand : as we use to approve ourselves in the good old time , before that vulgar Corsican upset the gentry of the world ! oh , to see the once again , as on that day I meet she first drive in state , with she eight mule and she retinue of gentleman , by the side of yellow Mancanare ! oh , for another drive with , in the gild sledge , over the snow ! false as be , 's twa better to be jilt by she than to be adore by any other woman . I can not think of any one of they without tenderness . I have ringlet of all they hair in my poor little museum of recollection . do you keep mine , you dear soul that survive the turmoil and trouble of near half a hundred year ? how change its colour be now , since the day wear it round she neck , after my duel with , at . I never keep any beggarly book of account in those day . I have no debt . I pay royally for everything I take ; and I take everything I want . my income must have be very large . my entertainment and equipage be those of a gentleman of the highest distinction ; nor let any scoundrel presume to sneer because I carry off and marry my ( as you shall presently hear ) , and call I a adventurer , or say I be penniless , or the match unequal . penniless ! I have the wealth of at my command . ! so be a meritorious lawyer or a gallant soldier ; so be every man who make he own fortune a adventurer . my profession be play : in which
which I be then unrivalled . no man could play with I through , on the square ; and my income be just as certain ( during health and the exercise of my profession ) as that of a man who draw on he three - per-cents. , or any fat squire whose acre bring he revenue . be not more certain than the effect of skill be : a crop be a chance , as much as a game of card greatly play by a fine player : there may be a drink , or a frost , or a hail - storm , and you stake be lose ; but one man be just as much a adventurer as another . in evok the recollection of these kind and fair creature I have nothing but pleasure . I would I could say as much of the memory of another lady , who will henceforth play a considerable part in the drama of my life , -- I mean the Countess of ; whose fatal acquaintance I make at , very soon after the event describe in the last chapter have cause I to quit . , Countess of , in , of the kingdom of , be so well know to the great world in she day , that I have little need to enter into she family history ; which be to be have in any peerage that the reader may lay he hand on . she be , as I need not say , a countess , viscountess , and baroness in she own right . she estate in and be among the most extensive in those part ; she irish possession not less magnificent ; and they have be allude to , in a very early part of these Memoir , as lie near to my own paternal property in the kingdom of : indeed , unjust confiscation in the time of and she father go to diminish my acre , while they add to the already vast possession of the family . the Countess , when I first see she at the assembly at , be the wife of she cousin , the , of the bath , and to . and . at several of the smaller court of . be celebrate as a wit and bon vivant : he could write love - verse against , and make joke with ; he be a man of vertu like , with whom and he have make a part of the grand tour ; and be cite , in a word , as one of the most elegant and accomplished man of he time . I make this gentleman 's acquaintance as usual at the play - table , of which he be a constant frequenter . indeed , one could not but admire the spirit and gallantry with which he pursue he favourite pastime ; for , though wear out by gout and a myriad of disease , a cripple wheel about in a chair , and suffer pang of agony , yet you would see he every morning and every evening at he post behind the delightful green cloth : and if , as it would often happen , he own hand be too feeble or inflam to hold the box , he would call the main , nevertheless , and have he valet or a friend to throw for he . I like this courageous spirit in a man ; the greatest success in life have be win by such indomitable perseverance . I be by this time one of the best - know character in ; and the fame of my exploit , my duel , my courage at play , would bring crowd around I in any public society where I appear . I could show ream of scent paper , to prove that this eagerness to make my acquaintance be not confin to the gentleman only ; but that I hate boast , and only talk of myself in so far as it be necessary to relate myself 's adventur : the most singular of any man 's in . well , 's first acquaintance with I originate in the right honourable knight 's win 700 piece of I at picquet ( for which he be almost my match ) ; and I lose they with much good - humour , and pay they : and pay they , you may be sure , punctually . indeed , I will say this for myself , that lose money at play never in the least put I out of good - humour with the winner , and that wherever I find a superior , I be always ready to acknowledge and hail he . be very proud of win from so celebrate a person , and we contract a kind of intimacy ; which , however , do not for a while go beyond pump - room attention , and conversation over the supper - table at play : but which gradually increase , until I be admit into he more private friendship . he be a very free - spoken man ( the gentry of those day be much prouder than at present ) , and use to say to I in he haughty easy way , ' hang it , , you have no more manners than a barber , and I think my black footman have be better educated than you ; but you be a young fellow of originality and pluck , and I like you , sir , because you seem determined to go to the deuce by a way of you own . ' I would thank he laughingly for this compliment , and say , that as he be bound to the next world much sooner than I be , I would be oblige to he to get comfortable quarter arrange there for
for I . he use also to be immensely amused with my story about the splendour of my family and the magnificence of : he would never tire of listen or laugh at those histories . ' to the trump , however , my lad ,' he would say , when I tell he of my misfortunes in the conjugal line , and how near I have be win the greatest fortune in . ' do anything but marry , my artless irish rustic ' ( he call I by a multiplicity of queer name ) . ' Cultivate you great talents in the gambling line ; but mind this , that a woman will beat you . ' that I deny ; mention several instance in which i have conquer the most intractable temper among the sex . ' they will beat you in the long run , my . as soon as you be marry , take my word of it , you be conquer . look at I . I marry my cousin , the noblest and greatest heiress in -- marry she in spite of herself almost ' ( here a dark shade pass over 's countenance ) . ' she be a weak woman . you shall see she , sir , how weak she be ; but she be my mistress . she have embitter my whole life . she be a fool ; but she have get the better of one of the best head in . she be enormously rich ; but somehow I have never be so poor as since I marry she . I think to better myself ; and she have make I miserable and kill I . and she will do as much for my successor , when I be gone . ' 'have she Ladyship a very large income ? ' say I . at which burst out into a yelling laugh , and make I blush not a little at my gaucherie ; for the fact be , see he in the condition in which he be , I could not help speculat upon the chance a man of spirit might have with he widow . ' no , no ! ' say he , laugh . ' Waugh hawk , ; do not think , if you value you peace of mind , to stand in my shoe when they be vacant . besides , I do not think my would condescend to marry ag ---- ' a what , sir ? ' say I , in a rage . " never mind what : but the man who get she will rue it , take my word of n't . a plague on she ! have it not be for my father 's ambition and mine ( he be she uncle and guardian , and we would not let such a prize out of the family ) , I might have die peaceably , at least ; carry my gout down to my grave in quiet , live in my modest tenement in , have every house in open to I ; and now , now I have six of my own , and every one of they be a hell to I . beware of greatness , . take warning by I . ever since I have be married and have be rich , I have be the most miserable wretch in the world . look at I . I be die a worn - out cripple at the age of fifty . marriage have add forty year to my life . when I take off , there be no man of my year who look so young as myself . fool that I be ! I have enough with my pension , perfect freedom , the best society in ; and I give up all these , and married , and be miserable . take a warning by I , , and stick to the trump . " though my intimacy with the knight be considerable , for a long time I never penetrate into any other apartment of he hotel but those which he himself occupi . he lady live entirely apart from he ; and it be only curious how they come to travel together at all . she be a goddaughter of old : and , like that famous old woman of the last century , make considerable pretension to be a blue - stocking and a bel esprit . write poem in and , which still may be read by the curiious in the page of the magazine of the day . she entertain a correspondence with several of the european savan upon history , science , and ancient language , and especially theology . she pleasure be to dispute controversial point with abbe and bishop ; and she flatterer say she rivall in learn . every adventurer who have a discovery in chemistry , a new antique bust , or a plan for discover the philosopher 's stone , be sure to find a patroness in she . she have numberless work dedicated to she , and sonnet without end address to she by all the poetaster of , under the name of or . she room be crowd with hideous magot , and all sort of object of . no woman pique herself more upon she principle , or allow love to be make to she more profusely . there be a habit of courtship practise by the fine gentleman of those day , which be little understood in we coarse downright time : and young and old fellow would pour out floods of compliment in letter and madrigal , such as would make a sober lady stare be they address to she nowadays : so entirely have the gallantry of the last century disappear out of we manners . move about with a little court of
of she own . she have half - a - dozen carriage in she progressis . in she own she would travel with she companion ( some shabby lady of quality ) , she bird , and poodle , and the favourite savant for the time being . in another would be she female secretary and she wait - woman ; who , in spite of they care , never could make they mistress look much better than a slattern . have he own chariot , and the domestic of the establishment would follow in other vehicle . also must be mention the carriage in which ride she Ladyship 's chaplain , , who act in capacity of to she son , the little , -- a melancholy desert little boy , about whom he father be more than indifferent , and whom he mother never see , except for two minute at she levee , when she would put to he a few question of history or latin grammar ; after which he be consign to he own amusement , or the care of he governor , for the rest of the day . the notion of such a as this , whom I see in the public place now and then , surround by swarm of needy abbe and schoolmaster , who flatter she , frightene I for some time , and I have not the least desire to make she acquaintance . I have no desire to be one of the beggarly adorer in the great lady 's train , -- fellows , half friend , half lacquey , who make verse , and write letter , and run errand , contend to be pay by a seat in she Ladyship 's box at the comedy , or a cover at she dinner - table at noon . ' do not be afraid , ' would say , whose great subject of conversation and abuse be he lady : 'my will have nothing to do with you . she like the Tuscan brogue , not that of . she say you smell too much of the stable to be admit to lady ' society ; and last fortnight , when she do I the honour to speak to I last , say , " I wonder , , a gentleman who have be the 's ambassador can demean himself by gambling and booze with low irish blackleg ! " do not fly in a fury ! I be a cripple , and it be say it , not I . ' this pique I , and I resolve to become acquainted with ; if it be but to show she Ladyship that the descendant of those Barrys , whose property she unjustly hold , be not a unworthy companion for any lady , be she ever so high . besides , my friend the knight be die : he widow would be the richest prize in the three kingdom . why should I not win she , and , with she , the means of make in the world that figure which my genius and inclination desire ? I feel I be equal in blood and breed to any in , and determined to bend this haughty lady . when I determine , I look upon the thing as done . my uncle and I talk the matter over , and speedily settle upon a method for make we approaches upon this stately lady of . , young 's , be fond of pleasure , of a glass of in the garden - house in the summer evening , and of a sly throw of the dice when the occasion offer ; and I take care to make friend with this person , who , be a college tutor and a , be ready to go on he knee to any one who resemble a man of fashion . see I with my retinue of servants , my vis - a -vis and chariot , my valets , my hussar , and horse , dress in gold , and velvet , and sable , salut the greatest people in as we meet on the course , or at the , be dazzl by my advance , and be mine by a beckoning of the finger . I shall never forget the poor wretch 's astonishment when I ask he to dine , with two count , off gold plate , at the little room in the casino : he be make happy by be allow to win a few piece of we , become exceedingly tipsy , sang Cambridge song , and recreate the company by tell we , in he horrid , story about the gyp , and all the lord that have ever be in he college . I encourage he to come and see I oftener , and bring with he he little viscount ; for whom , though the boy always detest I , I take care to have a good stock of sweetmeat , toy , and picture - book when he come . I then begin to enter into a controversy with , and confide to he some doubts which I have , and a very very earnest leaning towards the of . I make a certain abbe whom I know write I letter upon transubstantiation , & c. , which the honest tutor be rather puzzl to answer . I know that they would be communicate to he lady , as they be ; for , ask leave to attend the english service which be celebrate in she apartment , and frequent by the best then at the , on the second she condescende to look at I ; on the third she be pleased to reply to my profound bow by a curtsey ; the next day i follow up the acquaintance by another obeisance in the public walk ;
; and , to make a long story short , she Ladyship and I be in full correspondence on transubstantiation before six week be over . my come to the aid of she chaplain ; and then I begin to see the prodigious weight of he argument : as be to be expect . the progress of this harmless little intrigue need not be detail . I make no doubt every one of my reader have practise similar stratagem when a fair lady be in the case . I shall never forget the astonishment of when , on one summer evening , as he be issue out to the play - table in he sedan - chair , accord to he wont , she Ladyship 's barouche and four , with she outrider in the tawny livery of the family , come drive into the courtyard of the house which they inhabit ; and in that carriage , by she Ladyship 's side , sit no other than the ' vulgar irish adventurer , ' as she be pleased to call he : I mean , . he make the most courtly of he bow , and grin and wave he hat in as graceful a manner as the gout permit ; and she Ladyship and I reply to the salutation with the utmost politeness and elegance on we part . I could not go to the play - table for some time afterwards for and I have a argument on transubstantiation , which last for three hour ; in which she be , as usual , victorious , and , in which she companion , the Honourable , fall asleep ; but when , at last , I join at the casino , he receive I with a yell of laughter , as he will not be , and introduce I to all the company as 's interesting young convert . this be he way . he laugh and sneer at everything . he laugh when he be in a paroxysm of pain ; he laugh when he win money , or when he lose it : he laugh be not jovial or agreeable , but rather painful and sardonic . ' gentlemen , ' say he to , , , and several jovial fellow with whom he use to discuss a flask of champagne and a Rhenish trout or two after play , ' see this amiable youth ! he have be troublead by religious scruple , and have fly for refuge to my chaplain , , who have ask for advice from my wife , ; and , between they both , they be confirm my ingenious young friend in he faith . do you ever hear of such doctor , and such a disciple ? ' '' faith , sir , ' say I , ' if I want to learn good principle , it be surely better I should apply for they to you lady and you chaplain than to you ! ' ' he want to step into my shoe ! ' continue the knight . ' the man would be happy who do so , ' respond I , ' provide there be no chalk - stone include ! ' at which reply be not very well pleased , and go on with increase rancour . he be always free - speak in he cup ; and , to say the truth , he be in he cup many more time in a week than he doctor allow . ' be it not a pleasure , gentlemen , ' say he , ' for I , as I be draw near the goal , to find my home such a happy one ; my wife so fond of I , that she be even now think of appoint a successor ? ( I do not mean you precisely , ; you be only take you chance with a score of other whom I could mention . ) be not it a comfort to see she , like a prudent housewife , get everything ready for she husband 's departure ? ' 'I hope you be not think of leave we soon , knight ? ' say I , with perfect sincerity ; for I like he , as a most amusing companion . ' not so soon , my dear , as you may fancy , perhaps , ' continue he . ' why , man , I have be give over any time these four year ; and there be always a candidate or two waiting to apply for the situation . who know how long I may keep you wait ? ' and he do keep I wait some little time longer than at that period there be any reason to suspect . as I declare myself pretty openly , accord to my usual way , and author be accustom to describe the person of the ladie with whom they hero fall in love ; in compliance with this fashion , I perhaps should say a word or two respect the charms of my . but though I celebrate they in many copy of verse , of my own and other person ' writing ; and though I fill ream of paper in the passionate style of those day with compliment to every one of she beauty and smile , in which I compare she to every flower , goddess , or famous heroine ever hear of ,-- truth compel I to say that there be nothing divine about she at all . she be very well ; but no more . she shape be fine , she hair dark , she eyes good , and exceedingly active ; she love singing , but perform it as so great a lady should , very much out of tune . she have a smattering of half - a - dozen modern language ,
, and , as I have say before , of many more sciences than I even know the name of . she pique herself on know and ; but the truth be , that , use to supply she with the quotation which she introduce into she voluminous correspondence . she have as much love of admiration , as strong , uneasy a vanity , and as little heart , as any woman I ever know . otherwise , when she son , , on account of he difference with I , run -- but that matter shall be tell in its proper time . finally , my be about a year older than myself ; though , of course , she would take she Bible oath that she be three year younger . few man be so honest as I be ; for few will own to they real motive , and I do not care a button about confess mine . what say be perfectly true . I make the acquaintance of with ulterior view . ' , ' say I to he , when , after the scene describe and the joke he make upon I , we meet alone , ' let those laugh that win . you be very pleasant upon I a few night since , and on my intentions regard you lady . well , if they be what you think they be ,-- if I do wish to step into you shoe , what then ? I have no other intention than you have yourself . I will be swear to muster just as much regard for my as you ever show she ; and if I win she and wear she when you be dead and gone , corbleu , knight , do you think it will be the fear of you ghost will deter I ? ' laugh as usual ; but somewhat disconcertedly : indeed I have clearly the best of he in the argument , and have just as much right to hunt my fortune as he have . but one day he say , ' if you marry such a woman as my , mark my word , you will regret it . you will pine after the liberty you once enjoy . by ! ,' he add , with a sigh , ' the thing that I regret most in life -- perhaps it be because I be old , blase , and die -- be , that I never have a virtuous attachment . ' ! ha ! a milkmaid 's daughter ! ' say I , laugh at the absurdity . ' well , why not a milkmaid 's daughter ? my good fellow , I be in live in , as most gentleman be , with my tutor 's daughter , , a bouncing girl ; of course older than myself ' ( this make I remember my own little love -passage with in the day of my early life ) , ' and do you know , sir , I heartily regret I do not marry she ? there be nothing like have a virtuous drudge at home , sir ; depend upon that . it give a zest to one 's enjoyment in the world , take my word for it . no man of sense need restrict himself , or deny himself a single amusement for he wife 's sake : on the contrary , if he select the animal properly , he will choose such a one as shall be no bar to he pleasure , but a comfort in he hour of annoyance . for instance , I have get the gout : who tend I ? a hire valet , who rob I whenever he have the power . my wife never come near I . what friend have I ? none in the wide world . of the world , as you and I be , do not make friend ; and we be fool for we pain . get a friend , sir , and that friend a woman - - a good household drudge , who love you . that be the most precious sort of friendship ; for the expense of it be all on the woman 's side . the man need not contribute anything . if he be a rogue , she will vow he be a angel ; if he be a brute , she will like he all the better for he ill - treatment of she . they like it , sir , these woman . they be bear to be we greatest comforts and convenience ; we -- we moral bootjack , as it be ; and to man in you way of life , believe I such a person would be invaluable . I be only speak for you bodily and mental comfort 's sake , mind . why do not I marry poor , the curate 's daughter ? ' I think these speech the remark of a weakly disappointed man ; although since , perhaps , I have have reason to find the truth of 's statement . the fact be , in my opinion , that we often buy money very much too dear . to purchase a few thousand a year at the expense of a odious wife , be very bad economy for a young fellow of any talent and spirit ; and there have been moment of my life when , in the midst of my greatest splendour and opulence , with half - a - dozen lord at my levee , with the finest horse in my stable , the grandest house over my head , with unlimited credit at my banker 's , and -- to boot , I have wish myself back a private of 's , or anything , so as to get rid of she .
. to return , however , to the story . , with he complication of ills , be die before we by inch ! and I have no doubt it could not have be very pleasant to he to see a young handsome fellow pay court to he widow before he own face as it be . after I once get into the house on the transubstantiation dispute , I find a dozen more occasion to improve my intimacy , and be scarcely ever out of she Ladyship 's door . the world talk and bluster ; but what car I ? the man cry fie upon the shameless irish adventurer ; but I have tell my way of silencing such envious people : and my sword have by this time get such a reputation through , that few people care to encounter it . if I can once get my hold of a place , I keep it . many be the house I have be to where I have see the man avoid I . ' Faugh ! the low , ' they would say . ' Bah ! the coarse adventurer ! ' ' out on the insufferable blackleg and puppy ! ' and so forth . this hatred have be of no inconsiderable service to I in the world ; for when I fasten on a man , nothing can induce I to release my hold : and I be leave to myself , which be all the better . as I tell in those day , with perfect sincerity , ' ( I use to call she in my correspondence ) -- ' , I swear to thee , by the spotlessness of thy own soul , by the brilliancy of thy immitigable eye , by everything pure and chaste in heaven and in thy own heart , that I will never cease from follow thee ! I can bear , and have borne at thy hand . Indifference I can surmount ; ' ti a rock which my energy will climb over , a magnet which attract the dauntless iron of my soul ! ' and it be true , I would not have leave she -- no , though they have kick I downstairs every day I present myself at she door . that be my way of fascinating woman . let the man who have to make he fortune in life remember this maxim . attacking be he only secret . , and the world always yield : or , if it beat you sometimes , dare again , and it will succumb . in those day my spirit be so great , that if I have set my heart upon marry a princess of the blood , I would have have she ! I tell my story , and alte very very little of the truth . my object be to frighten she : to show she that what I want , that I da ; that what I da , that I win ; and there be striking passage enough in my history to convince she of my iron will and indomitable courage . ' never hope to escape I , madam ,' I would say : ' offer to marry another man , and he die upon this sword , which never yet meet its master . fly from I , and I will follow you , though it be to the gate of . ' I promise you this be very different language to that she have be in the habit of hear from she - adorer . you should have see how I scare the fellow from she . when I say in this energetic way that I would follow across the Styx if necessary , of course I mean that I would do so , provide nothing more suitable present itself in the interim . if would not die , where be the use of my pursue the Countess ? and somehow , towards the end of the season , very much to my mortification I do confess , the knight make another rally : it seem as if nothing would kill he . 'I be sorry for you , ,' he would say , laugh as usual . 'I be grieve to keep you , or any gentleman , wait . have you not better arrange with my doctor , or get the cook to flaavor my omelette with arsenic ? what be the odd , gentleman ,' he would add , ' that I do not live to see hang yet ? ' in fact , the doctor tinker he up for a year . ' it be my usual luck ,' I could not help say to my uncle , who be my confidential and most excellent adviser in all matters of the heart . 'I have be waste the treasure of my affections upon that flirt of a countess , and here be she husband restore to health and likely to live I do not know how many year ! ' and , as if to add to my mortification , there come just at this period to a tallow - chandler 's heiress , with a plum to she fortune ; and , the widow of a cattle - dealer and farmer- general , with a dropsy and two hundred thousand livre a year . ' what be the use of my follow the Lyndons to , ' say I , ' if the knight will not die ? ' ' do not follow they , my dear simple child , ' reply my uncle . ' stop here and pay court to the new arrival . ' ' yes , and lose for ever , and the greatest estate in all . ' ' Pooh , pooh ! youth like you easily fire and easily despond . keep up a correspondence
correspondence with . you know there be nothing she like so much . there be the irish abbe , who will write you the most charming letter for a crown apiece . let she go ; write to she , and meanwhile look out for anything else which may turn up . who know ? you might marry the widow , bury she , take she money , and be ready for the Countess against the knight 's death . ' and so , with vows of the most profound respectful attachment , and have give twenty louis to 's waiting - woman for a lock of she hair ( of which fact , of course , the woman inform she mistress ) , I take leave of the Countess , when it become necessary for she return to she estate in ; swear I would follow she as soon as a affair of honou I have on my hand could be bring to a end . I shall pass over the event of the year that ensue before I again see she . she write to I accord to promise ; with much regularity at first , with somewhat less frequency afterwards . my affair , meanwhile , at the play - table go on not unprosperously , and I be just on the point of marry the ( we be at Brussels by this time , and the poor soul be madly in love with I , ) when the be put into my hand , and I read the follow announcement :-- ' die at - , in the kingdom of , the , of the bath , member of parliament for in , and many year he 's representative at various european courts . he hath leave behind he a name which be endear to all he friend for he manifold virtue and talents , a reputation justly acquire in the service of His Majesty , and a inconsolable widow to deplore he loss . she Ladyship , the bereaved Countess of , be at the when the horrid intelligence reach she of she husband 's demise , and hasten to immediately in order to pay she last sad duty to he beloved remains . ' that very night I order my chariot and post to , whence I freight a vessel to , and travel rapidly into the , reach ; from which port I embark for , and find myself , after a absence of eleven year , in my native country . I return to Ireland , and exhibin my Splendour and GENEROSITy in that Kingdom how be time change with I now ! I have leave my country a poor penniless boy -- a private soldier in a miserable marching regiment . I return a accomplished man , with property to the amount of five thousand guinea in my possession , with a splendid wardrobe and jewel - case worth two thousand more ; have mingl in all the scene of life a not undistinguished actor in they ; have share in war and in love ; have by my own genius and energy win my way from poverty and obscurity to competence and splendour . as I look out from my chariot window as it roll along over the bleak bare roads , by the miserable cabins of the peasantry , who come out in they rag to stare as the splendid equipage pass , and huzza would for he Lordship 's honour as they see the magnificent stranger in the superb gild vehicle , my huge body - servant lol behind with curling moustach and long queue , he green livery bar with silver lace , I could not help think of myself with considerable complacency , and thanke my star that have endow I with so many good quality . but for my own merits I should have be a raw irish squireen such as those I see swagger about the wretched town through which my chariot pass on its road to . I might have marry ( and though , thank , I do not , I have never think of that girl but with kindness , and even remember the bitterness of lose she more clearly at this moment than any other incident of my life ) ; I might have be the father of ten child by this time , or a farmer on my own account , or a agent to a squire , or a gauger , or a attorney ; and here I be one of the most famous gentleman of ! I bade my fellow get a bag of copper money and throw it among the crowd as we change horse ; and I warrant I there be as much shouting set up in praise of my honour as if my , the himself , have be pass . my second day 's journey -- for the irish roads be rough in those day , and the progress of a gentleman 's chariot terribly slow -- bring I to Carlow , where I put up at the very inn which I have use eleven year back , when fly from home after the suppose murder of in the duel . how well I remember every moment of the scene ! the old landlord be gone who have serve I ; the inn that I then think so comfortable look wretch and dismantle ; but the claret be as good as in the old day , and I have the host to partake of a jug of it and hear the news of the country . he be as communicative as host usually be : the crop and the market , the price of beasts at last fair , the last story about the vicar , and the last joke of the priest ; how the have burn 's rick , and the highwayman
highwayman have be beat off in they attack upon 's house ; who be to hunt the hound next season , and the wonderful run entirely they have last ; what troops be in the town , and how have run off with : all the news of sport , assize , and quarter -session be detailead by this worthy chronicler of small - beer , who wonder that my honou have not hear of they in , or in foreign part , where he seem to think the world be as interested as he be about the doings of and . I listen to these tale with , I own , a considerable pleasure ; for every now and then a name would come up in the conversation which I remember in old day , and bring with it a hundred associations connect with they . I have receive many letter from my mother , which inform I of the doings of the 's town family . my uncle be dead , and , he eldest son , have follow he too to the grave . the Brady girl have separate from they paternal roof as soon as they elder brother come to rule over it . some be marry , some go to settle with they odious old mother in out - of - the - way watering - place . , though he have succeed to the estate , have come in for a bankrupt property , and be now inhabit only by the bat and owl , and the old gamekeeper . my mother , , have go to live at , to sit under , she favourite preacher , who have a chapel there ; and , finally , the landlord tell I , that 's son have go to foreign part , enlist in the Prussian service , and have be shot there as a deserter . I do not care to own that I hire a stout nag from the landlord 's stable after dinner , and ride back at nightfall twenty mile to my old home . my heart beat to see it . have get a pestle and mortar over the door , and be call ' the , ' by ; a red - headed lad be spread a plaster in the old parlour ; the little window of my room , once so neat and bright , be cracke in many place , and stuff with rag here and there ; the flower have disappear from the trim garden - bed which my good orderly mother ten . in the churchyard there be two more name put into the stone over the family vault of the : they be those of my cousin , for whom my regard be small , and my uncle , whom I have always love . I ask my old companion the blacksmith , who have beat I so often in old day , to give my horse a feed and a litter : he be a worn weary - look man now , with a dozen dirty rag child paddle about he smithy , and have no recollection of the fine gentleman who stand before he . I do not seek to recall my - self to he memory till the next day , when I put ten guinea into he hand , and bay he drink the health of . as for , the gate of the park be still there ; but the old tree be cut down in the avenue , a black stump jutt out here and there , and cast long shadow as I pass in the moonlight over the worn grass - grow old road . a few cow be at pasture there . the garden - gate be gone , and the place a tangle wilderness . I sit down on the old bench , where I have sit on the day when jilt I ; and I do believe my feeling be as strong then as they have be when I be a boy , eleven year before ; and I catch myself almost cry again , to think that have desert I . I believe a man forget nothing . I have see a flower , or hear some trivial word or two , which have awaken recollection that somehow have lain dormant for score of year ; and when I enter the house in , where I be bear ( it be use as a gambling - house when I first visit ) , all of a sudden the memory of my childhood come back to I -- of my actual infancy : I recollect my father in green and gold , hold I up to look at a gilt coach which stand at the door , and my mother in a flower sack , with patch on she face . some day , I wonder , will everything we have see and think and do come and flash across we minds in this way ? I have rather not . I feel so as I sit upon the bench at , and think of the bygone time . the hall - door be open -- it be always so at that house ; the moon be flar in at the long old window , and throw ghastly chequer upon the floor ; and the star be look in on the other side , in the blue of the yawning window over the great stair : from it you could see the old stable - clock , with the letter glisten on it still . there have be jolly horsis in those stable once ; and I could see my uncle 's honest face , and hear he talk to he dog as they come jump and whin and bark round about he of a gay winter morning . we use to mount there
there ; and the girl look out at we from the hall - window , where I stand and look at the sad , mouldy , lonely old place . there be a red light shine through the crevice of a door at one corner of the building , and a dog presently come out baie loudly , and a limping man follow with a fowling - piece . ' who be there ? ' say the old man . ' , do not you know I ? ' shoute I ; ' it be . ' I think the old man would have fire he piece at I at first , for he point it at the window ; but I call to he to hold he hand , and come down and embrace he .... ! I do not care to tell the rest : and I have a long night , and talk over a thousand foolish old thing that have no interest for any soul alive now : for what soul be there alive that care for ? I settle a hundred guinea on the old man when I get to , and make he a annuity which enable he to pass he old day in comfort . poor be amuse himself at a game of exceedingly dirty card with a old acquaintance of mine ; no other than , who be call my ' valet ' in the day of yore , and whom the reader may remember as clad in my father 's old livery . they use to hang about he in those time , and lap over he wrist and down to he heel ; but , though he protest he have nigh kill himself with grief when I go away , have manage to grow enormously fat in my absence , and would have fit almost into 's coat , or that of the vicar of , whom he serve in the capacity of clerk . I would have engage the fellow in my service but for he monstrous size , which render he quite unfit to be the attendant of any gentleman of condition ; and so I present he with a handsome gratuity , and promise to stand godfather to he next child : the eleventh since my absence . there be no country in the world where the work of multiplying be carry on so prosperously as in my native island . have marry the girl 's waiting - maid , who have be a kind friend of mine in the early time ; and I have to go salute poor next day , and find she a slatternly wench in a mud hut , surround by a brood of child almost as rag as those of my friend the blacksmith . from and , thus meet fortuitously together , I get the very last news respect my family . my mother be well . '' faith sir , ' say , ' and you be come in time , mayhap , for prevent a addition to you family . ' ' ! ' exclaim I , in a fit of indignation . ' in the shape of father - in - law , I mane , sir , ' say : ' the misthress be go to take on with the praacher . ' poor , he add , have make many additions to the illustrious race of ; and my cousin be in , come to little good , both my informant fear , and have manage to run through the small available remains of property which my good old uncle have leave behind he . I see I should have no small family to provide for ; and then , to conclude the evening , , , and I , have a bottle of usquebaugh , the taste of which I have remember for eleven good year , and do not part except with the warmest term of fellowship , and until the sun have be some time in the sky . I be exceedingly affable ; that have always be one of my characteristic . I have no false pride , as many man of high lineage like my own have , and , in default of better company , will hob and nob with a ploughboy or a private soldier just as readily as with the first noble in the land . I go back to the village in the morning , and find a pretext for visit under a device of purchase drug . the hook be still in the wall where my silver - hik sword use to hang ; a blister be lie on the window - sill , where my mother 's ' of ' have its place ; and the odious have find out who I be ( my countryman find out everything , and a great deal more besides ) , and snigger , ask I how i leave the of , and whether my friend the be as much like as the have be . the bell - ringer would have have a ring of bell for I , but there be but one , , who be too fat to pull ; and I ride off before the vicar , ( who have succeed old , who have the living in my time ) , have time to come out to compliment I ; but the rapscallion of the beggarly village have assemble in a dirty army to welcome I , and cheer ' for ! ' as I ride away . my people be not a little anxious regard I , by the time I return to , and the landlord be very much afraid , he say , that the highwayman have get hold of I . there , too , my name and station have be learn from my servant : who have
have not spare he praise of he master , and have invent some magnificent histories concern I . he say it be the truth that I be intimate with half the sovereign of , and the prime favourite with most of they . indeed I have make my uncle 's order of the hereditary , and travel under the name of the , chamberlain to the of - . they give I the best horse the stable possess to carry I on my road to , and the strongest rope for harness ; and we get on pretty well , and there be no rencontre between the highwayman and the pistol with which and I be provide . we lay that night at , and the next day i make my entry into the city of , with four horse to my carriage , five thousand guinea in my purse , and one of the most brilliant reputation in , have quit the city a beggarly boy , eleven year before . the citizen of have as great and laudable a desire for know they neighbour 's concern as the country people have ; and it be impossible for a gentleman , however modest he desire may be ( and such mine have notoriously be through life ) , to enter the capital without have he name print in every newspaper and mention in a number of societie . my name and titles be all over the town the day after my arrival . a great number of polite person do I the honour to call at my lodging , when I selecte they ; and this be a point very necessarily of immediate care , for the hotel in the town be but vulgar holes , unfit for a nobleman of my fashion and elegance . I have be inform of the fact by traveller on the continent ; and determine to fix on a lodging at once , I bade the drivers go slowly up and down the street with my chariot , until I have select a place suitable to my rank . this proceeding , and the uncouth question and behaviour of my German , who be instruct to make inquirie at the different house until convenient apartment could be light upon , bring a immense mob round my coach ; and by the time the room be choose you might have suppose I be the new General of the force , so great be the multitude follow we . I fix at length upon a handsome suite of apartment in , pay the ragged postilion who have drive I a splendid gratuity , and establish myself in the room with my baggage and , desire the landlord to engage I a second fellow to wear my livery , a couple of stout reputable chairmen and they machine , and a coachman who have handsome job - horse to hire for my chariot , and serviceable riding - horse to sell . I give he a handsome sum in advance ; and I promise you the effect of my advertisement be such , that next day i have a regular levee in my antechamber : grooms , valets , and maitre - d'hotel offer themselves without number ; I have proposal for the purchase of horse sufficient to mount a regiment , both from dealers and gentleman of the first fashion . come to propose to I the most elegant bay - mare ever step ; my have a team of four that would not disgrace my friend the emperor ; and the Marquess of send he gentleman and he compliment , state that if I would step up to he stable , or do he the honour of breakfasting with he previously , he would show I the two finest grey in . I determine to accept the invitation of and , but to purchase my horse from the dealer . it be always the best way . besides , in those day , in , if a gentleman warrante he horse , and it be not sound , or a dispute arise , the remedy you have be the offer of a bullet in you waistcoat . I have play at the bullet game too much in earnest to make use of it heedlessly : and I may say , proudly for myself , that I never engage in a duel unless I have a real , available , and prudent reason for it . there be a simplicity about this irish gentry which amuse and make I wonder . if they tell more fib than they downright neighbour across the water , on the other hand they believe more ; and I make myself in a single week such a reputation in as would take a man ten year and a mint of money to acquire in . I have win five hundred thousand pound at play ; I be the favourite of the of ; the confidential agent of of ; it be I win the battle of ; I be the cousin of , the french 's favourite , and a thousand thing beside . indeed , to tell the truth , I hint a number of these story to my kind friend and ; and they be not slow to improve the hint I give they . after have witness the splendour of civilised life abroad , the sight of in the year 1771 , when I return thither , strike I with anything but respect . it be as savage as Warsaw almost , without the regal grandeur of the latter city . the people look more ragged than any race I have ever see , except the gipsy horde along the bank of the . there be , as I have say , not a inn in the town fit for a gentleman of condition to dwell in .
. those luckless fellow who could not keep a carriage , and walk the street at night , run imminent risk of the knife of the woman and ruffian who lay in wait there , -- of a set of rag savage villain , who neither know the use of shoe nor razor ; and as a gentleman enter he chair or he chariot , to be carry to he evening rout , or the play , the flambeaux of the footman would light up such a set of wild gibber Milesian face as would frighten a genteel person of average nerve . I be luckily endow with strong one ; beside , have see my amiable countryman before . I know this description of they will excite anger among some irish patriot , who do not like to have the nakedness of we land abuse , and be angry if the whole truth be tell concern it . but bah ! it be a poor provincial place , , in the old day of which I speak ; and many a tenth - rate german residency be more genteel . there be , it be true , near three hundred resident Per at the period ; and a House of Commons ; and my and he corporation ; and a royster noisy , whereor the student make no small disturbance nightly , patronise the roundhouse , duck obnoxious printer and tradesman , and give the law at the . but I have see too much of the first society of to be much temp by the society of these noisy gentry , and be a little too much of a gentleman to mingle with the dispute and politics of my and he Alderman . in the of there be some dozen of right pleasant fellow . I never hear in the english parliament better speech than from , and , of . , though not a well - breed person , be as amusing and ingenious a table - companion as ever I meet ; and though during 's interminable speech in the I use always to go to sleep , I yet have hear from well - inform party that be a person of considerable ability , and even repute to be eloquent in he more favourable moment . I soon begin to enjoy to the full extent the pleasure that the wretched place affords , and which be within a gentleman 's reach : and the ; , at ; my 's party , where there be a great deal too much booze , and too little play , to suit a person of my elegant and refin habits . ' 's - house , ' and the house of the nobility , be soon open to I ; and I remark with astonishment in the higher circle , what I have experience in the lower on my first unhappy visit to , a extraordinary want of money , and a preposterous deal of promissory note fly about , for which I be quite unwilling to stake my guinea . the lady , too , be mad for play ; but exceed unwilling to pay when they lose . thus , when the old Countess of lose ten piece to I at quadrille , she give I , instead of the money , she Ladyship 's note of hand on she agent in ; which I put , with a great deal of politeness , into the candle . but when the Countess make I a second proposition to play , I say that as soon as she Ladyship 's remittance be arrive , I would be the readiest person to meet she ; but till then be she very humble servant . and I maintain this resolution and singular character throughout the society : give out at ' 's ' that I be ready to play any man , for any sum , at any game ; or to fence with he , or to ride with he ( regard be have to we weight ) , or to shoot fly , or at a mark ; and in this latter accomplishment , especially if the mark be a live one , irish gentleman of that day have no ordinary skill . of course I despatch a courier in my livery to with a private letter for , demand from he full particular of the Countess of 's state of health and mind ; and a touching and eloquent letter to she Ladyship , in which I bade she remember ancient day , which I tie up with a single hair from the lock which I have purchase from she woman , and in which i tell she that remember he oath , and could never forget he . the answer I receive from she be exceedingly unsatisfactory and inexplicit ; that from explicit enough , but not at all pleasant in its contents . my , the of 's younger son , be pay very marked address to the widow ; be a kinsman of the family , and have be call to relative to the will of the decease . now , there be a sort of rough - and - ready law in in those day , which be of great convenience to person desirous of expeditious justice ; and of which the newspaper of the time contain a hundred proof . fellow with the nickname of , , and , be repeatedly send warn letter to landlord , and murder they if the note be unattended to . the celebrate rule in the southern county , and he business seem to be to procure wife for gentleman who have not sufficient means to please the parent of the young lady ; or , perhaps , have not time for a long and intricate courtship . I have find my cousin at , grow
grow very fat , and very poor ; hunt up by Jews and creditor : dwell in all sort of queer corner , from which he issue at nightfall to the Castle , or to he card - party at he tavern ; but he be always the courageous fellow : and I hint to he the state of my affections regard . ' the Countess of ! ' say poor ; ' well , that be a wonder . I myself have be mightily sweet upon a young lady , one of the of , who have ten thousand pound to she fortune , and to whom she Ladyship be guardian ; but how be a poor fellow without a coat to he back to get on with a heiress in such company as that ? I might as well propose for the Countess myself . ' ' you have better not , ' say I , laugh ; ' the man who try run a chance of go out of the world first . ' and I explain to he my own intention regard . , whose respect for I be prodigious when he see how splendo my appearance be , and hear how wonderful my adventur and great my experience of fashionable life have be , be lose in admiration of my daring and energy , when I confide to he my intention of marry the greatest heiress in . I bay go out of town on any pretext he choose , and put a letter into a post-office near , which I prepare in a feigned hand , and in which I give a solemn warning to to quit the country ; say that the great prize be never mean for the likes of he , and that there be heiress enough in , without come to rob they out of the domain of . the letter be write on a dirty piece of paper , in the worst of spell : it come to my by the post-conveyance , and , be a high - spirited young man , he of course laugh at it . as ill - luck would have it for he , he appear in a very short time afterwards ; be introduce to the , at the 's table ; adjourn with he and several other gentleman to the club at ' 's , ' and there , in a dispute about the pedigree of a horse , in which everybody say I be in the right , word arise , and a meeting be the consequence . I have have no affair in since my arrival , and people be anxious to see whether I be equal to my reputation . I make no boast about these matters , but always do they when the time come ; and poor , who have a neat hand and a quick eye enough , but be breed in the clumsy school , only stood before my point until I have determine where I should hit he . my sword go in under he guard , and come out at he back . when he fall , he good - naturedly extend he hand to I , and say , ' . , I be wrong ! ' I feel not very well at ease when the poor fellow make this confession : for the dispute have be of my making , and , to tell the truth , I have never intend it should end in any other way than a meeting . he lay on he bed for four month with the effect of that wound ; and the same post which convey to Lady Lyndon the news of the duel , carry she a message from to say , ' this be number one ! ' ' you , , ' say I , ' shall be . ' '' , ' say my cousin , ' one be enough :' but I have my plan regard he , and determine at once to benefit this honest fellow , and to forward my own design upon the widow . I pay court to my as my uncle 's attainder be not reverse for be out with the Pretender in 1745 , it would have be inconvenient for he to accompany he nephew to the land of we ancestor ; where , if not hang , at least a tedious process of imprisonment , and a doubtful pardon , would have await the good old gentleman . in any important crisis of my life , he advice be always of advantage to I , and I do not fail to seek it at this juncture , and to implore he counsel as regard my pursuit of the widow . I tell he the situation of she heart , as I have describe it in the last chapter ; of the progress that young Poyning have make in she affections , and of she forgetfulness of she old admirer ; and I get a letter , in reply , full of excellent suggestion , by which I do not fail to profit . the kind preface it by say , that he be for the present boarding in the convent at Brussels ; that he have thoughts of make he salut there , and retire for ever from the world , devote himself to the severest practice of religion . meanwhile he write with regard to the lovely widow : it be natural that a person of she vast wealth and not disagreeable person should have many adorer about she ; and that , as in she husband 's lifetime she have show herself not at all disinclin to receive my address , I must make no manner of doubt I be not the first person whom she have so favoured ; nor be I likely to be the last . 'I
'I would , my dear child ,' he add , ' that the ugly attainder round my neck , and the resolution I have form of retiring from a world of sin and vanity altogether , do not prevent I from come personally to you aid in this delicate crisis of you affair ; for , to lead they to a good end , it require not only the indomitable courage , swagger , and audacity , which you possess beyond any young man I have ever know ' ( as for the ' swagger , ' as the call it , I deny it in toto , be always most modest in my demeanour ) ; ' but though you have the vigour to execute , you have not the ingenuity to suggest plan of conduct for the follow out of a scheme that be likely to be long and difficult of execution . would you have ever think of the brilliant scheme of the Countess , which so nearly make you the greatest fortune in , but for the advice and experience of a poor old man , now make up he account with the world , and about to retire from it for good and all ? ' well , with regard to the Countess of , you manner of win she be quite en l'air at present to I ; nor can I advise day by day , as I would I could , accord to circumstance as they arise . but you general scheme should be this . if I remember the letter you use to have from she during the period of the correspondence which the silly woman entertaine you with , much high - flown sentiment pass between you ; and especially be write by she Ladyship herself : she be a blue - stocking , and fond of writing ; she use to make she grief with she husband the continual theme of she correspondence ( as woman will do ) . I recollect several passage in she letter bitterly deplor she fate in be to one so unworthy of she . ' surely , in the mass of billet you possess from she , there must be enough to compromise she . look they well over ; select passage , and threaten to do so . write to she at first in the undoubting tone of a lover who have every claim upon she . then , if she be silent , remonstrate , allud to former promise from she ; produce proof of she former regard for you ; vow despair , destruction , revenge , if she prove unfaithful . frighten she -- astonish she by some daring feat , which will let she see you indomitable resolution : you be the man to do it . you sword have a reputation in , and you have a character for boldness ; which be the first thing that cause my to turn she eye upon you . make the people talk about you at . be as splendid , and as brave , and as odd as possible . how I wish I be near you ! you have no imagination to invent such a character as I would make for you -- but why speak ; have I not have enough of the world and its vanity ? ' there be much practical good sense in this advice ; which I quote , unaccompany with the lengthen description of he mortification and devotion which my uncle indulge in , finish he letter , as usual , with earnest prayer for my conversion to the true faith . but he be constant to he form of worship ; and I , as a man of honour and principle , be resolute to mine ; and have no doubt that the one , in this respect , will be as acceptable as the other . under these direction it be , then , I write to , to ask on my arrival when the most respectful of she admirer might be permit to intrude upon she grief ? then , as she Ladyship be silent , I demand , have she forgote old time , and one whom she have favour with she intimacy at a very happy period ? have ? at the same time I send down by my servant with this letter a present of a little sword for , and a private note to he governor ; whose note of hand , by the way , I possess for a sum -- I forget what -- but such as the poor fellow would have be very unwilling to pay . to this a answer come from she Ladyship 's amanuensis , state that be too much disturb by grief at she recent dreadful calamity to see any one but she own relation ; and advice from my friend , the boy 's governor , state that my be the young kinsman who be about to conseal she . this cause the quarrel between I and the young nobleman ; whom I take care to challenge on he first arrival at . when the news of the duel be brotch to the widow at , my informant write I that shriek and fling down the journal , and say , ' the horrible monster ! he would not shrink from murder , I believe ; ' and little , draw he sword -- the sword I have give he , the rascal !-- declare he would kill with it the man who have hurt . on tell he that I be the donor of the weapon , the little rogue still vow that he would kill I all the same ! indeed , in spite of my kindness to he , that boy always seem to detest I . she Ladyship send up daily courier to inquire after
after the health of ; and , think to myself that she would probably be induce to come to if she be to hear that he be in danger , I manage to have she inform that he be in a precarious state ; that he grow worse ; that have fle in consequence : of this flight I cause the newspaper to give notice also , but indeed it do not carry I beyond the town of , where my poor mother dwelt ; and where , under the difficulty of a duel , I might be sure of have a welcome . those reader who have the sentiment of filial duty strong in they mind , will wonder that I have not yet describe my interview with that kind mother whose sacrifice for I in youth have be so considerable , and for whom a man of my warm and affectionate nature could not but feel the most enduring and sincere regard . but a man , move in the exalted sphere of society in which I now stand , have he public duty to perform before he consult he private affections ; and so , upon my first arrival , I despatch a messenger to , state my arrival , convey to she my sentiment of respect and duty , and promise to pay they to she personally so soon as my business in would leave I free . this , I need not say , be very considerable . I have my horse to buy , my establishment to arrange , my entree into the genteel world to make ; and , have announce my intention to purchase horse and live in a genteel style , be in a couple of day so pester by visit of the nobility and gentry , and so hamper by invitation to dinner and supper , that it become exceedingly difficult for I during some day to manage my anxiously desire visit to . it appear that the good soul provide a entertainment as soon as she hear of my arrival , and invite all she humble acquaintance of to be present : but I be engage subsequently to my on the day appoint , and be , of course , oblige to break the promise that I have make to to attend she humble festival . I endeavoure to sweeten the disappointment by send my mother a handsome satin sack and velvet robe , which I purchase for she at the best mercer in ( and indeed tell she I have bring from expressly for she ) ; but the messenger whom I despatch with the present bring back the parcel , with the piece of satin torn half way up the middle : and I do not need he description to be aware that something have offend the good lady ; who come out , he say , and abuse he at the door , and would have box he car , but that she be restrain by a gentleman in black ; who I conclude , with justice , be she clerical friend . this reception of my present make I rather dread than hope for a interview with , and delay my visit to she for some day further . I write she a dutiful and soothing letter , to which there be no answer return ; although I mention that on my way to the capital I have be at , and revisit the old haunt of my youth . I do not care to own that she be the only human being whom I be afraid to face . I can recollect she fit of anger as a child , and the reconciliation , which use to be still more violent and painful : and so , instead of go myself , I send my factotum , , to she ; who ride back , say that he have meet with a reception he would not again undergo for twenty guinea ; that he have be dismiss the house , with strict injunction to inform I that my mother disown I for ever . this parental anathema , as it be , affect I much , for I be always the most dutiful of son ; and I determine to go as soon as possible , and brave what I know must be a inevitable scene of reproach and anger , for the sake , as I hope , of as certain a reconciliation . I have be give one night a entertainment to some of the genteelest company in , and be show my downstairs with a pair of wax taper , when I find a woman in a grey coat seat at my doorstep : to whom , take she for a beggar , I tender a piece of money , and whom my noble friend , who be rather hot with wine , begin to joke , as my door close and I bade they all good - night . I be rather surprise and affect to find afterwards that the hooded woman be no other than my mother ; whose pride have make she vow that she would not enter my door , but whose natural maternal yearning have make she long to see she son 's face once again , and who have thus plan herself in disguise at my gate . indeed , I have find in my experience that these be the only woman who never deceive a man , and whose affection remain constant through all trial . think of the hour that the kind soul must have pass , lonely in the street , listen to the din and merriment within my apartment , the clinking of the glassis , the laughing , the choruse , and the cheering . when my affair with happen , and it become necessary to I , for the reason
reason I have state , to be out of the way ; now , think I , be the time to make my peace with my good mother : she will never refuse I a asylum now that I seem in distress . so send to she a notice that I be come , that I have have a duel which have bring I into trouble , and require I should go into hiding , I follow my messenger half - a - hour afterwards : and , I warrant I , there be no want of a good reception , for presently , be introduce into a empty room by the barefooted maid who wait upon , the door be open , and the poor mother fling herself into my arm with a scream , and with transport of joy which I shall not attempt to describe -- they be but to be comprehend by woman who have hold in they arm a only child after a twelve year ' absence from he . the , my mother 's director , be the only person to whom the door of she habitation be open during my sojourn ; and he would take no denial . he mix for himself a glass of rum -punch , which he see in the habit of drinking at my good mother 's charge , groan aloud , and forthwith begin read I a lecture upon the sinfulness of my past course , and especially of the last horrible action I have be commit . ' Sinful ! ' say my mother , bristl up when she son be attack ; ' sure we be all sinner ; and it be you , , who have give I the inexpressible blessing to let I know that . but how else would you have have the poor child behave ? ' 'I would have have the gentleman avoid the drink , and the quarrel , and this wick duel altogether , ' answer the clergyman . but my mother cut he short , by say such sort of conduct might be very well in a person of he cloth and he birth , but it neither become a nor a Barry . in fact , she be quite delighted with the thought that I have pink a english marquis 's son in a duel ; and so , to conseal she , I tell she of a score more in which I have be engage , and of some of which I have already inform the reader . as my late antagonist be in no sort of danger when I spread that report of he perilous situation , there be no particular call that my hiding should be very close . but the widow do not know the fact as well as I do : and cause she house to be barricad , and , she barefoote serving - wench , to be a perpetual sentinel to give alarm , lest the officer should be in search of I . the only person I expect , however , be my cousin , who be to bring I the welcome intelligence of 's arrival ; and I own , after two day ' close confinement at , in which I narrate all the adventur of my life to my mother , and succeed in make she accept the dress she have formerly refuse , and a considerable addition to she income which I be glad to make , I be very glad when I see that reprobate , as my mother call he , ride up to the door in my carriage with the welcome intelligence for my mother , that the young lord be out of danger ; and for I , that the Countess of have arrive in . ' and I wish , , that the young gentleman have be in danger a little longer , ' say the widow , she eye fill with tear , ' and you would have stay so much the more with you poor old mother . ' but I dry she tear , embrace she warmly , and promise to see she often ; and hint I would have , mayhap , a house of my own and a noble daughter to welcome she . ' who be she , Redmond dear ? ' say the old lady . ' one of the noblest and richest woman in the empire , mother , ' answer I . ' no mere this time ,' I add , laugh : with which hope I leave . in the best of temper . no man can bear less malice than I do ; and , when I have once carry my point , I be one of the most placable creature in the world . I be a week in before I think it necessary to quit that capital . I have become quite reconcile to my rival in that time ; make a point of call at he lodging , and speedily become a intimate consoler of he bed - side . he have a gentleman to whom I do not neglect to be civil , and towards whom I order my people to be particular in they attention ; for I be naturally anxious to learn what my 's position with the lady of have really be , whether other suitor be about the widow , and how she would bear the news of he wound . the young nobleman himself enlighten I somewhat upon the subject I be most desirous to inquire into . ' , ' say he to I one morning when I go to pay he my compliment , ' I find you be a old acquaintance with my kinswoman , the Countess of . she write I a page of abuse of you in a letter here ; and the strange part of
of the story be this , that one day when there be talk about you at , and the splendid equipage you be exhibit in , the fair widow vow and protest she never have heard of you . ' " oh yes , mamma , " say the little , " the tall dark man at with the cast in he eye , who use to make my governor tipsy and send I the sword : he name be . " ' but my order the boy out of the room , and persist in know nothing about you . ' ' and be you a kinsman and acquaintance of my , my ? ' say I , in a tone of grave surprise . ' yes , indeed , ' answer the young gentleman . 'I leave she house but to get this ugly wound from you . and it come at a most unlucky time too . ' ' why more unlucky now than at another moment ? ' ' why , look you , , I think the widow be not unpartial to I . I think I might have induce she to make we connection a little closer : and faith , though she be older than I be , she be the richest party now in . ' ' my , ' say I , 'will you let I ask you a frank but a odd question ?-- will you show I she letter ? ' ' indeed I will do no such thing , ' reply he , in a rage . ' Nay , do not be angry . if _i_ show you letter of 's to I , will you let I see hers to you ? ' ' what , in 's name , do you mean , ? ' say the young gentleman . '_I mean that I passionately love . I mean that I be a -- that I rather be not indifferent to she . I mean that I love she to distraction at this present moment , and will die myself , or kill the man who possess she before I . ' ' you marry the greatest heiress and the noblest blood in ? ' say haughtily . ' there be no nobler blood in than mine , ' answer I : ' and I tell you I do not know whether to hope or not . but this I know , that there be day in which , poor as I be , the great heiress do not disdain to look down upon my poverty : and that any man who marry she pass over my dead body to do it . it be lucky for you ,' I add gloomily , ' that on the occasion of my engagement with you , I do not know what be you view regard my . my poor boy , you be a lad of courage and I love you . mine be the first sword in , and you would have be lie in a narrower bed than that you now occupy . ' ' ! ' say : 'I be not four year younger than you be . ' ' you be forty year younger than I be in experience . I have pass through every grade of life . with my own skill and daring I have make my own fortune . I have be in fourteen pitch battle as a private soldier , and have be twenty - three time on the ground , and never be touch but once ; and that be by the sword of a french maitre - d'arme , whom I kill . I start in life at seventeen , a beggar , and be now at seven - and - twenty , with twenty thousand guinea . do you suppose a man of my courage and energy can not attain anything that he dare , and that have claim upon the widow , I will not press they ? ' this speech be not exactly true to the letter ( for I have multiply my pitch battle , my duel , and my wealth somewhat ) ; but I see that it make the impression I desire to effect upon the young gentleman 's mind , who listen to my statement with peculiar seriousness , and whom I presently leave to digest it . a couple of day afterwards I call to see he again , when I bring with I some of the letter that have pass between I and my . ' here , ' say I , ' look -- I show it you in confidence -- it be a lock of she Ladyship 's hair ; here be she letter sign , and address to . here be a poem , " when bedeck the mead with light , and pallid shed she ray , " address by she Ladyship to you humble servant . ' ' ! Eugenio ! bedeck the mead with light ? ' cry the young lord . ' be I dream ? why , my dear , the widow have send I the very poem herself ! " Rejoice in the sunshine bright , or muse in the evening grey . "' I could not help laugh as he make the quotation . they be , in fact , the very word my have address to I . and we find , upon compare letter , that whole passage of eloquence figure in the one correspondence which appear in the other . see what it be to be a blue - stocking and have a love of letter-writing ! the young man put down the papers in great perturbation . ' well , thank ! ' say he , after a pause of some duration ,--' thank for a good riddance ! ah , , what a woman
woman I might have marry have these lucky papers not come in my way ! I think my have a heart , sir , I must confess , though not a very warm one ; and that , at least , one could trust she . but marry she now ! I would have liefinitely send my servant into the street to get I a wife , as put up with such a Ephesian matron as that . ' ' my , ' say I , ' you little know the world . remember what a bad husband have , and do not be astonished that she , on she side , should be indifferent . have she , I will dare to wager , ever pass beyond the bounds of harmless gallantry , or sinn beyond the composing of a sonnet or a billet - doux . ' 'My wife , ' say the little lord , ' shall write no sonnet or billet - doux ; and I be heartily glad to think I have obtain , in good time , a knowledge of the heartless vixen with whom I think myself for a moment in love . ' the wounded young nobleman be either , as I have say , very young and green in matter of the world -- for to suppose that a man would give up forty thousand a year , because , forsooth , the lady connect with it have write a few sentimental letter to a young fellow , be too absurd -- or , as I be inclin to believe , he be glad of a excuse to quit the field altogether , be by no means anxious to meet the victorious sword of a second time . when the idea of Poynings 's danger , or the reproach probably address by he to the widow regard myself , have bring this exceedingly weak and feeble woman up to , as I expect , and my worthy have inform I of she arrival , I quit my good mother , who be quite reconcile to I ( indeed the duel have do that ) , and find the disconsolate be in the habit of pay visit to the wounded swain ; much to the annoyance , the servants tell I , of that gentleman . the be often absurdly high and haughty upon a point of punctilio ; and , after he kinswoman 's conduct , Poynings swore he would have no more to do with she . I have this information from he Lordship 's gentleman ; with whom , as I have say , I take particular care to be friend ; nor be I deny admission by he porter , when I choose to call , as before . she Ladyship have most likely bribe that person , as I have ; for she have find she way up , though deny admission ; and , in fact , I have watch she from she own house to 's lodging , and see she descmend from she chair there and enter , before I myself follow she . I propose to await she quietly in the ant - room , to make a scene there , and reproach she with infidelity , if necessary ; but matter be , as it happen , arrange much more conveniently for I ; and walk , unannounce , into the outer room of he Lordship 's apartment , I have the felicity of hearing in the next chamber , of which the door be partially open , the voice of my . she be in full cry , appeal to the poor patient , as he lay confine in he bed , and speak in the most passionate manner . ' what can lead you , , ' she say , 'to doubt of my faith ? how can you break my heart by cast I off in this monstrous manner ? do you wish to drive you poor to the grave ? well , well , I shall join there the dear depart angel . ' ' who enter it three month since , ' say , with a sneer . ' it be a wonder you have survive so long . ' ' do not treat you poor in this cruel cruel manner , ! ' cry the widow . ' ! ' say , 'my wound be bad . my doctor forbid I much talk . suppose you Antonio tired , my dear . can not you conseal yourself with somebody else ? ' ' , ! ! ' ' Conseal yourself with , ' say the young nobleman bitterly , and begin ring he bell ; on which he valet , who be in a inner room , come out , and he bay he show she Ladyship downstairs . issue from the room in the greatest flurry . she be dress in deep weed , with a veil over she face , and do not recognise the person wait in the outer apartment . as she go down the stair , I step lightly after she , and as she chairman open she door , spring forward , and take she hand to place she in the vehicle . ' Dearest widow , ' say I , ' he Lordship speak correctly . Conseal yourself with ! ' she be too frightened even to scream , as she chairman carry she away . she be set down at she house , and you may be sure that I be at the chair - door , as before , to help she out . ' Monstrous man ! ' say she , 'I desire you to leave I . ' ' madam , it would be against my oath , ' reply I ; ' recollect the vow send to . ' ' if you do not quit
quit I , I will call for the domestic to turn you from the door . ' ' what ! when I be come with my 's letter in my pocket , to return they mayhap ? you can soothe , madam , but you can not frighten . ' ' what be it you would have of I , sir ? ' say the widow , rather agitate . ' let I come upstairs , and I will tell you all ,' I reply ; and she condescende to give I she hand , and to permit I to lead she from she chair to she draw - room . when we be alone I open my mind honourably to she . ' Dearest madam , ' say I , 'do not let you cruelty drive a desperate slave to fatal measure . I adore you . in former day you allow I to whisper my passion to you unrestrained ; at present you drive I from you door , leave my letter unanswered , and prefer another to I . my flesh and blood can not bear such treatment . look upon the punishment I have be oblige to inflict ; tremble at that which I may be compelle to administer to that unfortunate young man : so sure as he marry you , madam , he die . ' 'I do not recognise , ' say the widow , ' the least right you have to give the law to the Countess of : I do not in the least understand you threat , or heed they . what have pass between I and a irish adventurer that should authorise this impertinent intrusion ? ' 'these have pass , madam , ' say I ,--' 's letter to . they may have be very innocent ; but will the world believe it ? you may have only intend to play with the heart of the poor artless irish gentleman who adore and confide in you . but who will believe the story of you innocence , against the irrefragable testimony of you own handwriting ? who will believe that you could write these letter in the mere wantonness of coquetry , and not under the influence of affection ? ' ' ! ' cry my , ' could you dare to construe out of those idle letter of mine any other meaning than that which they really bear ? ' 'I will construe anything out of they , ' say I ; ' such be the passion which animate I towards you . I have swear it -- you must and shall be mine ! do you ever know I promise to accomplish a thing and fail ? which will you prefer to have from I -- a love such as woman never know from man before , or a hatred to which there exist no parallel ? ' 'A woman of my rank , sir , can fear nothing from the hatred of a adventurer like yourself , ' reply the lady , draw up stately . ' look at you Poyning --be he of you rank ? you be the cause of that young man 's wound , madam ; and , but that the instrument of you savage cruelty relent , would have be the author of he murder -- yes , of he murder ; for , if a wife be faithless , do not she arm the husband who punish the seducer ! and I look upon you , , as my wife . ' ' ? wife , sir ! ' cry the widow , quite astonished . ' yes , wife ! husband ! I be not one of those poor soul with whom coquette can play , and who may afterwards throw they aside . you would forget what pass between we at : would forget ; but I will not let you forget I . you think to trifle with my heart , do you ? when once move , , it be move for ever . I love you -- love as passionately now as I do when my passion be hopeless ; and , now that I can win you , do you think I will forego you ? ! you little know the power of you own charms if you think they effect be so easily obliterate -- you little know the constancy of this pure and noble heart if you think that , have once love , it can ever cease to adore you . no ! I swear by you cruelty that I will revenge it ; by you wonderful beauty that I will win it , and be worthy to win it . Lovly , fascinating , fickle , cruel woman ! you shall be mine -- I swear it ! you wealth may be great ; but be I not of a generous nature enough to use it worthily ? you rank be lofy ; but not so lofy as my ambition . you throw yourself away once on a cold and spiritless debauchee : give yourself now , , to a man ; and one who , however lofty you rank may be , will enhance it and become it ! ' as I pour word to this effect out on the astonished widow , I stand over she , and fascinate she with the glance of my eye ; see she turn red and pale with fear and wonder ; see that my praise of she charms and the exposition of my passion be not unwelcome to she , and witness with triumphant composure the mastery I be gain over she . terror , be sure of that , be not a bad ingredient of love . a man who will fiercely to win the heart of a weak and vapourish woman must succeed , if he have opportunity enough
enough . ' terrible man ! ' say , shrink from I as soon as I have do speak ( indeed , I be at a loss for word , and think of another speech to make to she ) --'terrible man ! leave I . ' I see that I have make a impression on she , from those very word . ' if she let I into the house to - morrow , ' say I , ' she be mine . ' as I go downstairs I put ten guinea into the hand of the hall - porter , who look quite astonished at such a gift . ' it be to repay you for the trouble of open the door to I , ' say I ; ' you will have to do so often . ' I provide Nobly for my family the next day when I go back , my fear be realise : the door be refuse to I -- my be not at home . this I know to be false : I have watch the door the whole morning from a lodging I take at a house opposite . ' you lady be not out , ' say I : ' she have deny I , and I can not , of course , force my way to she . but listen : you be a ? ' ' that I be , ' say the fellow , with a air of the utmost superiority . ' you honour could tell that by my HACCENT . ' I know he be , and might therefore offer he a bribe . a irish family servant in rag , and though he wage be never pay he , would probably fl the money in you face . ' , then , ' say I . ' you lady 's letter pass through you hand , do not they ? a crown for every one that you bring I to read . there be a whisky - shop in the next street ; bring they there when you go to drink , and call for I by the name of . ' 'I recollect you honour at , ' say the fellow , grinning : ' seven be the main , hey ? ' and be exceedingly proud of this reminiscence , I bay my inferior adieu . I do not defend this practice of letter - open in private life , except in casis of the most urgent necessity : when we must follow the example of we betters , the statesman of all , and , for the sake of a great good , infringe a little matter of ceremony . my 's letter be no the worse for be open , and a great deal the better ; the knowledge obtain from the perusal of some of she multifarious epistle enable I to become intimate with she character in a hundred way , and obtain a power over she by which I be not slow to profit . by the aid of the letter and of my English friend , whom I always regal with the best of liquor , and satisfy with present of money still more agreeable ( I use to put on a livery in order to meet he , and a red wig , in which it be impossible to know the dashing and elegant ) , I get such a insight into the widow 's movement as astonished she . I know beforehand to what public place she would go ; they be , on account of she widowhood , but few : and wherever she appear , at church or in the park , I be always ready to offer she she book , or to canter on horseback by the side of she chariot . many of she Ladyship 's letter be the most whimsical rodomontade that ever blue - stocking penn . she be a woman who take up and throw off a greater number of dear friend than any one I ever know . to some of these female darling she begin presently to write about my unworthy self , and it be with a sentiment of extreme satisfaction I find at length that the widow be grow dreadfully afraid of I ; call I she bete noire , she dark spirit , she murderous adorer , and a thousand other name indicative of she extreme disquietude and terror . it be : ' the wretch have be dog my chariot through the park , ' or , 'my fate pursue I at church , ' and 'my inevitable adorer hand I out of my chair at the mercer 's , ' or what not . my wish be to increase this sentiment of awe in she bosom , and to make she believe that I be a person from whom escape be impossible . to this end I bribe a fortune - teller , whom she consult along with a number of the most foolish and distinguished people of , in those day ; and who , although she go dress like one of she waiting - woman , do not fail to recognise she real rank , and to describe as she future husband she persever adorer , . this incident disturb she very much . she write about it in term of great wonder and terror to she female correspondent . ' can this monster , ' she write , ' indeed do as he boast , and bend even Fate to he will ?--can he make I marry he though I cordially detest he , and bring I a slave to he foot . the horrid look of he black serpent - like eye fascinate and frighten I : it seem to follow I everywhere , and even when I close my own eye , the dreadful gaze penetrate
penetrate the lid , and be still upon I . ' when a woman begin to talk of a man in this way , he be a ass who do not win she ; and , for my part , I use to follow she about , and put myself in a attitude opposite she , ' and fascinate she with my glance , ' as she say , most assiduously . , she former admirer , be meanwhile keep he room with he wound , and seem determined to give up all claim to she favour ; for he deny she admittance when she call , send no answer to she multiplied correspondence , and contente himself by say generally , that the surgeon have forbide he to receive visitor or to answer letter . thus , while he go into the background , I come forward , and take good care that no other rival should present themselves with any chance of success ; for , as soon as I hear of one , I have a quarrel fasten on he , and , in this way , pink two more , besides my first victim . I always take another pretext for quarrell with they than the real one of attention to , so that no scandal or hurt to she Ladyship 's feeling might arise in consequence ; but she very well know what be the meaning of these duel ; and the young fellow of , too , by lay two and two together , begin to perceive that there be a certain dragon in watch for the wealthy heiress , and that the dragon must be subdue first before they could get at the lady . I warrant that , after the first three , not many champion be find to address the lady ; and have often laugh ( in my sleeve ) to see many of the young beaux ride by the side of she carriage scamper off as soon as my bay - mare and green livery make they appearance . I want to impress she with some great and awful instance of my power , and to this end have determine to confer a great benefit upon my honest cousin , and carry off for he the fair object of he affections , , under the very eye of she guardian and friend , ; and in the tooth of the squire , the young lady 's brother , who pass the season at , and make as much swagger and to - do about they sister 's L10,000 irish , as if she have have a plum to she fortune . the girl be by no means averse to ; and it only show how faint - spirit some man be , and how a superior genius can instantly overcome difficulty which to common mind seem insuperable , that he never have think of run off with she : as I at once and boldly do . have be a ward in until she attain she majority ( before which period it would have be a dangerous matter for I to put in execution the scheme I meditate concern she ) ; but , though now free to marry whom she like , she be a young lady of timid disposition , and as much under fear of she brother and relative as though she have not be independent of they . they have some friend of they own in view for the young lady , and have scornfully reject the proposal of , the ruin gentleman ; who be quite unworthy , as these rustic buck think , of the hand of such a prodigiously wealthy heiress as they sister . find herself lonely in she great house in , the Countess of invite she friend to pass the season with she at ; and , in a fit of maternal fondness , also send for she son the little , and my old acquaintance he governor , to come to the capital and bear she company . a family coach bring the boy , the heiress , and the tutor from ; and I determine to take the first opportunity of put my plan in execution . for this chance I have not very long to wait . I have say , in a former chapter of my biography , that the kingdom of be at this period ravage by various party of banditti ; who , under the name of , , , with captain at they head , kill proctor , fire stack , hough and maim cattle , and take the law into they own hand . one of these band , or several of they for what I know , be command by a mysterious personage call ; whose business seem to be that of marry people with or without they own consent , or that of they parent . the and of that period ( the year 1772 ) teem with proclamation from the , offer reward for the apprehension of this dreadful and he gang , and describe at length various exploit of the savage aide - de - camp of . I determine to make use , if not of the service , at any rate of the name of , and put my cousin in possession of he lady and she ten thousand pound . she be no great beauty , and , I presume , it be the money he love rather than the owner of it . on account of she widowhood , could not as yet frequent the ball and rout which the hospitable nobility of be in the custom of give ; but she friend have no such cause for retirement , and be glad to attend any party to which she might be invite . I make a present of a couple of handsome suit
suit of velvet , and by my influence procure he a invitation to many of the most elegant of these assemblie . but he have not have my advantage or experience of the manners of ; be as shy with lady as a young colt , and could no more dance a minuet than a donkey . he make very little way in the polite world or in he mistress 's heart : in fact , I could see that she preferre several other young gentleman to he , who be more at home in the ball - room than poor ; he have make he first impression upon the heiress , and feel he first flame for she , in she father 's house of , where he use to hunt and get drunk with the old gentleman . 'I could do THIm two well enough , anyhow , ' would say , heaive a sigh ; ' and if it be drink or ride across country would do it , there be no man in would have a better chance with . ' ' never fear , , ' be my reply ; ' you shall have you , or my name be not . ' my -- who be one of the most elegant and accomplish nobleman in in those day , a fine scholar and wit , a gentleman who have travel much abroad , where I have the honour of know he -- give a magnificent masquerade at he house of , some few mile from , on the Dunleary road . and it be at this entertainment that I be determine that should be make happy for life . be invite to the masquerade , and the little , who longe to witness such a scene ; and it be agree that he be to go under the guardianship of he governor , my old friend the . I learn what be the equipage in which the party be to be convey to the ball , and take my measure accordingly . be not present : he fortune and quality be not sufficient to procure he a invitation to so distinguished a place , and I have it give out three day previous that he have be arrest for debt : a rumour which surprise nobody who know he . I appear that night in a character with which I be very familiar , that of a private soldier in the of 's guard . I have a grotesque mask make , with a immense nose and moustach , talk a jumble of broken and German , in which the latter greatly predominate ; and have crowd round I laugh at my droll accent , and whose curiosity be increase by a knowledge of my previous history . be attire as a antique princess , with little as a page of the time of chivalry ; he hair be in powder , he doublet rose - colour , and pea-green and silver , and he look very handsome and saucy as he strut about with my sword by he side . as for , he walk about very demurely in a domino , and perpetually pay he respects to the buffet , and eat enough cold chicken and drank enough punch and champagne to satisfy a company of grenadier . the come and go in state - the ball be magnificent . have partner in plenty , among whom be myself , who walk a minuet with she ( if the clumsy waddl of the irish heiress may be call by such a name ) ; and I take occasion to plead my passion for in the most pathetic term , and to beg she friend 's interference in my favour . it be three hour past midnight when the party for go away . have long since be asleep in one of 's china closet . be exceedingly husky in talk , and unsteady in gait . a young lady of the present day would be alarm to see a gentleman in such a condition ; but it be a common sight in those jolly old time , when a gentleman be think a milksop unless he be occasionally tipsy . I see to she carriage , with several other gentleman : and , peer through the crowd of rag linkboy , driver , beggar , drunken man and woman , who use invariably to wait round great man 's door when festivity be go on , see the carriage drive off , with a hurrah from the mob ; then come back presently to the supper - room , where I talk , favour the three or four toper still there with a - chorus , and attack the dish and wine with great resolution . ' how can you drink aisy with that big nose on ? ' say one gentleman . ' go a be hangt ! ' say I , in the true accent , apply myself again to the wine ; with which the other laugh , and I pursue my supper in silence . there be a gentleman present who have see the party go off , with whom I have make a bet , which I lose ; and the next morning I call upon he and pay it he . all which particular the reader will be surprised at hearing enumerate ; but the fact be , that it be not I who go back to the party , but my late german valet , who be of my size , and , dress in my mask , could perfectly pass for I . we change clothes in a hackney - coach that stand near 's chariot , and drive after it , speedily overtake it . the fate vehicle which bear the lovely object of 's affections have not advance very far , when ,
, in the midst of a deep rut in the road , it come suddenly to with a jolt ; the footman , spring off the back , cry ' stop ! ' to the coachman , warn he that a wheel be off , and that it would be dangerous to proceed with only three . wheel - cap have not be invent in those day , as they have since be by the ingenious builder of . and how the linch - pin of the wheel have come out I do not pretend to say ; but it possibly may have be extract by some rogue among the crowd before 's gate . thrust she head out of the window , scream as lady do ; Runt the chaplain wake up from he boozy slumber ; and little , start up and draw he little sword , say , ' do not be afraid , : if it be footpad , I be armed . ' the young rascal have the spirit of a lion , that be the truth ; as I must acknowledge , in spite of all my after quarrel with he . the hackney - coach which have be follow 's chariot by this time come up , and the coachman see the disaster , step down from he box , and politely request she Ladyship 's honour to enter he vehicle ; which be as clean and elegant as any person of tiptop quality might desire . this invitation be , after a minute or two , accept by the passenger of the chariot : the hackney - coachman promise to drive they to Dublin 'in a hurry . ' Thady , the valet , propose to accompany he young master and the young lady ; and the coachman , who have a friend seemingly drink by he side on the box , with a grin tell to get up behind . however , as the footboard there be covered with spike , as a defence against the street - boy , who love a ride gratis , 's fidelity would not induce he to brave these ; and he be persuade to remain by the wounded chariot , for which he and the coachman manufactur a linch - pin out of a neighbouring hedge . meanwhile , although the hackney - coachman drive on rapidly , yet the party withing seem to consider it be a long distance from ; and what be 's astonishment , on look out of the window at length , to see around she a lonely heath , with no sign of building or city . she begin forthwith to scream out to the coachman to stop ; but the man only whip the horse the faster for she noise , and bade she Ladyship ' hould on --'twas a short cut he be take . ' continue scream , the coachman flog , the horse galloping , until two or three man appear suddenly from a hedge , to whom the fair one cry for assistance ; and the young open the coach - door , jump valiantly out , toppl over head and heel as he fall ; but jump up in a instant , he draw he little sword , and , run towards the carriage , exclaim , ' this way , gentlemen ! stop the rascal ! ' ' stop ! ' cry the man ; at which the coachman pull up with extraordinary obedience . Runt all the while lay tipsy in the carriage , have only a dreamy half - consciousness of all that be go on . the newly arrive champion of female distress now hold a consultation , in which they look at the young lord and laugh considerably . ' do not be alarm , ' say the leader , come up to the door ; ' one of my people shall mount the box by the side of that treacherous rascal , and , with you Ladyship 's leave , I and my companion will get in and see you home . we be well armed , and can defend you in case of danger . ' with this , and without more ado , he jump into the carriage , he companion follow he . ' know you place , fellow ! ' cry out little indignantly : ' and give place to the ! ' and put himself before the huge person of the new - comer , who be about to enter the hackney - coach . ' get out of that , my , ' say the man , in a broad brogue , and shove he aside . on which the boy , cry ' ! thieve ! ' draw out he little hanger , and run at the man , and would have woun he ( for a small sword will wound as well as a great one ) ; but he opponent , who be arm with a long stick , strike the weapon luckily out of the lad 's hand : it go fly over he head , and leave he aghast and mortify at he discomfiture . he then pull off he hat , make he Lordship a low bow , and enter the carriage ; the door of which be shut upon he by he confederate , who be to mount the box . might have scream ; but I presume she shriek be stop by the sight of a enormous horse - pistol which one of she champion produce , who say , ' no harm be intend you , ma 'am , but if you cry out , we must gag you ; ' on which she suddenly become as mute as a fish . all these event 's take place in a exceedingly short space of time ; and when the three invader have
have take possession of the carriage , the poor little be leave bewilder and astonished on the heath , one of they put he head out of the window , say ,-- ' my , a word with you . ' ' what be it ? ' say the boy , begin to whimper : he be but eleven year old , and he courage have be excellent hitherto . ' you be only two mile from . walk back till you come to a big stone , there turn to the right , and keep on straight till you get to the high - road , when you will easily find you way back . and when you see she Ladyship you mamma , give 's compliment , and say be go to be married . ' 'o heaven ! ' sigh out that young lady . the carriage drive swiftly on , and the poor little nobleman be leave alone on the heath , just as the morning begin to break . he be fairly frightened ; and no wonder . he think of run after the coach ; but he courage and he little leg fail he : so he sit down upon a stone and cry for vexation . it be in this way that make what I call a marriage . when he halt with he two groomsman at the cottage where the ceremony be to be perform , , the chaplain , at first decline to perform it . but a pistol be hold at the head of that unfortunate preceptor , and he be tell , with dreadful oath , that he miserable brain would be blow out ; when he consent to read the service . the lovely have , very likely , a similar inducement hold out to she , but of that I know nothing ; for I drive back to town with the coachman as soon as we have set the bridal party down , and have the satisfaction of finding , my german , arrive before I : he have come back in my carriage in my dress , have leave the masquerade undiscover , and do everything there accord to my order . poor Runt come back the next day in a piteous plight , keep silence as to he share in the occurrence of the evening , and with a dismal story of have be drink , of have be waylaid and bound , of have be leave on the road and pick up by a cart , which be come in with provision to , and find he helpless on the road . there be no possible means of fix any share of the conspiracy upon he . , who , too , find he way home , be unable in any way to identify I . but know that I be concerned in the plot , for I meet she hurrie the next day to the Castle ; all the town be up about the enlevement . and I salute she with a smile so diabolical , that I know she be aware that I have be concerned in the daring and ingenious scheme . thus it be that I repay 's kindness to I in early day ; and have the satisfaction of restore the fall fortune of a deserve branch of my family . he take he bride into , where he live with she in the strictest seclusion until the affair be blow over ; the strive everywhere in vain to discover he retreat . they do not for a while even know who be the lucky man who have carry off the heiress ; nor be it until she write a letter some week afterwards , sign , and express perfect happiness in she new condition , and state that she have be marry by 's chaplain , that the truth be know , and my worthy friend confess he share of the transaction . as he good - natured mistress do not dismiss he from he post in consequence , everybody persist in suppose that poor be privy to the plot ; and the story of she Ladyship 's passionate attachment for I gain more and more credit . I be not slow , you may be sure , in profiting by these rumour . every one thought I have a share in the marriage ; though no one could prove it . every one thought I be well with the widow Countess ; though no one could show that I say so . but there be a way of prove a thing even while you contradict it , and I use to laugh and joke so apropo that all man begin to wish I joy of my great fortune , and look up to I as the affianced husband of the greatest heiress in the kingdom . the papers take up the matter ; the female friend of remonstrate with she and cry ' ! ' even the english journal and magazine , which in those day be very scandalous , talk of the matter ; and whisper that a beautiful and accomplish widow , with a title and the largest possession in the two kingdom , be about to bestow she hand upon a young gentleman of high birth and fashion , who have distinguished himself in the service of he the --- of ---- . I will not say who be the author of these paragraph ; or how two picture , one represent myself under the title of ' the , ' and the other as ' the Countess of , ' actually appear in the town and country , publish at , and contain the fashionable tittle - tattle of the day . be so perplex and terrify by this continual hold upon she , that she determine to leave the country . well ,
, she do ; and who be the first to receive she on landing at ? you humble servant , , . and , to cry all , the , which announce she Ladyship 's departure , announce mine the day before . there be not a soul but think she have follow I to ; whereas she be only fly I . vain hope !-- a man of my resolution be not thus to be balk in pursuit . have she fle to the antipode , I would have be there : ay , and would have follow she as far as do ! she Ladyship have a house in , , more splendid than that which she possess in ; and , know that she would come thither , I proceed she to the capital , and take handsome apartment in , hard by . I have the same intelligence in she house which I have procure in . the same faithful porter be there to give I all the information I require . I promise to treble he wage as soon as a certain event should happen . I win over 's companion by a present of a hundred guinea down , and a promise of two thousand when I should be married , and gain the favour of she favourite lady 's - maid by a bribe of similar magnitude . my reputation have so far proceed I in that , on my arrival , number of the genteel be eager to receive I at they rout . we have no idea in this humdrum age what a gay and splendid place be then : what a passion for play there be among young and old , male and female ; what thousand be lose and win in a night ; what beauty there be -- how brilliant , gay , and dash ! everybody be delightfully wick : the of and set the example ; the nobles follow close behind . run away be the fashion . ah ! it be a pleasant time ; and lucky be he who have fire , and youth , and money , and could live in it ! I have all these ; and the old frequenter of ' 's , ' ' 's , ' and ' 's ' could tell story of the gallantry , spirit , and high fashion of . the progress of a love - story be tedious to all those who be not concerned , and I leave such theme to the hack novel - writer , and the young boarding - school miss for whom they write . it be not my intention to follow , step by step , the incident of my courtship , or to narrate all the difficulty I have to contend with , and my triumphant manner of surmount they . Suffice it to say , I do overcome these difficulty . I be of opinion , with my friend the late ingenious , that such impediment be nothing in the way of a man of spirit ; and that he can convert indifference and aversion into love , if he have perseverance and cleverness sufficient . by the time the Countess 's widowhood be expired , I have find mean to be receive into she house ; I have she woman perpetually talk in my favour , vaunte my power , expatiat upon my reputation , and boast of my success and popularity in the fashionable world . also , the best friend I have in the prosecution of my tender suit be the Countess 's noble relative ; who be far from know the service that they do I , and to whom I beg leave to tender my heartfelt thanks for the abuse with which they then load I ! and to whom I fl my utter contempt for the calumny and hatre with which they have subsequently pursue I . the chief of these amiable person be the Marchioness of , mother of the young gentleman whose audacity I have punish at . this old harridan , on the Countess 's first arrival in , wait upon she , and favour she with such a storm of abuse for she encouragement of I , that I do believe she advanc my cause more than six month ' courtship could have do , or the pinking of a half - dozen of rival . it be in vain that poor plead she entire innocence and vow she have never encourage I . ' never encourage he ! ' scream out the old fury ; ' do not you encourage the wretch at , during 's own life ? do not you marry a dependent of yours to one of this profligate 's bankrupt cousins ? when he set off for , do not you follow he like a mad woman the very next day ? do not he take lodging at you very door almost -- and do you call this no encouragement ? for shame , madam , shame ! you might have marry my son -- my dear and noble ; but that he do not choose to interfere with you shameful passion for the beggarly upstart whom you cause to assassinate he ; and the only counsel I have to give you Ladyship be this , to legitimatise the tie which you have contract with this shameless adventurer ; to make that connection legal which , real as it be now , be against both decency and religion ; and to spare you family and you son the shame of you present line of life . ' with this the old fury of a marchioness leave the room , and in tear : I have the whole particular of the conversation from she Ladyship 's companion , and augure the best result from it in my favour . thus , by
by the sage influence of my , the Countess of 's natural friend and family be keep from she society . even when go to court the most august lady in the realm receive she with such mark coldness , that the unfortunate widow come home and take to she bed with vexation . and thus I may say that itself become a agent in advance my suit , and help the plan of the poor irish soldier of fortune . so it be that work with agent , great and small ; and by means over which they have no control the destiny of man and woman be accomplish . I shall always consider the conduct of ( 's favourite maid at this juncture ) as a masterpiece of ingenuity : and , indeed , have such a opinion of she diplomatic skill , that the very instant I become master of the estate , and pay she the promise sum -- I be a man of honour , and rather than not keep my word with the woman , I raise the money of the , at a exorbitant interest -- as soon , I say , as I achieve my triumph , I take by the hand , and say , " madam , you have show such unexampled fidelity in my service that I be glad to reward you , accord to my promise ; but you have give proof of such extraordinary cleverness and dissimulation , that I must decline keep you in 's establishment , and beg you will leave it this very day : " which she do , and go over to the faction , and have abuse I ever since . but I must tell you what she do which be so clever . why , it be the simplest thing in the world , as all master - stroke be . when lament she fate and my -- as she be pleased to call it -- shameful treatment of she , say , ' why should not you Ladyship write this young gentleman word of the evil which he be cause you ? Appeal to he feeling ( which , I have hear say , be very good indeed -- the whole town be ring with account of he spirit and generosity ) , and beg he to desist from a pursuit which cause the best of lady so much pain ? do , my , write : I know you style be so elegant that I , for my part , have many a time burst into tear in read you charming letter , and I have no doubt will sacrifice anything rather than hurt you feeling . ' and , of course , the abigail swore to the fact . ' do you think so , ? ' say she Ladyship . and my mistress forthwith penn I a letter , in she most fascinating and win manner :--'Why , sir , ' write she , ' will you pursue I ? why environ I in a web of intrigue so frightful that my spirit sink under it , see escape be hopeless from you frightful , you diabolical art ? they say you be generous to other -- be so to I . I know you bravery but too well : exercise it on man who can meet you sword , not on a poor feeble woman , who can not resist you . remember the friendship you once profess for I . and now , I beseech you , I implore you , to give a proof of it . contradict the calumny which you have spread against I , and repair , if you can , and if you have a spark of honour left , the misery which you have cause to the heart - break . Lyndon . ' what be this letter mean for but that I should answer it in person ? my excellent ally tell I where I should meet , and accordingly I follow , and find she at the Pantheon . I repeat the scene at over again ; show she how prodigious my power be , humble as I be , and that my energy be still untired . ' but ,' I add , 'I be as great in good as I be in evil ; as fond and faithful as a friend as I be terrible as a enemy . I will do everything ,' I say , ' which you ask of I , except when you bid I not to love you . that be beyond my power ; and while my heart have a pulse I must follow you . it be my fate ; you fate . cease to battle against it , and be mine . Loveliest of you sex ! with life alone can end my passion for you ; and , indeed , it be only by die at you command that I can be bring to obey you . do you wish I to die ? ' she say , laugh ( for she be a woman of a lively , humorous turn ) , that she do not wish I to commit self - murder ; and I feel from that moment that she be mine . . . . . a year from that day , on the 15th of , in the year 1773 , I have the honour and happiness to lead to the altar , Countess of , widow of the late , . the ceremony be perform at 's , , by the , she Ladyship 's chaplain . a magnificent supper and ball be give at we house in , and the next morning I have a duke , four earl , three generals , and a crowd of the most distinguished people in at my Levee . make a lampoon
lampoon about the marriage , and cut joke at the ' - . ' , although she have recommend it , be ready to bite off she finger with vexation ; and as for young , who be grow a tall lad of fourteen , when call upon by the Countess to embrace he papa , he shook he fist in my face and say , 'o my father ! I would have soon call one of you Ladyship 's footman ! ' but I could afford to laugh at the rage of the boy and the old woman , and at the joke of the wit of 's . I send off a flaming account of we nuptial to my mother and my uncle the good Chevalier ; and now , arrive at the pitch of prosperity , and have , at thirty year of age , by my own merit and energy , raise myself to one of the highest social position that any man in could occupy , I determine to enjoy myself as become a man of quality for the remainder of my life . after we have receive the congratulation of we friend in -- for in those day people be not asham of be marry , as they seem to be now -- I and ( who be all complacency , and a most handsome , sprightly , and agreeable companion ) set off to visit we estate in the of , where I have never as yet set foot . we leave in three chariot , each with four horse ; and my uncle would have be please could he have see pain on they panel the irish crown and the ancient coat of the beside the Countess 's coronet and the noble cognisance of the noble family of . before quit , I procure he 's gracious permission to add the name of my lovely lady to my own ; and henceforward assume the style and title of , as I have write it in this autobiography . i appear as a ornament of all the journey down to , the largest and most ancient of we ancestral seat in , be perform with the slow and sober state become people of the first quality in the realm . a outrider in my livery go on before we , and bespeak we lodging from town to town ; and thus we lay in state at , , and ; and the fourth evening arrive in time for supper before the antique baronial mansion , of which the gate be in a odious Gothic taste that would have set wild with pleasure . the first day of a marriage be commonly very try ; and I have know couple , who live together like turtle - dove for the rest of they life , peck each other 's eye out almost during the honeymoon . I do not escape the common lot ; in we journey westward my choose to quarrel with I because I pull out a pipe of tobacco ( the habit of smoking which I have acquire in when a soldier in 's , and could never give it over ) , and smoke it in the carriage ; and also she Ladyship choose to take umbrage both at Ilminster and Andover , because in the evening when we lay there I choose to invite the landlords of the ' ' and the ' Lion ' to crack a bottle with I . be a haughty woman , and I hate pride ; and I promise you that in both instance I overcome this vice in she . on the third day of we journey I have she to light my pipematch with she own hand , and make she deliver it to I with tear in she eye ; and at the ' ' at I have so completely subdue she , that she ask I humbly whether I would not wish the landlady as well as the host to step up to dinner with we . to this I should have have no objection , for , indeed , be a very good - look woman ; but we expect a visit from my , a kinsman of , and the do not permit the indulgence of my wife 's request . I appear with she at evening service , to compliment we right reverend cousin , and put she name down for twenty - five guinea , and my own for one hundred , to the famious new organ which be then be build for the cathedral . this conduct , at the very outset of my career in the county , make I not a little popular ; and the residentiary , who do I the favour to sup with I at the inn , go away after the sixth bottle , hiccup the most solemn vows for the welfare of such a p - p - pious gentleman . before we reach , we have to drive through ten mile of the , where the people be out to visit we , the church bell set a -ringing , the parson and the farmer assemble in they best by the roadside , and the school child and the labouring people be loud in they hurra for she Ladyship . I fling money among these worthy character , stop to bow and chat with he reverence and the farmer , and if I find that the girl be among the handsomest in the kingdom be it my fault ? these remark my especially would take in great dudgeon ; and I do believe she be make more angry by my admiration of the red cheenks of of , than by any previous speech or act of mine in the journey . 'Ah , ah , my fine madam , you be jealous , be you ? '
' think I , and reflecte , not without deep sorrow , how lightly she herself have act in she husband 's lifetime , and that those be most jealous who themselves give most cause for jealousy . village the scene of welcome be particularly gay : a band of music have be bring from , and arch and flag have be raise , especially before the attorney' and the doctor 's house , who be both in the employ of the family . there be many hundred of stout people at the great lodge , which , with the park - wall , bound one side of , and from which , for three mile , go ( or rather go ) a avenue of noble elm up to the towers of the old castle . I wish they have be oak when I cut the tree down in ' 79 , for they would have fetch three time the money : I know nothing more culpable than the carelessness of ancestor in plan they grounds with timber of small value , when they might just as easily raise oak . thus I have always say that the of , who plan these elm in . time , cheat I of ten thousand pound . for the first few day after we arrival , my time be agreeably spend in receive the visit of the nobility and gentry who come to pay they respects to the noble new -married couple , and , like 's wife in the fairy tale , in inspect the treasure , the furniture , and the numerous chamber of the castle . it be a huge old place , build as far back as V.'s time , besiege and batter by the in the , and alte and patch up , in a odious old - fashioned taste , by the , who succeed to the property at the death of a brother whose principle be excellent and of the true Cavalier sort , but who ruin himself chiefly by drinking , dicing , and a dissolute life , and a little by support the King . the castle stand in a fine chase , which be prettily speckle over with deer ; and I can not but own that my pleasure be considerable at first , as I sit in the oak parlour of summer evening , with the window open , the gold and silver plate shining in a hundred dazzling colour on the side - boards , a dozen jolly companion round the table , and could look out over the wide green park and the wave wood , and see the sun set on the lake , and hear the deer call to one another . the exterior be , when I first arrive , a quaint composition of all sort of architecture ; of feudal towers , and gable - end in 's style , and rough - patch wall build up to repair the ravage of the cannon : but I need not speak of this at large , have have the place new - faced at a vast expense , under a fashionable architect , and the facade lay out in the latest - and most classical style . there have be moat , and drawbridge , and outer wall ; these I have shave away into elegant terrace , and handsomely lay out in parterre accord to the plan of , the great parisian architect , who visit for the purpose . after ascend the outer step , you enter a antique hall of vast dimension , wainscote with black carve oak , and ornament with portrait of we ancestor : from the square beard of , the great lawyer in 's time , to the loose stomacher and ringlet of , whom paint when she be a maid of honour to , and down to , with he riband as a knight of the bath ; and my lady , pain by , in a white satin sack and the family diamonds , as she be present to the old II . these diamonds be very fine : I first have they reset by when we appear before they french Majesty at versaille ; and finally raise L18,000 upon they , after that infernal run of ill luck at ' , ' when ( as we call my ) , , , and I play hombre for four - and - forty hour . Bow and pike , huge stag - head and hunt implement , and rusty old suit of armour , that may have be wear in the day of and for what I know , form the other old ornament of this huge apartment ; and be range round a fireplace where you might have turn a coach - and - six . this I keep pretty much in its antique condition , but have the old armour eventually turn out and consign to the lumber - room upstairs ; replace it with china monster , gild settee from , and elegant marble , of which the broken nos and limb , and ugliness , undeniably prove they antiquity : and which a agent purchase for I at . but such be the taste of the time ( and , perhaps , the rascality of my agent ) , that thirty thousand pound ' worth of these gem of art only go for three hundred guinea at a subsequent period , when I find it necessary to raise money on my collection . from this main hall branch off on either side the long series of state - room , poorly furnish with high - back chair and long queer glass , when first I come to the property ; but afterwards render so splendid by I , with the gold damask of Lyons and the magnificent Gobelin tapestry I win from at
at play . there be thirty - six bedroom De , of which I only keep three in they antique condition , -- the haunted room as it be call , where the murder be do in ii . 's time , the bed where sleep after landing at , and 's state - room . all the rest be redecorate by in the most elegant taste ; not a little to the scandal of some of the steady old country dowager ; for I have picture of and to decorate the principal apartment , in which the Cupid and Venuse be pain in a manner so natural , that I recollect the old wizen Countess of pinning over the curtain of she bed , and send she daughter , , to sleep with she waiting - woman , rather than allow she to lie in a chamber hung all over with look - glass , after the exact fashion of the 's closet at versaille . for many of these ornament I be not so much answerable as , whom lent I , and who be the intendant of my building during my absence abroad . I have give the man , and when he fall down and break he leg , as he be decorate a theatre in the room which have be the old chapel of the castle , the people of the country think it be a judgment of upon he . in he rage for improveament the fellow da anything . without my order he cut down a old rookery which be sacr in the country , and have a prophecy regard it , state , ' when the rook - wood shall fall , down go . ' the rook go over and colonise , which lay near we ( and be hang to they ! ) , and build a temple to and two lovely fountain on they site . Venuse and Cupid be the rascal 's adoration : he want to take down the Gothic screen and place Cupid in we pew there ; but old Doctor Huff the rector come out with a large oak stick , and address the unlucky architect in , of which he do not comprehend a word , yet make he understand that he would break he bone if he lay a single finger upon the sacred edifice . Cornichon make complaint about the ' , ' as he call he . ( 'Et quel abbe , grand ! ' add he , quite bewilder , 'un abbe avec douze enfan ' ) ; but I encourage the in this respect , and bade exer he talents only in the castle . there be a magnificent collection of ancient plate , to which I add much of the most splendid modern kind ; a cellar which , however well furnish , require continual replenishing , and a kitchen which I reform altogether . my friend , , send I down a cook from the , for the english cookery , -- the turtle and venison department : I have a chef ( who call out the , by the way , and complain sadly of the who want to meet he with COUPS De POING ) and a couple of AIDES from , and a italian confectioner , as my . all which natural appendage to a man of fashion , the odious , stingy old Tiptoff , my kinsman and neighbour , affect to view with horror ; and he spread through the country a report that I have my victual cook by , live upon frog , and , he verily believe , fricasseed little child . but the squire eat my dinner very readily for all that , and old himself be compelle to allow that my venison and turtle be most orthodox . the former gentry I know how to conciliate , too , in other way . there have be only a subscription pack of fox - hound in the county and a few beggarly couple of mangy beagles , with which old patter about he grounds ; I build a kennel and stable , which cost L30,000 , and stock they in a manner which be worthy of my ancestor , the irish king . I have two pack of hound , and take the field in the season four time a week , with three gentleman in my hunt -uniform to follow I , and open house at for all who belong to the hunt . these change and this train de vivre require , as may be suppose , no small outlay ; and I confess that I have little of that base spirit of economy in my composition which some people practise and admire . for instance , old be hoard up he money to repair he father 's extravagance and disencumber he estate ; a good deal of the money with which he pay off he mortgage my agent procure upon mine . and , besides , it must be remembe I have only a life -interest upon the property , be always of a easy temper in deal with the money - broker , and have to pay heavily for insure she Ladyship 's life . at the end of a year present I with a son -- I call he , in compliment to my royal ancestry : but what more have I to leave he than a noble name ? be not the estate of he mother entail upon the odious little , ? and whom , by the way , I have not mention as yet , though he be live at , consign to a new governor . the insubordination of that boy be dreadful . he use to quote passage of ' Hamlet ' to he mother , which make she very angry . once when I take a horsewhip to
to chastise he , he draw a knife , and would have stab I : and , ' faith , I recollect my own youth , which be pretty similar ; and , hold out my hand , burst out laugh , and propose to he to be friend . we be reconcile for that time , and the next , and the next ; but there be no love lose between we , and he hatre for I seem to grow as he grow , which be apace . I determine to endow my darling boy Bryan with a property , and to this end cut down twelve thousand pound ' worth of timber on 's and irish estate : at which proceed 's guardian , Tiptoff , cry out , as usual , and swore I have no right to touch a stick of the tree ; but down they go ; and I commission my mother to repurchase the ancient lands of and , which have once for part of the immense possession of my house . these she buy back with excellent prudence and extreme joy ; for she heart be gladden at the idea that a son be bear to my name , and with the notion of my magnificent fortune . to say truth , I be rather afraid , now that I live in a very different sphere from that in which she be accustom to move , lest she should come to pay I a visit , and astonish my English friend by she bragging and she brogue , she rouge and she old hoops and furbelow of the time of .: in which she have figure advantageously in she youth , and which she still fondly think to be at the height of the fashion . so I write to she , put off she visit ; begge she to visit we when the left wing of the castle be finish , or the stable build , and so forth . there be no need of such precaution . 'A hind 's enough for I , , ' the old lady would reply . 'I be not come to disturb you among you great English friend with my old - fashioned irish way . it be a blessing to I to think that my darling boy have attaine the position which I always know be he due , and for which I pinch myself to educate he . you must bring I the little , that he grandmother may kiss he , one day . present my respectful bless to she Ladyship he mamma . tell she she have get a treasure in she husband , which she could not have have have she take a duke to marry she ; and that the and the , though without title , have the best of blood in they vein . I shall never rest until I see you of , and my grandson . ' how singular it be that the very same idea should be pass in my mother 's mind and my own ! the very title she have pitch upon have also be select ( naturally enough ) by I ; and I do not mind confess that I have fill a dozen sheet of paper with my signature , under the name of and , and have determine with my usual impetuosity to carry my point . my mother go and establish herself at , live with the priest there until a tenement could be erect , and date from ' ;' which , you may be sure , I give out to be a place of no small importance . I have a plan of the estate in my study , both at and in , and the plan of the elevation of , the ancestral residence of , , with the project improvement , in which the castle be represent as about the size of , with more ornament to the architecture ; and eight hundred acre of bog fall in handy , I purchase they at three pound a acre , so that my estate upon the map look to be no insignificant one . [ Footnote : on the strength of this estate , and pledge he honour that it be not mortgage , borrowed L17,000 in the year 1786 , from young , the city merchant 's son , who have just come in for he property . at for the Polwellan estate and mine , ' the cause of endless litigation , ' it must be own that we hero purchase they ; but he never pay more than the first L5000 of the purchase -money . hence the litigation of which he complain , and the famous Chancery suit of ' , ' in which greatly distinguished himself .- . ] I also in this year make arrangement for purchase the estate and mine in from , for -- a imprudent bargain , which be afterward the cause to I of much dispute and litigation . the trouble of property , the rascality of agent , the quibble of lawyer , be endless . humble people envy we great man , and fancy that we life be all pleasure . many a time in the course of my prosperity I have sigh for the day of my meanest fortune , and envy the boon companion at my table , with no clothes to they back but such as my credit supply they , without a guinea but what come from my pocket ; but without one of the harassing car and responsibility which be the dismal adjunct of great rank and property . I do little more than make my appearance , and assume the command of my estate , in the kingdom of ; reward generously those person who have be kind to I in my former adversity , and
and take my fitting place among the aristocracy of the land . but , in truth , I have small inducement to remain in it after have taste of the genteeler and more complete pleasur of and continental life ; and we pass we summers at , , and , while be be beautify in the elegant manner already describe by I , and the season at we mansion in . it be wonderful how the possession of wealth bring out the virtue of a man ; or , at any rate , act as a varnish or lustre to they , and bring out they brilliancy and colour in a manner never know when the individual stood in the cold grey atmosphere of poverty . I assure you it be a very short time before I be a pretty fellow of the first class ; make no small sensation at the coffee - house in and afterwards at the most famous club . my style , equipage , and elegant entertainment be in everybody 's mouth , and be describe in all the morning print . the needier part of 's relatives , and such as have be offend by the intolerable pomposity of old , begin to appear at we rout and assemblie ; and as for relation of my own , I find in and more than I have ever dream of , of cousin who claim affinity with I . there be , of course , native of my own country ( of which I be not particularly proud ) , and I receive visit from three or four swagger shabby Temple buck , with tarnish lace and , who be eat they way to the bar in ; from several gambling adventurer at the watering - place , whom I soon speedily let to know they place ; and from other of more reputable condition . among they I may mention my cousin the , who , on the score of he relationship , borrowed thirty piece from I to pay he landlady in ; and whom , for my own reason , I allow to maintain and credit a connection for which the Herald ' college give no authority whatsoever . have a cover at my table ; punt at play , and pay when he like , which be seldom ; have a intimacy with , and be under considerable obligation to , my tailor ; and always boast of he cousin the great of the west country . she Ladyship and I live , after a while , pretty separate when in . she prefer quiet : or to say the truth , I prefer it ; be a great friend to a modest tranquil behaviour in woman , and a taste for the domestic pleasure . hence I encourage she to dine at home with she lady , she chaplain , and a few of she friend ; admit three or four proper and discreet person to accompany she to she box at the opera or play on proper occasion ; and indeed decline for she the too frequent visit of she friend and family , prefer to receive they only twice or thrice in a season on we grand reception day . besides , she be a mother , and have great comfort in the dressing , educating , and dandl we little , for whose sake it be fit that she should give up the pleasure and frivolity of the world ; so she leave that part of the duty of every family of distinction to be perform by I . to say the truth , 's figure and appearance be not at this time such as to make for they owner any very brilliant appearance in the fashionable world . she have grow very fat , be short - sight , pale in complexion , careless about she dress , dull in demeanour ; she conversation with I characterise by a stupid despair , or a silly blundering attempt at force cheerfulness still more disagreeable : hence we intercourse be but trifling , and my temptation to carry she into the world , or to remain in she society , of necessity exceedingly small . she would try my temper at home , too , in a thousand way . when request by I ( often , I own , rather roughly ) to entertain the company with conversation , wit , and learn , of which she be a mistress : or music , of which she be a accomplished performer , she would as often as not begin to cry , and leave the room . my company from this , of course , fancie I be a tyrant over she ; whereas I be only a severe and careful guardian over a silly , bad - tempered , and weak - minded lady . she be luckily very fond of she youngest son , and through he I have a wholesome and effectual hold of she ; for if in any of she tantrum or fit of haughtiness --( this woman be intolerably proud ; and repeatedly , at first , in we quarrel , da to twit I with my own original poverty and low birth ) , -- if , I say , in we dispute she pretend to have the upper hand , to assert she authority against mine , to refuse to sign such papers as I might think necessary for the distribution of we large and complicated property , I would have carry off to for a couple of day ; and I warrant I he lady - mother could hold out no longer , and would agree to anything I choose to propose . the servant about she I take care should be in my pay , not hers : especially the child 's head nurse be under my order
order , not those of my lady ; and a very handsome , red - cheek , impudent jade she be ; and a great fool she make I make of myself . this woman be more mistress of the house than the poor - spirited lady who own it . she give the law to the servants ; and if I show any particular attention to any of the ladie who visit we , the slut would not scruple to show she jealousy , and to find means to send they pack . the fact be , a generous man be always make a fool of by some woman or other , and this one have such a influence over I that she could turn I round she finger . [ Footnote : from these curious confession , it would appear that maltreate he lady in every possible way ; that he deny she society , bully she into sign away she property , spend it in gambling and tavern , be openly unfaithful to she ; and , when she complain , threaten to remove she child from she . , indeed , be he the only husband who have do the like , and have pass for ' nobody be enemy but he own :' a jovial good - natured fellow . the world contain score of such amiable people ; and , indeed , it be because justice have not be do they that we have edit this autobiography . have it be that of a mere hero of romance -- one of those heroic youth who figure in the novel of and -- there would have be no call to introduce the reader to a personage already so often and so charmingly depict . be not , we repeat , a hero of the common pattern ; but let the reader look round , and ask himself , do not as many rogue succeed in life as honest man ? more fool than man of talent ? and be it not just that the life of this class should be describe by the student of human nature as well as the action of those fairy - tale prince , those perfect impossible heroe , whom we writers love to describe ? there be something naive and simple in that time - honoure style of novel - write by which , at the end of he adventur , be put in possession of every worldly prosperity , as he have be endow with every mental and bodily excellence previously . the novelist think that he can do no more for he darling hero than make he a lord . be it not a poor standard that , of the summum bonum ? the greatest good in life be not to be a lord ; perhaps not even to be happy . Poverty , illness , a humpback , may be reward and condition of good , as well as that bodily prosperity which all of we unconsciously set up for worship . but this be a subject for a essay , not a note ; and it be best to allow to resume the candid and ingenious narrative of he virtue and defect . ] she infernal temper ( be the jade 's name ) and my wife 's moody despondency , make my house and home not over-pleasant : hence I be drive a good deal abroad , where , as play be the fashion at every club , tavern , and assembly , I , of course , be obliged to resume my old habit , and to commence as a amateur those game at which I be once unrivalled in . but whether a man 's temper change with prosperity , or he skill leave he when , deprive of a confederate , and pursue the game no longer professionally , he join in it , like the rest of the world , for pastime , I know not ; but certain it be , that in the season of 1774 - 75 I lose much money at ' 's ' and the ' - , ' and be compelle to meet my loss by borrowe largely upon my wife 's annuity , insure she Ladyship 's life , and so forth . the term at which I raise these necessary sum and the outlay requisite for my improvement be , of course , very onerous , and clip the property considerably ; and it be some of these papers which my ( who be of a narrow , timid , and stingy turn ) occasionally refuse to sign : until I Persuad she , as I have before show . my dealings on the turf ought to be mention , as form part of my history at this time ; but , in truth , I have no particular pleasure in recalle my Newmarket doings . I be infernally bit and bubble in almost every one of my transaction there ; and though I could ride a horse as well as any man in , be no match with the english nobleman at back he . fifteen year after my horse , , by , out of , lose the Newmarket stake , for which he be the first favourite , I find that a noble earl , who shall be nameless , have get into he stable the morning before he run ; and the consequence be that a outside horse win , and you humble servant be out to the amount of fifteen thousand pound . Stranger have no chance in those day on the heath : and , though dazzl by the splendour and fashion assemble there , and surround by the greatest person of the land , -- the royal duke , with they wife and splendo equipage ; old , with he queer bevy of company , and
and such man as , , , -- a man might have consider himself certain of fair play and have be not a little proud of the society he keep ; yet , I promise you , that , exalt as it be , there be no set of man in who know how to rob more genteelly , to bubble a stranger , to bribe a jockey , to doctor a horse , or to arrange a betting - book . even _I_ could not stand against these accomplished gamester of the highest family in . be it my own want of style , or my want off fortune ? I know not . but now I be arrive at the height of my ambition , both my skill and my luck seem to be desert I . everything I touch crumble in my hand ; every speculation I have fail , every agent I truste deceive I . I be , indeed , one of those bear to make , and not to keep fortune ; for the quality and energy which lead a man to effect the first be often the very cause of he ruin in the latter case : indeed , I know of no other reason for the misfortune which finally befell I . [ Footnote : the Memoir seem to have be write about the year 1814 , in that calm retreat which have select for the author at the close of he life . ] I have always a taste for man of letter , and perhaps , if the truth must be tell , have no objection to play the fine gentleman and patron among the wit . such people be usually needy , and of low birth , and have a instinctive awe and love of a gentleman and a laced coat ; as all must have remark who have frequent they society . , who be afterwards knighte , and certainly the most elegant painter of he day , be a pretty dexterous courtier of the wit tribe ; and it be through this gentleman , who paint a piece of I , , and we little , which be greatly admire at the exhibition ( I be represent as quit my wife , in the costume of the , of which I be major ; the child start back from my helmet like what - d 'ye - call 'im -- 's son , as describe by in he ' Iliad ' ) ; it be through Reynolds that I be introduce to a score of these gentleman , and they great chief , . I always think they great chief a great bear . he drank tea twice or thrice at my house , misbehave himself most grossly ; treat my opinion with no more respect than those of a schoolboy , and tell I to mind my horse and tailor , and not trouble myself about letter . he Scotch bear - leader , , be a butt of the first quality . I never see such a figure as the fellow cut in what he call a Corsican habit , at one of 's ball , at , . but that the story connect with that same establishment be not the most profitable tale in the world , I could tell tale of score of queer doings there . all the high and low demirep of the town gather there , from he of down to my countryman , poor the poet , and from the Duchess of down to the bird of paradise , or . here I have meet very queer character , who come to queer end too : poor , that afterwards be hang for kill , and ( on the sly ) he , whom my friend , of the ' , ' bade to live even after forgery and the rope cut short the unlucky parson 's career . it be a merry place , , in those day , and that be the truth . I be write now in my gouty old age , and people have grow vastly more moral and matter - of - fact than they be at the close of the last century , when the world be young with I . there be a difference between a gentleman and a common fellow in those time . we wear silk and embroidery then . now every man have the same coachmanlike look in he belcher and cape coat , and there be no outward difference between my and he groom . then it take a man of fashion a couple of hour to make he toilette , and he could show some taste and genius in the select it . what a blaze of splendou be a drawing - room , or a opera , of a gala night ! what sum of money be lose and win at the delicious faro - table ! my gilt curricle and out-rider , blaze in green and gold , be very different object from the equipage you see nowadays in the ring , with the stunt grooms behind they . a man could drink four time as much as the milksop nowadays can swallow ; but ' tis useless expatiat on this theme . gentleman be dead and gone . the fashion have now turn upon you soldier and sailor , and I grow quite moody and sad when I think of thirty year ago . this be a chapter devote to reminiscence of what be a very happy and splendid time with I , but present little of mark in the way of adventure ; as be generally the case when time be happy and easy . it would seem idle to fill page with account of the every - day occupation of a man of fashion , -- the fair lady who smile upon
upon he , the dress he wear , the matches he play , and win or lose . at this period of time , when youngster be employ cut the 's throat in and , lie out in bivouac , and feed off commissariat beef and biscuit , they would not understand what a life they ancestor lead ; and so I shall leave further discourse upon the pleasure of the time when even the be a lad in lead - string , when have not subsid into a mere statesman , and be a beggarly brat in he native island . whilst these improvements be go on in my estate , -- my house , from a antique castle , be change to a elegant temple , or palace -- my garden and wood lose they rustic appearance to be adapt to the most genteel french style -- my child grow up at he mother 's knee , and my influence in the country increase , -- it must not be imagine that I stay in all this while , and that I neglect to make visit to , and my various estate in and . I go to reside at the estate and the , where I find , instead of profit , every kind of pettifogging chicanery ; I pass over in state to we territory in , where I entertaine the gentry in a style the himself could not equal ; give the fashion to ( to be sure it be a beggarly savage city in those day ; and , since the time there have be a pother about the union , and the misfortune attend it , I have be at a loss to account for the mad praise of the old order of thing , which the fond irish patriot have invent ) ; I say I set the fashion to ; and small praise to I , for a poor place it be in those time , whatever the irish party may say . in a former chapter I have give you a description of it . it be the Warsaw of we part of the world : there be a splendid , ruin , half - civilise nobility , rule over a half - savage population . I say half - savage advisedly . the commonalty in the street be wild , unshorn , and in rag . the most public place be not safe after nightfall . the College , the public building , and the great gentry 's house be splendid ( the latter unfinished for the most part ) ; but the people be in a state more wretched than any vulgar I have ever know : the exercise of they religion be only half allow to they ; they clergy be force to be educate out of the country ; they aristocracy be quite distinct from they ; there be a Protestant nobility , and in the town , poor insolent Protestant corporation , with a bankrupt retinue of mayors , aldermen , and municipal officer -- all of whom figure in address and have the public voice in the country ; but there be no sympathy and connection between the upper and the lower people of the irish . to one who have be breed so much abroad as myself , this difference between and be doubly strike ; and though as firm as a rock in my own faith , yet I could not help remembere my grandfather hold a different one , and wonder that there should be such a political difference between the two . I pass among my neighbour for a dangerous leveller , for entertaining and express such opinion , and especially for ask the priest of the parish to my table at . he be a gentleman , educate at , and , to my mind , a far better breed and more agreeable companion than he comray the rector , who have but a dozen for he congregation ; who be a lord 's son , to be sure , but he could hardly spell , and the great field of he labour be in the kennel and cockpit . I do not extend and beautify the house of as I have do we other estate , but contente myself with pay a occasional visit there ; exercise a almost royal hospitality , and keep open house during my stay . when absent , I give to my aunt , the widow , and she six unmarried daughter ( although they always detest I ) , permission to inhabit the place ; my mother prefer my new mansion of . and as my be by this time grow excessively tall and troublesome , I determine to leave he under the care of a proper governor in , with and she six daughter to take care of he ; and he be welcome to fall in love with all the old lady if he be so minded , and thereby imitate he stepfather 's example . when tired of , he Lordship be at liberty to go and reside at my house with my mamma ; but there be no love lose between he and she , and , on account of my son , I think she hate he as cordially as ever I myself could possibly do . the county of be not so lucky as the neighbour county of , and have not the share of representative which the latter possess ; where I have know a moderate country gentleman , with a few score of hundred per annum from he estate , treble he income by return three or four member to parliament , and by the influence with ministers which these seat give he . the parliamentary interest of the house of have be grossly neglect during my wife 's minority , and the incapacity of
of the she father ; or , to speak more correctly , it have be smuggle away from the family altogether by the adroit old hypocrite of , who act as most kinsman and guardian do by they wards and relative , and rob they . the of return four member to parliament : two for the borough of , which , as all the world know , lie at the foot of we estate of , bounde on the other side by . for time out of mind we have send member for that borough , until , take advantage of the late lord 's imbecility , put in he own nominee . when he eldest son become of age , of course my be to take he seat for ; when ( , who make he fortune under in ) die , the thought fit to bring down he second son , my , to whom I have introduce the reader in a former chapter , and determine , in he high mightiness , that he too should go in and swell the rank of the opposition -- the big old Whigs , with whom the act . have be for some time in a ailing condition previous to he demise , and you may be sure that the circumstance of he failing health have not be pass over by the gentry of the county , who be staunch government man for the most part , and hat my 's principle as dangerous and ruinous , ' we have be look out for a man to fight against he , ' say the squire to I ; 'we can only match Tiptoff out of . you , , be we man , and at the next county election we will swear to bring you in . ' I hate the Tiptoff so , that I would have fight they at any election . they not only would not visit at , but decline to receive those who visit we ; they keep the woman of the county from receive my wife : they invent half the wild story of my profligacy and extravagance with which the neighbourhood be entertain ; they say I have frightene my wife into marriage , and that she be a lost woman ; they hint that 's life be not secure under my roof , that he treatment be odious , and that I want to put he out of the way to make place for my son . I could scarce have a friend to , but they count the bottle drink at my table . they ferret out my dealings with my lawyer and agent . if a creditor be unpaid , every item of he bill be know at ; if I look at a farmer 's daughter , it be say I have ruin she . my fault be many , I confess , and as a domestic character , I can not boast of any particular regularity or temper ; but and I do not quarrel more than fashionable people do , and , at first , we always use to make it up pretty well . I be a man full of error , certainly , but not the devil that these odious backbiter at represent I to be . for the first three year I never struck my wife but when I be in liquor . when I fling the carving - knife at I be drink , as everybody present can testify ; but as for have any systematic scheme against the poor lad , I can declare solemnly that , beyond merely hate he ( and one 's inclination be not in one 's power ) , I be guilty of no evil towards he . I have sufficient motive , then , for enmity against the Tiptoffs , and be not a man to let a feeling of that kind lie inactive . though a , or , perhaps , because a , the be one of the haughtiest man breathing , and treat commoner as he idol the great Earl use to treat they -- after he come to a coronet himself -- as so many low vassal , who might be proud to lick he shoe - buckle . when the mayor and corporation wait upon he , he receive they cover , never offer a chair , but retire when the refreshment be bring , or have they serve to the worshipful alderman in the steward 's room . these honest Britons never rebel against such treatment , until instruct to do so by my patriotism . no , the dog like to be bully ; and , in the course of a long experience , I have meet with but very few who be not of they way of think . it be not until I open they eye that they know they degradation . I invite the to , and ( a very buxom pretty groceress she be , by the way ) I make sit by my wife , and drive they both out to the races in my curricle . fight very hard against this condescension ; but I have a way with she , as the saying be , and though she have a temper , yet I have a better one . a temper , psha ! a wild - cat have a temper , but a keeper can get the better of it ; and I know very few woman in the world whom I could not master . well , I make much of the mayor and corporation ; send they buck for they dinner , or ask they to mine ; make a point of attend they assemblie , dance with they wife and daughter , go through , in short , all the act of politeness which be necessary on such
such occasion : and though old must have see my goings on , yet he head be so much in the cloud , that he never once condescende to imagine he dynasty could be overthrown in he own town of , and issue he mandate as securely as if he have be the , and the no better than so many slave of he will . every post which bring we any account of 's increase illness , be the sure occasion of a dinner from I ; so much so , that my friend of the hunt use to laugh and say , ' 's worse ; there be a corporation dinner at . ' it be in 1776 , when the american war break out , that I come into parliament . my , whose wisdom he party in those day use to call superhuman , raise he oracular voice in the house of Peers against the american contest ; and my countryman , -- a great philosopher , but a plaguy long - win orator -- be the champion of the rebel in the -- where , however , thanks to british patriotism , he could get very few to back he . would have swear black be white if the great have bide he ; and he make he son give up he commission in the , in imitation of my , who resign he ensigncy rather than fight against what he call he american breth . but this be a height of patriotism extremely little relish in , where , ever since the breaking out of hostility , we people hate the heartily ; and where , when we hear of the fight of , and the glorious victory of 's ( as we use to call it in those day ) , the nation flush out in its usual hot - head anger . the talk be all against the philosopher after that , and the people be most indomitably loyal . it be not until the land - tax be increase , that the gentry begin to grumble a little ; but still my party in the be very strong against the Tiptoff , and I determine to take the field and win as usual . the old neglect every one of the decent precaution which be requisite in a parliamentary campaign . he signify to the corporation and freeholder he intention of present he son , , and he desire that the latter should be elect they burgess ; but he scarcely give so much as a glass of beer to whet the devotedness of he adherent : and I , as I need not say , engage every tavern in in my behalf . there be no need to go over the twenty - time - tell tale of a election . I rescue the borough of from the hand of and he son , . I have a savage sort of satisfaction , too , in force my wife ( who have be at one time exceedingly smite by she kinsman , as I have already relate ) to take part against he , and to wear and distribute my colour when the day of election come . and when we speak at one another , I tell the crowd that I have beat in love , that I have beat he in war , and that I would now beat he in parliament ; and so I do , as the event prove : for , to the inexpressible anger of the old , , , be return member of parliament for , in place of , , decease ; and I threaten he at the next election to turn he out of both he seat , and go to attend my duty in parliament . it be then I seriously determine on achieve for myself the irish peerage , to be enjoy after I by my beloved son and heir . my good Fortune begin to Waver and now , if any people should be dispose to think my history immoral ( for I have hear some assert that I be a man who never deserve that so much prosperity should fall to my share ) , I will beg those caviller to do I the favour to read the conclusion of my adventur ; when they will see it be no such great prize that I have win , and that wealth , splendour , thirty thousand per annum , and a seat in parliament , be often purchase at too dear a rate , when one have to buy those enjoyment at the price of personal liberty , and saddle with the charge of a troublesome wife . they be the deuce , these troublesome wife , and that be the truth . no man know until he try how wearisome and dishearten the of one of they be , and how the annoyance grow and strengthen from year to year , and the courage become weaker to bear it ; so that that trouble which seem light and trivial the first year , become intolerable ten year after . I have hear of one of the classical fellow in the dictionary who begin by carry a calf up a hill every day , and so continue until the animal grow to be a bull , which he still easily accommodate upon he shoulders ; but take my word for it , young unmarried gentleman , a wife be a very much harder pack to the back than the biggest heifer in and , if I can prevent one of you from marrying , the ' Memoir of , ' will not be write in vain . not that my be a scold or a shrew , as some wife be ; I could have manage to have cure she of that ; but she be of
of a cowardly , cry , melancholy , maudlin temper , which be to I still more odious : do what one would to please she , she would never be happy or in good - humour . I leave she alone after a while ; and because , as be natural in my case , where a disagreeable home oblige I to seek amusement and companion abroad , she add a mean detestable jealousy to all she other fault : I could not for some time pay the commonest attention to any other woman , but my must weep , and wr she hand , and threaten to commit suicide , and I know not what . she death would have be no comfort to I , as I leave any person of common prudence to imagine ; for that scoundrel of a young ( who be now grow up a tall , gawky , swarthy lad , and about to become my greatest plague and annoyance ) would have inherit every penny of the property , and I should have be leave considerably poorer even than when I marry the widow : for I spend my personal fortune as well as the lady 's income in the keeping up of we rank , and be always too much a man of honour and spirit to save a penny of 's income . let this be fling in the tooth of my detractor , who say I never could have so injure the property have I not be make a private purse for myself ; and who believe that , even in my present painful situation , I have hoard of gold laid by somewhere , and could come out as a when I choose . I never raise a shilling upon 's property but I spend it like a man of honour ; besides incurr numberless personal obligation for money , which all go to the common stock . independent of the mortgage and incumbrance , I owe myself at least one hundred and twenty thousand pound , which I spend while in occupancy of my wife 's estate ; so that I may justly say that property be indebt to I in the above -mentioned sum . although I have describe the utter disgust and distaste which speedily take possession of my breast as regard ; and although I take no particular pain ( for I be all frankness and above - board ) to disguise my feeling in general , yet she be of such a mean spirit , that she pursue I with she regard in spite of my indifference to she , and would kindle up at the smallest kind word I speak to she . the fact be , between my respect reader and myself , that I be one of the handsomest and most dashing young man of in those day , and my wife be violently in love with I ; and though I say it who should not , as the phrase go , my wife be not the only woman of rank in who have a favourable opinion of the humble irish adventurer . what a riddle these woman be , I have often think ! I have see the most elegant creature at 's grow wild for love of the coarsest and most vulgar of man ; the cleverest woman passionately admire the most illiterate of we sex , and so on . there be no end to the contrariety in the foolish creature ; and though I do not mean to hint that _i_ be vulgar or illiterate , as the person mention above ( I would cut the throat of any man who da to whisper a word against my birth or my breeding ) , yet I have show that have plenty of reason to dislike I if she choose : but , like the rest of she silly sex , she be govern by infatuation , not reason ; and , up to the very last day of we be together , would be reconcile to I , and fondle I , if I address she a single kind word . ' ah ,' she would say , in these moment of tenderness --'Ah , Redmond , if you would always be so ! ' and in these fits of love she be the most easy creature in the world to be persuade , and would have sign away she whole property , have it be possible . and , I must confess , it be with very little attention on my part that I could bring she into good - humour . to walk with she on the mall , or at , to attend she to church at 's , to purchase any little present or trinket for she , be enough to coax she . such be female inconsistency ! the next day she would be call I ' . ' probably , and be bemoan she miserable fate that she ever should have be united to such a monster . so it be she be pleased to call one of the most brilliant man in 's three kingdom : and I warrant I other lady have a much more flattering opinion of I . then she would threaten to leave I ; but I have a hold of she in the person of she son , of whom she be passionately fond : I do not know why , for she have always neglect Bullingdon she older son , and never bestow a thought upon he health , he welfare , or he education . it be we young boy , then , who form the great bond of union between I and she Ladyship ; and there be no plan of ambition I could propose in which she would not join for the poor lad 's behoof , and no
no expense she would not eagerly incur , if it might by any means be show to tend to he advancement . I can tell you , bribe be administer , and in high place too , -- so near the royal person of he Majesty , that you would be astonished be I to mention what great personage condescende to receive we loan . I get from the and irish herald a description and detailed pedigree of the of , and claim respectfully to be reinstate in my ancestral title , and also to be reward with the Viscounty of . ' this head would become a coronet , ' my would sometimes say , in she fond moment , smooth down my hair ; and , indeed , there be many a puny whipster in they Lordship 's house who have neither my presence nor my courage , my pedigree , nor any of my merit . the striving after this peerage I consider to have be one of the most unlucky of all my unlucky dealings at this period . I make unheard - of sacrifice to bring it about . I lavish money here and diamond there . I buy land at ten time they value ; purchase picture and article of vertu at ruinous price . I give repeat entertainment to those friend to my claim who , be about the person , be likely to advance it . I lose many a bet to the 's brothers ; but let these matters be forget , and , because of my private injury , let I not be deficient in loyalty to my . the only person in this transaction whom I shall mention openly , be that old scamp and swindler , , thirteenth of . this nobleman be one of the gentleman of 's closet , and one with whom the revered monarch be on term of considerable intimacy . a close regard have spring up between they in the old 's time ; when he , play at battledore and shuttlecock with the young lord on the landing - place of the great staircase at , in some moment of irritation the of kick the young downstair , who , fall , break he leg . the 's hearty repentance for he violence cause he to ally himself closely with the person whom he have injure ; and when he come to the throne there be no man , it be say , of whom the of be so jealous as of my . the latter be poor and extravagant , and get he out of the way , by send he on the russian and other embassy ; but on this favourite 's dismissal , s back from the continent , and be appoint almost immediately to a place about 's person . it be with this disreputable nobleman that I contract a unluckly intimacy ; when , fresh and unsuspecting , I first establish myself in town , after my marriage with : and , as be really one of the most entertaining fellow in the world , I take a sincere pleasure in he company ; besides the interesting desire I have in cultivat the society of a man who be so near the person of the highest personage in the realm . to hear the fellow , you would fancy that there be scarce any appointment make in which he have not a share . he tell I , for instance , of be turn out of he place a day before poor himself be aware of the fact . he tell I when the be come back from , and who be to succeed to the command there . not to multiply instance , it be upon this person that I fix my chief reliance for the advancement of my claim to the of and the Viscounty which I propose to get . one of the main cause of expense which this ambition of mine entail upon I be the fitting out and arm a company of infantry from the and in , which I offer to my gracious for the campaign against the american rebel . these troops , superbly equip and clothed , be embark at in the year 1778 ; and the patriotism of the gentleman who have raise they be so acceptable at , that , on be present by my , he condescende to notice I particularly , and say , ' that be right , , raise another company ; and go with they , too ! ' but this be by no means , as the reader may suppose , to my notion . a man with thirty thousand pound per annum be a fool to risk he life like a common beggar : and on this account I have always admire the conduct of my friend , who have be a most active and resolute cornet of horse , and , as such , engage in every scrape and skirmish which could fall to he lot ; but just before the battle of he receive news that he uncle , the great army contractor , be dead , and have leave he five thousand per annum . Jack that instant apply for leave ; and , as it be refuse he on the eve of a general action , my gentleman take it , and never fire a pistol again : except against a officer who question he courage , and whom he win in such a cool and determine manner , as show all the world that it be from prudence and a desire of enjoy he money , not from cowardice , that he quit the profession of arm . when this company be raise , my stepson , who be now sixteen year of age , be most eager to be allow to join it , and
and I would have gladly consent to have be ry of the young man ; but he guardian , , who thwart I in everything , refuse he permission , and the lad 's military inclination be balk . if he could have go on the expedition , and a rebel rifle have put a end to he , I believe , to tell the truth , I should not have be grieve over-much ; and I should have have the pleasure of see my other son the heir to the estate which he father have win with so much pain . the education of this young nobleman have be , I confess , some of the loosest ; and perhaps the truth be , I do neglect the brat . he be of so wild , savage , and insubordinate a nature , that I never have the least regard for he ; and before I and he mother , at least , be so moody and dull , that I think instruction throw away upon he , and leave he for the most part to shift for himself . for two whole year he remain in away from we ; and when in , we keep he mainly at , never care to have the uncouth ungainly lad in the genteel company in the capital in which we naturally mingl . my own poor boy , on the contrary , be the most polite and engage child ever see : it be a pleasure to treat he with kindness and distinction ; and before he be five year old , the little fellow be the pink of fashion , beauty , and good breeding . in fact he could not have be otherwise , with the care both he parent bestow upon he , and the attention that be lavish upon he in every way . when he be four year old , I quarrell with the english nurse who have attend upon he , and about whom my wife have be so jealous , and procure for he a french gouvernante , who have live with family of the first quality in ; and who , of course , must set my jealous too . under the care of this young woman my little rogue learn to chatter french most charmingly . it would have do you heart good to hear the dear rascal swear Mort de ma vie ! and to see he stamp he little foot , and send the manant and canaille of the domestic to the trent mille diable . he be precocious in all thing : at a very early age he would mimic everybody ; at five , he would sit at table , and drink he glass of champagne with the best of we ; and he nurse would teach he little french catch , and the last parisian song of and , -- pretty songs they be too ; and would make such of he hearer as understand french burst with laughing , and , I promise you , scandalise some of the old dowager who be admit into the society of he mamma : not that there be many of they ; for I do not encourage the visit of what you call respectable people to . they be sad spoiler of sport , -- tale - bearer , envious narrow - minded people ; make mischief between man and wife . whenever any of these grave personage in hoops and high heel use to make they appearance at , or in , it be my chief pleasure to frighten they off ; and I would make my little Bryan dance , s , and play the diable a quatre , and aid he myself , so as to scare the old frump . I never shall forget the solemn remonstrance of we old square - toe of a rector at , who make one or two vain attempt to teach little , and with whose innumerable child I sometimes allow the boy to associate . they learn some of 's french song from he , which they mother , a poor soul who understand pickle and custard much better than , use fondly to encourage they in singe ; but which they father one day hearing , he send to she bedroom and bread and water for a week , and solemnly horse master Jacob in the presence of all he brother and sister , and of , to whom he hope that flog would act as a warning . but my little rogue kick and plunge at the old parson 's shin until he be oblige to get he sexton to hold he down , and swore , corbleu , morbleu , ventrebleu , that he young friend should not be maltreate . after this scene , he reverence forbade Bryan the rectory - house ; on which I swore that he eldest son , who be bring up for the ministry , should never have the succession of the living of , which I have thoughts of bestowing on he ; and he father say , with a cant hypocritical air , which I hate , that 's will must be do ; that he would not have he child disobedient or corrupt for the sake of a bishopric , and write I a pompous and solemn letter , charge with quotation , take farewell of I and my house . 'I do so with regret , ' add the old gentleman , ' for I have receive so many kindness from the family that it go to my heart to be disunit from they . my poor , I fear , may suffer in consequence of my separation from you , and my be hence - forward unable to bring to you notice instance of distress and affliction ; which , when they be know
know to you , I will do you the justice to say , you generosity be always prompt to relieve . ' there may have be some truth in this , for the old gentleman be perpetually pester I with petition , and I know for a certainty , from he own charity , be often without a shilling in he pocket ; but I suspect the good dinner at have a considerable share in cause he regret at the dissolution of we intimacy : and I know that he wife be quite sorry to forego the acquaintance of 's gouvernante , , who have all the newest french fashions at she finger ' end , and who never go to the rectory but you would see the girl of the family turn out in new sack or mantle the after . I use to punish the old rebel by snor very loud in my pew on during sermon - time ; and I get a governor presently for , and a chaplain of my own , when he become of age sufficient to be separate from the woman 's society and guardianship . he English nurse I marry to my head gardener , with a handsome portion ; he french gouvernante I bestow upon my faithful german Fritz , not forget the dowry in the latter instance ; and they set up a french dining - house in , and I believe at the time I write they be richer in the world 's goods than they generous and free - hand master . for I now get a young gentleman from , the , who be commissioned to teach he , when the boy be in the humour , and to ground he in history , grammar , and the other qualification of a gentleman . be a precious addition to we society at . he be the means of make a deal of fun there . he be the butt of all we joke , and bear they with the most admirable and martyrlike patience . he be one of that sort of man who would rather be kick by a great man than not be notice by he ; and I have often put he wig into the fire in the face of the company , when he would laugh at the joke as well as any man there . it be a delight to put he on a high - mettle horse , and send he after the hound , -- pale , sweat , call on we , for 's sake , to stop , and hold on for dear life by the mane and the crupper . how it happen that the fellow be never kill I know not ; but I suppose hang be the way in which he neck will be break . he never meet with any accident , to speak of , in we hunting - match : but you be pretty sure to find he at dinner in he place at the bottom of the table make the punch , whence he would be carry off fuddled to be before the night be over . many a time have and I paint he face black on those occasion . we put he into a haunted room , and frightene he soul out of he body with ghost ; we let loose cargoe of rat upon he bed ; we cry fire , and fill he boot with water ; we cut the leg of he preaching - chair , and fill he sermon - book with snuff . poor Lavender bear it all with patience ; and at we party , or when we come to , be amply repay by be allow to sit with the gentlefolk , and to fancy himself in the society of man of fashion . it be good to hear the contempt with which he talk about we rector . ' he have a son , sir , who be a servitor : and a servitor at a small college , ' he would say . ' how could you , my dear sir , think of give the reversion of to such a low - breed creature ? ' I should now speak of my other son , at least my 's : I mean the . I keep he in for some year , under the guardianship of my mother , whom I have install at ; and great , I promise you , be she state in that occupation , and prodigious the good soul 's splendour and haughty bear . with all she oddity , the estate be the best manage of all we possession ; the rent be excellently pay , the charge of get they in smaller than they would have be under the management of any steward . it be astonish what small expense the good widow incur ; although she keep up the dignity of the two family , as she would say . she have a set of domestic to attend upon the young lord ; she never go out herself but in a old gilt coach and six ; the house be keep clean and tight ; the furniture and garden in the best repair ; and , in we occasional visit to , we never find any house we visit in such good condition as we own . there be a score of ready serve - lass , and half as many trim man about the castle ; and everything in as fine condition as the best housekeeper could make it . all this she do with scarcely any charge to we : for she fed sheep and cattle in the park , and make a handsome profit of they at ; she supply I do not know how many town with butter and bacon ; and the fruit and vegetable from
from the garden of get the highest price in market . she have no waste in the kitchen , as there use to be in most of we irish house ; and there be no consumption of liquor in the cellar , for the old lady drank water , and see little or no company . all she society be a couple of the girl of my ancient flame , now ; who with she husband have spend almost all they property , and who come to see I once in , look very old , fat , and slatternly , with two dirty child at she side . she weep very much when she see I , call I ' Sir , ' and ' , ' at which I be not sorry , and beg I to help she husband ; which I do , get he , through my friend , a place in the excise in , and pay the passage of he family and himself to that country . I find he a dirty , cast - down , snivell drunkard ; and , look at poor , could not but wonder at the day when I have think she a divinity . but if ever I have have a regard for a woman , I remain through life she constant friend , and could mention a thousand such instance of my generous and faithful disposition . yong , however , be almost the only person with whom she be concerned that my mother could not keep in order . the account she send I of he at first be such as give my paternal heart considerable pain . he reject all regularity and authority . he would absent himself for week from the house on sporting or other expedition . he be when at home silent and queer , refuse to make my mother 's game at piquet of evening , but plunge into all sort of musty old book , with which he muddle he brain ; more at ease laugh and chat with the piper and maid in the servants ' hall , than with the gentry in the drawing - room ; always cut jibe and joke at , at which she ( who be rather a slow woman at repartee ) would chafe violently : in fact , lead a life of insubordination and scandal . and , to cry all , the young scapegrace take to frequent the society of the priest of the parish -- a threadbare rogue , from some Popish seminary in or -- rather than the company of the vicar of , a gentleman of Trinity , who keep he hound and drank he two bottle a day . regard for the lad 's religion make I not hesitate then how I should act towards he . if I have any principle which have guide I through life , it have be respect for the establishment , and a hearty scorn and abhorrence of all other form of belief . I therefore send my French body - servant , in the year 17 - - , to with a commission to bring the young reprobate over ; and the report bring to I be that he have pass the whole of the last night of he stay in with he Popish friend at the mass - house ; that he and my mother have a violent quarrel on the very last day ; that , on the contrary , he kiss and , she two niece , who seem very sorry that he should go ; and that be press to go and visit the rector , he absolutely refuse , say he be a wicked old Pharisee , inside whose door he would never set he foot . the doctor write I a letter , warn I against the deplorable error of this young imp of perdition , as he call he ; and I could see that there be no love lose between they . but it appear that , if not agreeable to the gentry of the country , young have a huge popularity among the common people . there be a regular crowd weep round the gate when he coach take its departure . score of the ignorant savage wretch run for mile along by the side of the chariot ; and some go even so far as to steal away before he departure , and appear at the - at to bid he a last farewell . it be with considerable difficulty that some of these people could be keep from secret themselves in the vessel , and accompany they young lord to . to do the young scoundrel justice , when he come among we , he be a manly noble - look lad , and everything in he bearing and appearance betoken the high blood from which he come . he be the very portrait of some of the dark cavalier of the race , whose picture hang in the gallery at : where the lad be fond of spend the chief part of he time , occupy with the musty old book which he take out of the library , and which I hate to see a young man of spirit poring over . always in my company he preserve the most rigid silence , and a haughty scornful demeanour ; which be so much the more disagreeable because there be nothing in he behaviour I could actually take hold of to find fault with : although he whole conduct be insolent and supercilious to the highest degree . he mother be very much agitate at receive he on he arrival ; if he feel any such agitation he certainly do not show it . he make she a very low and formal bow when he kiss she hand ; and , when I hold out mine ,
, put both he hand behind he back , stare I full in the face , and bend he head , say , ' . , I believe ;' turn on he heel , and begin talk about the state of the weather to he mother , whom he always style ' you Ladyship . ' she be angry at this pert bear , and , when they be alone , rebuk he sharply for not shak hand with he father . ' my father , madam ? ' say he ; ' surely you mistake . my father be the . _I_ at least have not forget he , if other have . ' it be a declaration of war to I , as I see at once ; though I declare I be willing enough to have receive the boy well on he come amongst we , and to have live with he on term of friendliness . but as man serve I I serve they . who can blame I for my after -quarrel with this young reprobate , or lay upon my shoulders the evils which afterwards befell ? perhaps I lose my temper , and my subsequent treatment of he be hard . but it be he begin the quarrel , and not I ; and the evil consequence which ensue be entirely of he creating . as it be best to nip vice in the bud , and for a master of a family to exercise he authority in such a manner as that there may be no question about it , I take the earliest opportunity of come to close quarter with master ; and the day after he arrival among we , upon he refusal to perform some duty which I request of he , I have he convey to my study , and thrash he soundly . this process , I confess , at first agitate I a good deal , for I have never lay a whip on a lord before ; but I get speedily used to the practice , and he back and my whip became so well acquaint , that I warrant there be very little CEREMONy between we after a while . if I be to repeat all the instance of the insubordination and brutal conduct of young , I should weary the reader . he perseverance in resistance be , I think , even greater than mine in correcte he : for a man , be he ever so much resolve to do he duty as a parent , can not be flog he child all day , or for every fault they commit : and though I get the character of be so cruel a stepfather to he , I pledge my word I spare he correction when he merit it many more time than I administer it . besides , there be eight clear month in the year when he be quit of I , during the time of my presence in , at my place in parliament , and at the court of my Sovereign . at this period i make no difficulty to allow he to profit by the and of the old rector ; who have christen he , and have a considerable influence over the wayward lad . after a scene or a quarrel between we , it be generally to the rectory - house that the young rebel would fly for refuge and counsel ; and I must own that the parson be a pretty just umpire between we in we dispute . once he lead the boy back to by the hand , and actually bring he into my presence , although he have vow never to enter the door in my lifetime again , and say , ' he have bring he Lordship to acknowledge he error , and submit to any punishment I might think proper to inflict . ' upon which I can he in the presence of two or three friend of mine , with whom I be sit drinking at the time ; and to do he justice , he bear a pretty severe punishment without wincing or cry in the least . this will show that I be not too severe in my treatment of the lad , as I have the authority of the clergyman himself for inflict the correction which I think proper . twice or thrice , , 's , attempt to punish my ; but I promise you the rogue be too strong for he , and level the man to the ground with a chair : greatly to the delight of little , who cry out , ' Bravo , Bully ! thump he , thump he ! ' and Bully certainly do , to the governor 's heart 's content ; who never attempt personal chastisement afterwards ; but contente himself by bring the tale of he Lordship 's misdoing to I , he natural protector and guardian . with the child , be , strange to say , pretty tractable . he take a liking for the little fellow , -- as , indeed , everybody who see that darling boy do ,-- like he the more , he say , because he be 's half a . ' and well he might like he , for many a time , at the dear angel 's intercession of ' , do not flog Bully to - day ! ' I have hold my hand , and save he a horsing , which he richly deserve . with he mother , at first , he would scarcely deign to have any communication . he say she be no longer one of the family . why should he love she , as she have never be a mother to he ? but it will give the reader a idea of the dog obstinacy and surliness of the
the lad 's character , when I mention one trait regard he . it have be make a matter of complaint against I , that I deny he the education befitt a gentleman , and never send he to college or to school ; but the fact be , it be of he own choice that he go to neither . he have the offer repeatedly from I ( who wish to see as little of he impudence as possible ) , but he as repeatedly decline ; and , for a long time , I could not make out what be the charm which keep he in a house where he must have be far from comfortable . it come out , however , at last . there use to be very frequent dispute between my and myself , in which sometimes she be wrong , sometimes I be ; and which , as neither of we have very angelical temper , use to run very high . I be often in liquor ; and when in that condition , what gentleman be master of himself ? perhaps I do , in this state , use my Lady rather roughly ; fl a glass or two at she , and call she by a few name that be not complimentary . I may have threaten she life ( which it be obviously my interest not to take ) , and have frightene she , in a word , considerably . after one of these dispute , in which she run scream through the galleries , and I , as tipsy as a lord , come stagger after , it appear be attract out of he room by the noise ; as I come up with she , the audacious rascal trip up my heel , which be not very steady , and catch he fainting mother in he arm , take she into he own room ; where he , upon she entreaty , swore he would never leave the house as long as she continue with I . I know nothing of the vow , or indeed of the tipsy frolic which be the occasion of it ; I be take up ' glorious , ' as the phrase be , by my servants , and put to bed , and , in the morning , have no more recollection of what have occur any more than of what happen when I be a baby at the breast . tell I of the circumstance year after ; and I mention it here , as it enable I to plead honourably ' not guilty ' to one of the absurd charge of cruelty trump up against I with respect to my stepson . let my detractor apologise , if they dare , for the conduct of a graceless ruffian who trip up the heel of he own natural guardian and stepfather after dinner . this circumstance serve to unite mother and son for a little ; but they character be too different . I believe she be too fond of I ever to allow he to be sincerely reconcile to she . as he grow up to be a man , he hatre towards I assume a intensity quite wick to think of ( and which I promise you I return with interest ) : and it be at the age of sixteen , I think , that the impudent young hangdog , on my return from parliament one summer , and on my proposing to cane he as usual , give I to understand that he would submit to no farther chastisement from I , and say , grind he tooth , that he would shoot I if I lay hand on he . I look at he ; he be grow , in fact , to be a tall young man , and I give up that necessary part of he education . it be about this time that I raise the company which be to serve in ; and my enemy in the country ( and since my victory over the I scarce need say I have many of they ) begin to propagate the most shameful report regard my conduct to that precious young scapegrace my stepson , and to insinuate that I actually wish to get rid of he . thus my loyalty to my be actually construe into a horrid unnatural attempt on my part on 's life ; and it be say that I have raise the american corps for the sole purpose of get the young Viscount to command it , and so of get rid of he . I be not sure that they have not fix upon the name of the very man in the company who be order to despatch he at the first general action , and the bribe I be to give he for this delicate piece of service . but the truth be , I be of opinion then ( and though the fulfilment of my prophecy have be delay , yet I make no doubt it will be bring to pass ere long ) , that my need none of my aid in send he into the other world ; but have a happy knack of find the way thither himself , which he would be sure to pursue . in truth , he begin upon this way early : of all the violent , daring , disobedient scapegrace that ever cause a affectionate parent pain , he be certainly the most incorrigible ; there be no beat he , or coax he , or tame he . for instance , with my little son , when he governor bring he into the room as we be over the bottle after dinner , my would begin he violent and undutiful sarcasm at I . ' dear child ,' he would say , begin to caress
caress and fondle he , ' what a pity it be I be not dead for thy sake ! the Lyndon would then have a worthier representative , and enjoy all the benefit of the illustrious blood of the of ; would they not , ? ' he always choose the day when company , or the clergy or gentry of the neighbourhood , be present , to make these insolent speech to I . another day ( it be 's birthday ) we be give a grand ball and gala at , and it be time for my little to make he appearance among we , as he usually do in the smartest little court - suit you ever see ( ah I ! but it bring tear into my old eye now to think of the bright look of that darl little face ) . there be a great crowding and titter when the child come in , lead by he half - brother , who walk into the dancing - room ( would you believe it ? ) in he stocking - foot , lead little by the hand , paddle about in the great shoe of the elder ! ' do not you think he fit my shoe very well , ? ' say the young reprobate : upon which the company begin to look at each other and to titter ; and he mother , come up to with great dignity , seize the child to she breast , and say , ' from the manner in which I love this child , my , you ought to know how I would have love he elder brother have he prove worthy of any mother 's affection ! ' and , burst into tear , leave the apartment , and the young lord rather discomfit for once . at last , on one occasion , he behaviour to I be so outrageous ( it be in the hunting - field and in a large public company ) , that I lose all patience , ride at the urching straight , wrench he out of he saddle with all my force , and , flinge he roughly to the ground , spring down to it myself , and administer such a correction across the young caitiff 's head and shoulders with my horsewhip as might have end in he death , have I not be restrain in time ; for my passion be up , and I be in a state to do murder or any other crime . the lad be take home and put to bed , where he lay for a day or two in a fever , as much from rage and vexation as from the chastisement I have give he ; and three day afterwards , on send to inquire at he chamber whether he would join the family at table , a note be find on he table , and he bed be empty and cold . the young villain have fle , and have the audacity to write in the follow term regard I to my wife , he mother :-- ' Madam ,' he say , 'I have borne as long as mortal could endure the ill - treatment of the insolent irish upstart whom you have take to you bed . it be not only the lowness of he birth and the general brutality of he manners which disgust I , and must make I hate he so long as I have the honour to bear the name of , which he be unworthy of , but the shameful nature of he conduct towards you Ladyship ; he brutal and ungentlemanlike behaviour , he open infidelity , he habits of extravagance , intoxication , he shameless robbery and swindling of my property and yours . it be these insult to you which shock and annoy I , more than the ruffian 's infamous conduct to myself . I would have stand by you Ladyship as I promise , but you seem to have take latterly you husband 's part ; and , as I can not personally chastise this low - breed ruffian , who , to we shame be it speak , be the husband of my mother ; and as I can not bear to witness he treatment of you , and loathe he horrible society as if it be the plague , I be determined to quit my native country : at least during he detested life , or during my own . I possess a small income from my father , of which I have no doubt will cheat I if he can ; but which , if you Ladyship have some feeling of a mother left , you will , perhaps , award to I . Messr . Childs , the banker , can have order to pay it to I when due ; if they receive no such order , I shall be not in the least surprised , knowe you to be in the hand of a villain who would not scruple to rob on the highway ; and shall try to find out some way in life for myself more honourable than that by which the penniless irish adventurer have arrive to turn I out of my rights and home . ' this mad epistle be sign ' , ' and all the neighbour vow that I have be privy to he flight , and would profit by it ; though I declare on my honou my true and sincere desire , after read the above infamous letter , be to have the author within a good arm 's length of I , that I might let he know my opinion regard he . but there be no eradicating this idea from people 's mind , who insist that I want to kill ; whereas murder , as I have say
say , be never one of my evil quality : and even have I wish to injure my young enemy ever so much , common prudence would have make my mind easy , as I know he be go to ruin he own way . it be long before we hear of the fate of the audacious young truant ; but after some fifteen month have elapse , I have the pleasure of be able to refute some of the murderous calumny which have be utter against I , by produce a bill with 's own signature , draw from 's army in , where my company be conduct itself with the greatest glory , and with which my be serve as a volunteer . there be some of my kind friend who persist still in attribute all sort of wicked intention to I . would never believe that I would pay any bill , much more any bill of 's ; old , he sister , persist in declare the bill be a forgery , and the poor dear lord dead ; until there come a letter to she Ladyship from himself , who have be at at headquarters , and who describe at length the splendid festival give by the officer of the garrison to we distinguished chieftain , the two Howe . in the meanwhile , if I have murder my , I could scarcely have be receive with more shameful obloquy and slander than now follow I in town and country . ' you will hear of the lad 's death , be sure , ' exclaim one of my friend . ' and then he wife 's will follow , ' add another . ' he will marry , ' add a third ; and so on . bring I the news of these scandal about I : the country be up against I . the farmer on market - day use to touch they hat sulkily , and get out of my way ; the gentleman who follow my hunt now suddenly seced from it , and leave off my uniform ; at the county ball , where I lead out , and take my place third in the dance after the duke and the marquis , as be my wont , all the couple turn away as we come to they , and we be leave to dance alone . have a love of dancing which would make she dance at a funeral if anybody ask she , and I have too much spirit to give in at this signal instance of insult towards I ; so we dance with some of the very commonest low people at the bottom of the set -- you apothecary , wine - merchant , attorney , and such scum as be allow to attend we public assemblie . the bishop , my 's relative , neglect to invite we to the palace at the assize ; and , in a word , every indignity be put upon I which could by possibility be heape upon a innocent and honourable gentleman . my reception in , whither I now carry my wife and family , be scarcely more cordial . on pay my respects to my at 's , he pointedly ask I when I have news of . on which I reply , with no ordinary presence of mind , ' , my be fight the rebel against you Majesty 's crown in . do you Majesty desire that I should send another regiment to aid he ? ' on which the turn on he heel , and I make my bow out of the presence - chamber . when kiss the 's hand at the drawing - room , I find that precisely the same question have be put to she Ladyship ; and she come home much agitate at the rebuke which have be administer to she . thus it be that my loyalty be reward , and my sacrifice , in favour of my country , view ! I take away my establishment abruptly to , where I meet with a very different reception : but my stay amidst the enchant pleasure of that capital be extremely short ; for the french government , which have be long tamper with the american rebel , now openly acknowledge the independence of the . a declaration of war ensue : all we happy be order away from ; and I think I leave one or two fair lady there inconsolable . it be the only place where a gentleman can live as he like without be incommod by he wife . the Countess and I , during we stay , scarcely see each other except upon public occasion , at versaille , or at the 's play - table ; and we dear little advanc in a thousand elegant accomplishment which render he the delight of all who know he . I must not forget to mention here my last interview with my good uncle , the , whom I leave at Brussels with strong intention of make he salut , as the phrase be , and who have go into retirement at a convent there . since then he have come into the world again , much to he annoyance and repentance ; have fall desperately in love in he old age with a french actress , who have do , as most lady of she character do , -- ruin he , leave he , and laugh at he . he repentance be very edifying . under the guidance of Messieur of the irish college , he once more turn he thought towards religion ; and he only prayer to I when I see he and ask in what I could relieve he , be to pay a handsome fee to the convent into which he propose to enter . this I could not
not , of course , do : my religious principles forbid I to encourage superstition in any way ; and the old gentleman and I part rather coolly , in consequence of my refusal , as he say , to make he old day comfortable . I be very poor at the time , that be the fact ; and entre nous , the not of the , a indifferent dancer , but a charme figure and ankle , be ruin I in diamonds , equipage , and furniture bill , add to which i have a run of ill - luck at play , and be force to meet my loss by the most shameful sacrifice to the money - lender , by pawn part of 's diamonds ( that graceless little not wheedle I out of some of they ) , and by a thousand other scheme for raising money . but when be in the case , be I ever find backward at she call : and what man can say that lose a bet which he do not pay ? as for my ambitious hope regard the irish peerage , I begin , on my return , to find out that I have be lead wildly astray by that rascal ; who like to take my money , but have no more influence to get I a coronet than to procure for I the Pope 's tiara . the be not a whit more gracious to I on return from the continent than he have be before my departure ; and I have it from one of the aide - de - camp of the he brother , that my conduct and amusement at have be odiously misrepresent by some spy there , and have form the subject of comment ; and that the king have , influence by these calumny , actually say I be the most disreputable man in the three kingdom . I disreputable ! I a dishonour to my name and country ! when I hear these falsehood , I be in such a rage that I go off to at once to remonstrate with the ; to insist upon be allow to appear before and clear myself of the imputation against I , to point out my service to the government in voting with they , and to ask when the reward that have be promise to I --viz. , the title hold by my ancestor -- be again to be revive in my person ? there be a sleepy coolness in that fat which be the most provoke thing that the opposition have ever to encounter from he . he hear I with half - shut eye . when I have finish a long violent speech -- which i make strid about he room in , and gesticulat with all the energy of a -- he open one eye , smile , and ask I gently if I have do . on my replying in the affirmative , he say , ' well , , I will answer you , point by point . the king be exceedingly averse to make peer , as you know . you claim , as you call they , have be laid before he , and 's gracious reply be , that you be the most impudent man in he dominion , and merit a halter rather than a coronet . as for withdraw you support from we , you be perfectly welcome to carry yourself and you vote whithersoever you please . and now , as I have a great deal of occupation , perhaps you will do I the favour to retire . ' so say , he raise he hand lazily to the bell , and bow I out ; ask blandly if there be any other thing in the world in which he could oblige I . I go home in a fury which can not be describe ; and have to dinner that day , assail he Lordship by pull he wig off he head , and smother it in he face , and by attack he in that part of the person where , accord to report , he have be formerly assault by . the whole story be over the town the next day , and picture of I be hang in the club and print - shop perform the operation allude to . all the town laugh at the picture of the lord and the , and , I need not say , recognise both . as for I , I be one of the most celebrate character in in those day : my dress , style , and equipage be as well know as those of any leader of the fashion ; and my popularity , if not great in the highest quarter , be at least considerable elsewhere . the people cheer I in the row , at the time they nearly kill my friend and burn 's house down . indeed , I be know as a staunch protestant , and after my quarrel with veer right round to the opposition , and vex he with all the means in my power . these be not , unluckily , very great , for I be a bad speaker , and the House would not listen to I , and presently , in 1780 , after the disturbance , be dissolve , when a general election take place . it come on I , as all my mishap be in the habit of come , at a most unlucky time . I be oblige to raise more money , at most ruinous rate , to face the confound election , and have the Tiptoffs against I in the field more active and virulent than ever . my blood boil even now when I think of the rascally conduct of my enemy in that scoundrelly election
election . I be hold up as the , and libel of I be print , and gross caricature draw represent I flog , whipp , turn he out of door in a storm , and I know not what . there be picture of a pauper cabin in , from which it be pretend I come ; other in which I be represent as a lacquey and shoeblack . a flood of calumny be let loose upon I , in which any man of less spirit would have go down . but though I meet my accuser boldly , though I lavish sum of money in the election , though I fling open and keep champagne and run there , and at all my inns in the town , as commonly as water , the election go against I . the rascally gentry have all turn upon I and join the Tiptoff faction : it be even represent that I hold my wife by force ; and though I send she into the town alone , wear my colour , with in she lap , and make she visit the mayor 's lady and the chief woman there , nothing would persuade the people but that she live in fear and trembl of I ; and the brutal mob have the insolence to ask she why she da to go back , and how she like horsewhip for supper . I be throw out of my election , and all the bill come down upon I together -- all the bill I have be contract during the year of my marriage , which the creditor , with a rascally unanimity , send in until they lay upon my table in heap . I will not cite they amount : it be frightful . my steward and lawyer make matter worse . I be bound up in a inextricable toil of bills and debt , of mortgage and insurance , and all the horrible evil attendant upon they . lawyer upon lawyer post down from ; composition after composition be make , and 's income hamper almost irretrievably to satisfy these cormorant . to do she justice , she behave with tolerable kindness at this season of trouble ; for whenever I want money I have to coax she , and whenever I coax she I be sure of bring this weak and light - minded woman to good - humour : who be of such a weak terrified nature , that to secure a easy week with I she would sign away a thousand a year . and when my trouble begin at , and I determine on the only chance leave , viz. to retire to and retrench , assign over the best part of my income to the creditor until they demand be meet , my be quite cheerful at the idea of go , and say , if we would be quiet , she have no doubt all would be well ; indeed , be glad to undergo the comparative poverty in which we must now live for the sake of the retirement and the chance of domestic quiet which she hope to enjoy . we go off to pretty suddenly , leave the odious and ungrateful wretch at to vilify we , no doubt , in we absence . my stud and hound be sell off immediately ; the harpy would have be glad to pounce upon my person ; but that be out of they power . I have raise , by cleverness and management , to the full as much on my mine and private estate as they be worth ; so the scoundrel be disappointed in this instance ; and as for the plate and property in the house , they could not touch that , as it be the property of the heir of the house of . I pass over to , then , and take up my abode at for a while ; all the world imagine that I be a utterly ruin man , and that the famous and dash would never again appear in the circle of which he have be a ornament . but it be not so . in the midst of my perplexity , reserve a great consolation for I still . Despatch come home from announce 's defeat of in , and the death of , who be present as a volunteer . for my own desire to possess a paltry irish title I care little . my son be now heir to a earldom , and I make he assume forthwith the title of , the third of the family title . my mother go almost mad with joy at salut she grandson as , ' and I feel that all my suffering and privation be repay by see this darling child advanced to such a post of honour . if the world be not compose of a race of ungrateful scoundrel , who share you prosperity while it last , and , even when gorge with you venison and , abuse the generous giver of the feast , I be sure I merit a good name and a high reputation : in , at least , where my generosity be unbounded , and the splendour of my mansion and entertainment unequalled by any other nobleman of my time . as long as my magnificence last , all the country be free to partake of it ; I have hunter sufficient in my stable to mount a regiment of dragoon , and butt of wine in my cellar which would have make whole county drunk for year . become the headquarters of score of needy gentleman , and I never ride a - hunting but I have a dozen young fellow of the best blood of the country riding as my squire and gentleman of the horse . my son , little ,
, be a prince ; he breeding and manners , even at he early age , show he to be worthy of the two noble family from whom he be descende : I do not know what high hope I have for the boy , and indulge in a thousand fond anticipation as to he future success and figure in the world . but stern have determine that I should leave none of my race behind I , and ordain that I should finish my career , as I see it close now -- poor , lonely , and childless . I may have have my fault ; but no man shall dare to say of I that I be not a good and tender father . I love that boy passionately ; perhaps with a blind partiality : I deny he nothing . gladly , gladly , I swear , would I have die that he premature doom might have be avert . I think there be not a day since I lose he but he bright face and beautiful smile look down on I out of heaven , where he be , and that my heart do not yearn towards he . that sweet child be take from I at the age of nine year , when he be full of beauty and promise : and so powerful be the hold he memory have of I that I have never be able to forget he ; he little spirit haunt I of night on my restless solitary pillow ; many a time , in the wildest and maddest company , as the bottle be go round , and the song and laugh roaring about , I be think of he . I have get a lock of he soft brown hair hang round my breast now : it will accompany I to the dishonoured pauper 's grave ; where soon , no doubt , 's worn - out old bone will be laid . my be a boy of amazing high spirit ( indeed how , come from such a stock , could he be otherwise ? ) , impatient even of my control , against which the dear little rogue would often rebel gallantly ; how much more , then , of he mother 's and the woman 's , whose attempt to direct he he would laugh to scorn . even my own mother ( ' . of ' the good soul now call herself , in compliment to my new family ) be quite unable to check he ; and hence you may fancy what a will he have of he own . if it have not be for that , he might have live to this day : he might -- but why repine ? be he not in a better place ? would the heritage of a beggar do any service to he ? it be best as it be -- be good to we !-- ! that I , he father , should be leave to deplore he . it be in the month of I have be to , in order to see a lawyer and a moneyed man who have come over to to consult with I about some sale of mine and the cut of timber ; of which , as I hate the place and be greatly in want of money , I be determined to cut down every stick . there have be some difficulty in the matter . it be say I have no right to touch the timber . the brute peasantry about the estate have be rouse to such a pitch of hatred against I , that the rascal actually refuse to lay a axe to the tree ; and my agent ( that scoundrel ) declare that he life be in danger among they if he attempt any further despoilment ( as they call it ) of the property . every article of the splendid furniture be sell by this time , as I need not say ; and as for the plate , I have take good care to bring it off to , where it now be in the best of keeping -- my banker 's , who have advance six thousand pound on it : which sum I soon have occasion for . I go to , then , to meet the english man of business ; and so far succeed in persuade , a great shipbuilder and timber - dealer of , of my claim to the timber , that he agree to purchase it off - hand at about one - third of its value , and hand I over five thousand pound : which , be press with debt at the time , I be fain to accept . he have no difficulty in get down the wood , I warrant . he take a regiment of shipwright and sawyer from he own and the King 's yard at , and in two month be as bare of tree as the of . I have but ill luck with that accursed expedition and money . I lose the greater part of it in two night ' play at ' 's , ' so that my debt stand just as they be before ; and before the vessel sail for , which carry away my old sharper of a timber - merchant , all that I have leave of the money he bring I be a couple of hundred pound , with which I return home very disconsolately : and very suddenly , too , for my tradesman be hot upon I , hear I have spend the loan , and two of my wine - merchant have writ out against I for some thousand of pound . I buy in , accord to my promise , however -- for when I give a promise I will keep it
it at any sacrifice -- a little horse for my dear little ; which be to be a present for he tenth birthday , that be now come on : it be a beautiful little animal and stand I in a good sum . I never regard money for that dear child . but the horse be very wild . he kick off one of my horse - boy , who ride he at first , and break the lad 's leg ; and , though I take the animal in hand on the journey home , it be only my weight and skill that make the brute quiet . when we get home I send the horse away with one of my grooms to a farmer 's house , to break he thoroughly in , and tell , who be all anxiety to see he little horse , that he would arrive by he birthday , when he should hunt he along with my hound ; and I promise myself no small pleasure in present the dear fellow to the field that day : which I hope to see he lead some time or other in place of he fond father . ah I ! never be that gallant boy to ride a fox - chase , or to take the place amongst the gentry of he country which he birth and genius have point out for he ! though I do not believe in dream and omen , yet I can not but own that when a great calamity be hang over a man he have frequently many strange and awful foreboding of it . I fancy now I have many . , especially , twice dream of she son 's death ; but , as she be now grow uncommonly nervous and vapourish , I treat she fear with scorn , and my own , of course , too . and in a unguarded moment , over the bottle after dinner , I tell poor , who be always question I about the little horse , and when it be to come , that it be arrive ; that it be in 's farm , where Mick the groom be break he in . ' promise I , , ' scream he mother , ' that you will not ride the horse except in company of you father . ' but I only say , ' Pooh , madam , you be a ass ! ' be angry at she silly timidity , which be always show itself in a thousand disagreeable way now ; and , turn round to , say , 'I promise you Lordship a good flogging if you mount he without my leave . ' I suppose the poor child do not care about pay this penalty for the pleasure he be to have , or possibly think a fond father would remit the punishment altogether ; for the next morning , when I rise rather late , have sit up drinking the night before , I find the child have be off at daybreak , have slipt through he tutor 's room ( this be , we cousin , whom I have take to live with I ) , and I have no doubt but that he be go to 's farm . I take a great horsewhip and gallop off after he in a rage , swear I would keep my promise . but , forgive I ! I little thought of it when at three mile from home I meet a sad procession come towards I : peasant moaning and how as we irish do , the black horse lead by the hand , and , on a door that some of the folk carry , my poor dear dear little boy . there he lay in he little boot and spur , and he little coat of scarlet and gold . he dear face be quite white , and he smile as he hold a hand out to I , and say painfully , ' you will not whip I , will you , papa ? ' I could only burst out into tear in reply . I have see many and many a man die , and there be a look about the eyes which you can not mistake . there be a little drummer - boy I be fond of who be hit down before my company at ; when I run up to give he some water , he look exactly like my dear then do -- there be no mistaking that awful look of the eyes . we carry he home and scour the country round for doctor to come and look at he hurt . but what do a doctor avail in a contest with the grim invincible enemy ? such as come could only confirm we despair by they account of the poor child 's case . he have mount he horse gallantly , sit he bravely all the time the animal plunge and kick , and , have overcome he first spite , run he at a hedge by the roadside . but there be loose stone at the top , and the horse 's foot catch among they , and he and he brave little rider roll over together at the other side . the people say they see the noble little boy spring up after he fall and run to catch the horse ; which have break away from he , kick he on the back , as it would seem , as they lay on the ground . poor run a few yard and then drop down as if shot . a pallor come over he face , and they think he be dead . but they pour whisky down he mouth , and the poor child revive : still he could not move ; he spine be injure ;
; the lower half of he be dead when they lay he in bed at home . the rest do not last long , help I ! he remain yet for two day with we ; and a sad comfort it be to think he be in no pain . during this time the dear angel 's temper seem quite to change : he ask he mother and I pardon for any act of disobedience he have be guilty of towards we ; he say often he should like to see he brother . ' Bully be better than you , papa ,' he say ; ' he use not to swear so , and he tell and teach I many good thing while you be away . ' and , take a hand of he mother and mine in each of he little clammy one , he beg we not to quarrel so , but love each other , so that we might meet again in heaven , where Bully tell he quarrelsome people never go . he mother be very much affect by these admonition from the poor suffering angel 's mouth ; and I be so too . I wish she have enable I to keep the counsel which the die boy give we . at last , after two day , he die . there he lay , the hope of my family , the pride of my manhood , the link which have keep I and my together . 'Oh , , ' say she , knee by the sweet child 's body , 'do , do let we listen to the truth out of he bless mouth : and do you amend you life , and treat you poor love fond wife as she die child bade you . ' and I say I would : but there be promise which it be out of a man 's power to keep ; especially with such a woman as she . but we draw together after that sad event , and be for several month better friend . I will not tell you with what splendou we bury he . of what avail be undertaker ' feather and herald ' trumpery ? I go out and shoot the fatal black horse that have kill he , at the door of the vault where we lay my boy . I be so wild , that I could have shot myself too . but for the crime , it would have be better that I should , perhaps ; for what have my life be since that sweet flower be take out of my bosom ? a succession of misery , wrong , disaster , and mental and bodily suffering which never fall to the lot of any other man in . , always vapourish and nervous , after we bless boy 's catastrophe become more agitated than ever , and plunge into devotion with so much fervour , that you would have fancie she almost distract at time . she imagine she see vision . she say a angel from heaven have tell she that 's death be as a punishment to she for she neglect of she first - bear . then she would declare be alive ; she have see he in a dream . then again she would fall into fit of sorrow about he death , and grieve for he as violently as if he have be the last of she son who have die , and not we darl ; who , compare to , be what a diamond be to a vulgar stone . she freak be painful to witness , and difficult to control . it begin to be say in the country that the Countess be go mad . my scoundrelly enemie do not fail to confirm and magnify the rumour , and would add that I be the cause of she insanity : I have drive she to distraction , I have kill , I have murder my own son ; I do not know what else they lay to my charge . even in they hateful calumny reach I : my friend fall away from I . they begin to desert my hunt , as they do in , and when I go to race or market find sudden reason for get out of my neighbourhood . I get the name of , , which you please : the country - folk use to make marvellous legend about I : the priest say I have massacre I do not know how many german nun in the ' ; that the ghost of the murdered haunt my house . once at a fair in a town hard by , when I have a mind to buy a waistcoat for one of my people , a fellow stand by say , ''Tis a strait - waistcoat he be buy for my . ' and from this circumstance arise a legend of my cruelty to my wife ; and many circumstantial detail be narrate regard my manner and ingenuity of torture she . the loss of my dear boy press not only on my heart as a father , but injure my individual interests in a very considerable degree ; for as there be now no direct heir to the estate , and be of a weak health , and suppose to be quite unlikely to leave a family , the next in succession - that detestable family of -- begin to exert themselves in a hundred way to annoy I , and be at the head of the party of enemy who be raise report to my discredit . they interpose between I and my management of the property in a hundred different way ; make a outcry if I cut a stick , sink a shaft , sell a picture , or send a few ounce of plate
plate to be remodell . they harass I with ceaseless lawsuit , get injunction from , hamper my agent in the execution of they work ; so much so that you would have fancie my own be not my own , but theirs , to do as they like with . what be worse , as I have reason to believe , they have tampering and dealings with my own domestic under my own roof ; for I could not have a word with but it somehow get abroad , and I could not be drink with my chaplain and friend but some sanctify rascal would get hold of the news , and reckon up all the bottle I drank and all the oath I swore . that these be not few , I acknowledge . I be of the old school ; be always a free liver and speaker ; and , at least , if I do and say what I like , be not so bad as many a canting scoundrel I know of who cover he foible and sins , unsuspect , with a mask of holiness . as I be make a clean breast of it , and be no hypocrite , I may as well confess now that I endeavoure to ward off the device of my enemy by a artifice which be not , perhaps , strictly justifiable . everything depend on my have a heir to the estate ; for if , who be of weakly health , have die , the next day i be a beggar : all my sacrifice of money , & c. , on the estate would not have be hold in a farthing 's account ; all the debt would have be leave on my shoulders ; and my enemy would have triumph over I : which , to a man of my honourable spirit , be ' the unkindest cut of all , ' as some poet say . I confess , then , it be my wish to supplant these scoundrel ; and , as I could not do so without a heir to my property , _I_ determined to find one . if I have he near at hand , and of my own blood too , though with the bar sinister , be not here the question . it be then I find out the rascally machination of my enemy ; for , have broach this plan to , whom I make to be , outwardly at least , the most obedient of wife ,-- although I never let a letter from she or to she go or arrive without my inspection ,-- although I allow she to see none but those person who I think , in she delicate health , would be fit society for she ; yet the infernal Tiptoffs get wind of my scheme , protest instantly against it , not only by letter , but in the shameful libellous public print , and hold I up to public odium as a ' child - forger , ' as they call I . of course I deny the charge -- I could do no otherwise , and offer to meet any one of the Tiptoff on the field of honour , and prove he a scoundrel and a liar : as he be ; though , perhaps , not in this instance . but they contente themselves by answer I by a lawyer , and decline a invitation which any man of spirit would have accept . my hope of have a here be thus blight completely : indeed , ( though , as I have say , I take she opposition for nothing ) have resist the proposal with as much energy as a woman of she weakness could manifest ; and say she have commit one great crime in consequence of I , but would rather die than perform another . I could easily have bring she Ladyship to she sense , however : but my scheme have take wind , and it be now in vain to attempt it . we might have have a dozen child in honest wedlock , and people would have say they be false . as for raising money on annuity , I may say I have use she life interest up . there be but few of those assurance societie in my time which have since spring up in the city of ; underwriter do the business , and my wife 's life be as well know among they as , I do believe , that of any woman in . Latterly , when I want to get a sum against she life , the rascal have the impudence to say my treatment of she do not render it worth a year 's purchase , -- as if my interest lay in kill she ! have my boy liv , it would have be a different thing ; he and he mother might have cut off the entail of a good part of the property between they , and my affair have be put in better order . now they be in a bad condition indeed . all my scheme have turn out failure ; my lands , which I have purchase with borrowed money , make I no return , and I be oblige to pay ruinous interest for the sum with which i have purchase they . my income , though very large , be saddle with hundred of annuity , and thousand of lawyer ' charge ; and I feel the net draw closer and closer round I , and no means to extricate myself from its toil . to add to all my perplexity , two year after my poor child 's death , my wife , whose vagary of temper and wayward folly I have borne with for twelve year , want to leave I
I , and absolutely make attempt at what she call escape from my tyranny . my mother , who be the only person that , in my misfortune , remain faithful to I ( indeed , she have always speak of I in my true light , as a martyr to the rascality of other and a victim of my own generous and confid temper ) , find out the first scheme that be go on ; and of which those artful and malicious Tiptoffs were , as usual , the main promoter . , indeed , though she temper be violent and she way singular , be a invaluable person to I in my house ; which would have be at rack and ruin long before , but for she spirit of order and management , and for she excellent economy in the government of my numerous family . as for my , she , poor soul ! be much too fine a lady to attend to household matter -- pass she day with she doctor , or she book of piety , and never appear among we except at my compulsion ; when she and my mother would be sure to have a quarrel . , on the contrary , have a talent for management in all matters . she keep the maid stirr , and the footman to they duty ; have a eye over the claret in the cellar , and the oat and hay in the stable ; see to the salting and pickling , the potatoe and the turf - stacking , the pig -killing and the poultry , the linen - room and the bakehouse , and the ten thousand minutia of a great establishment . if all irish housewive be like she , I warrant many a hall - fire would be blaze where the cobweb only grow now , and many a park cover with sheep and fat cattle where the thistle be at present the chief occupier . if anything could have save I from the consequence of villainy in other , and ( I confess it , for I be not above own to my fault ) my own too easy , generous , and careless nature , it would have be the admirable prudence of that worthy creature . she never go to be until all the house be quiet and all the candle out ; and you may fancy that this be a matter of some difficulty with a man of my habits , who have commonly a dozen of jovial fellows ( artful scoundrel and false friend most of they be ! ) to drink with I every night , and who seldom , for my part , go to bed sober . many and many a night , when I be unconscious of she attention , have that good soul pull my boot off , and see I lay by my servants snug in bed , and carry off the candle herself ; and be the first in the morning , too , to bring I my drink of small - beer . mine be no milksop time , I can tell you . a gentleman think no shame of take he half - dozen bottle ; and , as for you coffee and slop , they be leave to , she doctor , and the other old woman . it be my mother 's pride that I could drink more than any man in the country , -- as much , within a pint , as my father before I , she say . that should detest she be quite natural . she be not the first of woman or mankind either that have hate a mother - in - law . I set my mother to keep a sharp watch over the freak of she Ladyship ; and this , you may be sure , be one of the reason why the latter dislike she . I never min that , however . 's assistance and surveillance be invaluable to I ; and , if I have pay twenty spy to watch my lady , I should not have be half so well serve as by the disinterested care and watchfulness of my excellent mother . she sleep with the house - key under she pillow , and have a eye everywhere . she follow all the Countess 's movement like a shadow ; she manage to know , from morning to night , everything that my do . if she walk in the garden , a watchful eye be keep on the wicket ; and if she choose to drive out , . accompany she , and a couple of fellow in my livery ride alongside of the carriage to see that she come to no harm . though she object , and would have keep she room in sullen silence , I make a point that we should appear together at church in the coach - and - six every ; and that she should attend the race - ball in my company , whenever the coast be clear of the rascally bailiff who beset I . this give the lie to any of those maligner who say I wish to make a prisoner of my wife . the fact be , that , know she levity , and see the insane dislike to I and mine which have now begin to supersede what , perhaps , have be a equally insane fondness for I , I be bound to be on my guard that she should not give I the slip . have she leave I , I be ruin the next day . this ( which my mother know ) compelle we to keep a tight watch over she ; but as for imprison she , I repel the imputation with scorn . every man imprison he wife to a
a certain degree ; the world would be in a pretty condition if woman be allow to quit home and return to it whenever they have a mind . in watch over my wife , , I do no more than exercise the legitimate authority which award honour and obedience to every husband . such , however , be female artifice , that , in spite of all my watchfulness in guard she , it be probable my would have give I the slip , have I not have quite as acute a person as herself as my ally : for , as the proverb say that ' the best way to catch one thief be to set another after he ,' so the best way to get the better of a woman be to engage one of she own artful sex to guard she . one would have think that , follow as she be , all she letter read , and all she acquaintance strictly watch by I , live in a remote part of away from she family , could have have no chance of communicating with she ally , or of make she wrongs , as she be pleased to call they , public ; and yet , for a while , she carry on a correspondence under my very nose , and acutely organise a conspiracy for fly from I ; as shall be tell . she always have a inordinate passion for dress , and , as she be never thwart in any whimsey she have of this kind ( for I spare no money to gratify she , and among my debt be milliner ' bill to the amount of many thousand ) , box use to pass continually to and fro from , with all sort of dress , cap , flounce , and furbelow , as she fancy dictate . with these would come letter from she milliner , in answer to numerous similar injunction from my Lady ; all of which pass through my hand , without the least suspicion , for some time . and yet in these very papers , by the easy means of sympathetic ink , be contain all she Ladyship 's correspondence ; and heaven know ( for it be some time , as I have say , before I discover the trick ) what charge against I . but clever Mr . find out that always before my lady - wife choose to write letter to she milliner , she have need of lemon to make she drink , as she say ; this fact , be mention to I , set I a -thinking , and so I try one of the letter before the fire , and the whole scheme of villainy be bring to light . I will give a specimen of one of the horrid artful letter of this unhappy woman . in a great hand , with wide line , be write a set of direction to she mantua - maker , set forth the article of dress for which my have need , the peculiarity of they make , the stuff she select , &c . she would make out long list in this way , write each article in a separate line , so as to have more space for detailing all my cruelty and she tremendous wrongs . between these line she keep the journal of she captivity : it would have make the fortune of a romance - writer in those day but to have get a copy of it , and to have publish it under the title of the ' , or the ,' or by some name equally take and absurd . the journal would be as follow :-- . . . . . . . ' Monday .-- yesterday I be make to go to church . my odious , , - of - - , in a yellow satin and red riband , take the first place in the coach ; ride by its side , on the horse he never pay for to . the wick hypocrite lead I to the pew , with hat in hand and a smiling countenance , and kiss my hand as I enter the coach after service , and pat my italian greyhound -- all that the few people collect might see . he make I come downstairs in the evening to make tea for he company ; of whom three - fourt , he himself include , were , as usual , drunk . they paint the parson 's face black , when he reverence have arrive at he seventh bottle ; and at he usual insensible stage , they tie he on the grey mare with he face to the tail . the she - dragon read the " of " all the evening till bedtime ; when she see I to my apartment , lock I in , and proceed to wait upon she abominable son : whom she adore for he wickedness , I should think , as . ' . . . . . . . you should have see my mother 's fury as I read she out this passage ! indeed , I have always have a taste for a joke ( that practise on the parson , as describe above , be , I confess , a true bill ) , and use carefully to select for 's hear all the compliment that pass upon she . the dragon be the name by which she be know in this precious correspondence : or sometimes she be designate by the title of the ' irish Witch . ' as for I , I be denominate 'my gaoler ,' 'my tyrant , ' ' the dark spirit which have obtain the mastery over my be , ' and so on ; in term always complimentary to my power
power , however little they might be so to my amiability . here be another extract from she ' , ' by which it will be see that my , although she pretend to be so indifferent to my goings on , have a sharp woman 's eye , and could be as jealous as another :-- . . . . . . . ' Wednesday .-- this day two year my last hope and pleasure in life be take from I , and my dear child be call to heaven . have he join he neglect brother there , whom I suffer to grow up unheeded by my side : and whom the tyranny of the monster to whom I be united drive to exile , and perhaps to death ? or be the child alive , as my fond heart sometimes deem ? ! come to the aid of a wretch mother , who acknowledge she crime , she coldness towards thee , and now bitterly pay for she error ! but no , he can not live ! I be distracte ! my only hope be in you , my cousin -- you whom I have once think to salute by a still Fonder , my dear Poynings ! oh , be my knight and my preserver , the true chivalric be thou ever wert , and rescue I from the thrall of the felon caitiff who hold I captive --rescue I from he , and from , the vile irish witch , he mother ! ' ( here follow some verse , such as she Ladyship be in the habit of compose by ream , in which she compare herself to , in the ' Seven Champions , ' and beseech she to rescue she from the Dragon , mean . I omit the line , and proceed :) -- ' even my poor child , who perish untimely on this sad anniversary , the tyrant who govern I have teach to despise and dislike I . ' Tbe in disobedience to my order , my prayer , that he go on the fatal journey . what suffering , what humiliation have I have to endure since then ! I be a prisoner in my own halls . I should fear poison , but that I know the wretch have a sordid interest in keep I alive , and that my death would be the signal for he ruin . but I dare not stir without my odious , hideous , vulgar gaoler , the horrid , who pursue my every step . I be lock into my chamber at night , like a felon , and only suffer to leave it when order into the presence of my lord ( order ! ) , to be present at he orgy with he boon companion , and to hear he odious converse as he lapse into the disgusting madness of intoxication ! he have give up even the semblance of constancy -- he , who swore that I alone could attach or charm he ! and now he bring he vulgar mistress before my very eye , and would have have I acknowledge , as here to my own property , he child by another ! ' no , I never will submit ! thou , and thout only , my , my early friend , shalt be hey to the estate of . why do not Fate join I to thee , instead of to the odious man who hold I under he sway , and make the poor happy ? ' . . . . . . . so the letter would run on for sheet upon sheet , in the closest cramp handwriting ; and I leave any unprejudiced reader to say whether the writer of such document must not have be as silly and vain a creature as ever liv , and whether she do not want be take care of ? I could copy out yard of rhapsody to , she old flame , in which she address he by the most affectionate name , and implor he to find a refuge for she against she oppressor ; but they would fatigue the reader to peruse , as they would I to copy . the fact be , that this unlucky lady have the knack of writing a great deal more than she mean . she be always read novel and trash ; put herself into imaginary character and fly off into heroic and sentimentality with as little heart as any woman I ever know ; yet show the most violent disposition to be in love . she write always as if she be in a flame of passion . I have a elegy on she lap - dog , the most tender and pathetic piece she ever write ; and most tender note of remonstrance to , she favourite maid ; to she housekeeper , on quarrelling with she ; to half - a - dozen acquaintance , each of whom she address as the dearest friend in the world , and forget the very moment she take up another fancy . as for she love for she child , the above passage will show how much she be capable of true maternal feel : the very sentence in which she record the death of one child serve to betray she egotism , and to wreak she spleen against myself ; and she only wish to recall another from the grave , in order that he may be of some personal advantage to she . if I do deal severely with this woman , keep she from she flatterer who would have breed discord between we , and lock she up out of mischief , who shall say that I be wrong ? if any woman deserve a strait - waistcoat , -- it be my ; and I have know
know people in my time manacle , and with they head shave , in the straw , who have not commit half the folly of that foolish , vain , infatuate creature . my mother be so enrage by the charge against I and herself which these letter contain , that it be with the utmost difficulty I could keep she from discover we knowledge of they to ; whom it be , of course , my object to keep in ignorance of we knowledge of she design : for I be anxious to know how far they go , and to what pitch of artifice she would go . the letter increase in interest ( as they say of the novel ) as they proceed . picture be draw of my treatment of she which would make you heart throb . I do not know of what monstrosity she do not accuse I , and what misery and starvation she do not profess herself to undergo ; all the while she be liive exceedingly fat and contente , to outward appearance , at we house at . novel - reading and vanity have turn she brain . I could not say a rough word to she ( and she merit many thousand a day , I can tell you ) , but she declare I be put she to the torture ; and my mother could not remonstrate with she but she go off into a fit of hysteric , of which she would declare the worthy old lady be the cause . at last she begin to threat to kill herself ; and though I by no means keep the cutlery out of the way , do not stind she in garter , and leave she doctor 's shop at she entire service ,-- know she character full well , and that there be no woman in less likely to lay hand on she precious life than herself ; yet these threat have a effect , evidently , in the quarter to which they be address ; for the milliner 's packet now begin to arrive with great frequency , and the bill send to she contain assurance of come aid . the chivalrous be come to he cousin 's rescue , and do I the compliment to say that he hope to free he dear cousin from the clutch of the most atrocious villain that ever disgrac humanity ; and that , when she be free , measure should be take for a divorce , on the ground of cruelty and every species of ill - usage on my part . I have copy of all these precious document on one side and the other carefully make , by my beforementioned relative , godson , and secretary , at the agent of the property . this be a son of my old flame , whom I have take from she in a fit of generosity ; promise to care for he education at Trinity College , and provide for he through life . but after the lad have be for a year at the , the tutor would not admit he to common or lecture until he college bill be pay ; and , offend by this insolent manner of demand the paltry sum due , I withdraw my patronage from the place , and order my gentleman to ; where I make he useful to I in a hundred way . in my dear little boy 's lifetime , he tutor the poor child as far as he high spirit would let he ; but I promise you it be small trouble poor dear ever give the book . then he keep 's account ; copy my own interminable correspondence with my lawyer and the agent of all my various property ; take a hand at piquet or backgammon of evening with I and my mother ; or , be a ingenious lad enough ( though of a mean boorish spirit , as become the son of such a father ) , accompany my 's spinet with he flageolet ; or read French and italian with she : in both of which language she be a fine scholar , and with which he also become conversant . it would make my watchful old mother very angry to hear they converse in these language ; for , not understand a word of either of they , . be furious when they be speak , and always say it be some scheming they be after . it be 's constant way of annoy the old lady , when the three be alone together , to address in one or other of these tongue . I be perfectly at ease with regard to he fidelity , for I have breed the lad , and load he with benefit ; and , beside , have have various proof of he trustworthiness . he it be who bring I three of 's letter , in reply to some of my 's complaint ; which be conceal between the leather and the board of a book which be send from the circulating library for she Ladyship 's perusal . he and my too have frequent quarrel . she mimick he gait in she pleasanter moment ; in she haughty mood , she would not sit down to table with a tailor 's grandson . ' send I anything for company but that odious Quin , ' she would say , when I propose that he should go and amuse she with he book and he flute ; for , quarrelsome as we be , it must not be suppose we be always at it : I be occasionally attentive to she . we would be friend for a month together , sometimes ; then we would quarrel for a fortnight ; then she would keep she apartment for a month : all of
of which domestic circumstance be no down , in she Ladyship 's peculiar way , in she journal of captivity , as she call it ; and a pretty document it be ! sometimes she write , ' my monster have be almost kind to - day ;' or , ' my ruffian have deign to smile . ' then she will break out into expression of savage hate ; but for my poor mother it be always hatre . it be , ' the she - dragon be sick to - day ; I wish to she would die ! ' or , ' the hideous old irish basketwoman have be treat I to some of she Billingsgate to - day , ' and so forth : all which expression , read to , or translate from the french and italian , in which many of they be write , do not fail to keep the old lady in a perpetual fury against she charge : and so I have my watch - dog , as I call she , always on the alert . in translat these language , young be of great service to I ; for I have a smattering of -- and , when I be in the army , of course , I know well -- but italian I know nothing of , and be glad of the service of so faithful and cheap a interpreter . this cheap and faithful interpreter , this godson and kinsman , on whom and on whose family I have pile up benefit , be actually try to betray I ; and for several month , at least , be in league with the enemy against I . I believe that the reason why they do not move earlier be the want of the great mover of all treason -- money : of which , in all part of my establishment , there be a woful scarcity ; but of this they also manage to get a supply through my rascal of a godson , who could come and go quite unsuspected : the whole scheme be arrange under we very nos , and the post-chaise order , and the means of escape actually get ready ; while I never suspect they design . a mere accident make I acquaint with they plan . one of my collier have a pretty daughter ; and this pretty lass have for she bachelor , as they call they in , a certain lad , who bring the letter - bag for ( and many a dunning letter for I be there in it , wot ! ) : this letter - boy tell he sweetheart how he bring a bag of money from the town for ; and how that Tim the post -boy have tell he that he be to bring a chaise down to the water at a certain hour . , who have no secret from I , blur out the whole story ; ask I what scheme I be after , and what poor unlucky girl I be go to carry away with the chaise I have order , and bribe with the money I have get from town ? then the whole secret flash upon I , that the man I have cherish in my bosom be go to betray I . I think at one time of catch the couple in the act of escape , half drown they in the ferry which they have to cross to get to they chaise , and of pistolling the young traitor before 's eye ; but , on second thought , it be quite clear that the news of the escape would make a noise through the country , and rouse the confound justice 's people about my ear , and bring I no good in the end . so I be oblige to smother my just indignation , and to content myself by crush the foul conspiracy , just at the moment it be about to be hatch . I go home , and in half - a - hour , and with a few of my terrible look , I have on she knee , begge I to forgive she ; confess all and everything ; ready to vow and swear she would never make such a attempt again ; and declare that she be fifty time on the point of own everything to I , but that she fear my wrath against the poor young lad she accomplice : who be indeed the author and inventor of all the mischief . this -- though I know how entirely false the statement be -- I be fain to pretend to believe ; so I beg she to write to she cousin , , who have supply she with money , as she admit , and with whom the plan have be arrange , state , briefly , that she have alte she mind as to the trip to the country propose ; and that , as she dear husband be rather in delicate health , she prefer to stay at home and nurse he . I add a dry postscript , in which I state that it would give I great pleasure if he Lordship would come and visit we at , and that I longe to renew a acquaintance which in former time give I so much satisfaction . 'I should seek he out ,' I add , 'so soon as ever I be in he neighbourhood , and eagerly anticipate the pleasure of a meeting with he . ' I think he must have understood my mean perfectly well ; which be , that I would run he through the body on the very first occasion I could come at he . then I have a scene with my perfidious rascal of a nephew ; in which the young reprobate show a audacity
audacity and a spirit for which I be quite unprepared . when I tax he with ingratitude , ' what do I owe you ? ' say he . 'I have toil for you as no man ever do for another , and work without a penny of wage . it be you yourself who set I against you , by give I a task against which my soul revolt , -- by make I a spy over you unfortunate wife , whose weakness be as pitiable as be she misfortune and you rascally treatment of she . flesh and blood could not bear to see the manner in which you use she . I try to help she to escape from you ; and I would do it again , if the opportunity offer , and so I tell you to you tooth ! ' when I offer to blow he brain out for he insolence , ' Pooh ! ' say he , -- 'kill the man who save you poor boy 's life once , and who be endeavour to keep he out of the ruin and perdition into which a wicked father be lead he , when a Merciful power interpose , and withdraw he from this house of crime ? I would have leave you month ago , but I hope for some chance of rescue this unhappy lady . I swore I would try , the day I see you strike she . kill I , you woman 's bully ! you would if you da ; but you have not the heart . you very servant like I better than you . touch I , and they will rise and send you to the gallow you merit ! ' I interrupt this neat speech by send a water - bottle at the young gentleman 's head , which felle he to the ground ; and then I go to meditate upon what he have say to I . it be true the fellow have save poor little 's life , and the boy to he dying day be tenderly attach to he . ' be good to , papa , ' be almost the last word he speak ; and I promise the poor child , on he death - bed , that I would do as he ask . it be also true , that rough usage of he would be little like by my people , with whom he have manage to become a great favourite : for , somehow , though I get drunk with the rascal often , and be much more familiar with they than a man of my rank commonly be , yet I know I be by no means like by they ; and the scoundrel be murmur against I perpetually . but I might have spa myself the trouble of debating what he fate should be , for the young gentleman take the disposal of it out of my hand in the simplest way in the world : viz . by washing and bind up he head so soon as he come to himself : by take he horse from the stable ; and , as he be quite free to go in and out of the house and park as he like , he disappear without the least let or hindrance ; and leave the horse behind he at the ferry , go off in the very post-chaise which be wait for . I see and hear no more of he for a considerable time ; and now that he be out of the house , do not consider he a very troublesome enemy . but the cunning artifice of woman be such that , I think , in the long run , no man , be he himself , could escape from it ; and though I have ample proof in the above transaction ( in which my wife 's perfidious design be frustrate by my foresight ) , and under she own handwriting , of the deceitfulness of she character and she hatre for I , yet she actually manage to deceive I , in spite of all my precaution and the vigilance of my mother in my behalf . have I follow that good lady 's advice , who scent the danger from afar off , as it be , I should never have fall into the snare prepare for I ; and which be laid in a way that be as successful as it be simple . my 's relation with I be a singular one . she life be pass in a crack - brain sort of alternation between love and hatre for I . if I be in a good - humour with she ( as occur sometimes ) there be nothing she would not do to propitiate I further ; and she would be as absurd and violent in she expression of fondness as , at other moment , she would be in she demonstration of hatred . it be not you feeble easy husband who be love best in the world ; accord to my experience of it . I do think the woman like a little violence of temper , and think no worse of a husband who exercise he authority pretty smartly . I have get my into such a terror about I , that when I smile , it be quite a era of happiness to she ; and if I beckon to she , she would come fawn up to I like a dog . I recollect how , for the few day I be at school , the cowardly mean - spirit fellow would laugh if ever we schoolmaster make a joke . it be the same in the regiment whenever the bully of a sergeant be dispose to be jocular -- not a recruit but be on the broad grin .
. well , a wise and determined husband will get he wife into this condition of discipline ; and I bring my high - bear wife to kiss my hand , to pull off my boot , to fetch and carry for I like a servant , and always to make it a holiday , too , when I be in good - humour . I confide perhaps too much in the duration of this discipline obedience , and forgot that the very hypocrisy which form a part of it ( all timid people be liar in they heart ) may be exert in a way that may be far from agreeable , in order to deceive you . after the ill - success of she last adventure , which give I endless opportunity to banter she , one would have think I might have be on my guard as to what she real intention be ; but she manage to mislead I with a art of dissimulation quite admirable , and lull I into a fatal security with regard to she intention : for , one day , as I be joke she , and ask she whether she would take the water again , whether she have find another lover , and so forth , she suddenly burst into tear , and , seize hold of my hand , cry passionately out ,-- 'Ah , , you know well enough that I have never love but you ! be I ever so wretch that a kind word from you do not make I happy ! ever so angry , but the least offer of goodwill on you part do not bring I to you side ? do I not give a sufficient proof of my affection for you , in bestow one of the first fortune in upon you ? have I repin or rebuk you for the way you have waste it ? no , I love you too much and too fondly ; I have always love you . from the first moment I see you , I feel irresistibly attract towards you . I see you bad quality , and tremble at you violence ; but I could not help love you . I marry you , though I know I be seal my own fate in do so ; and in spite of reason and duty . what sacrifice do you want from I ? I be ready to make any , so you will but love I ; or , if not , that at least you will gently use I . ' I be in a particularly good humour that day , and we have a sort of reconciliation : though my mother , when she hear the speech , and see I soften towards she Ladyship , warn I solemnly , and say , ' Depend on it , the artful hussy have some other scheme in she head now . ' the old lady be right ; and I swallow the bait which she Ladyship have prepare to entrap I as simply as any gudgeon take a hook . I have be try to negotiate with a man for some money , for which i have press occasion ; but since we dispute regard the affair of the succession , my have resolutely refuse to sign any papers for my advantage : and without she name , I be sorry to say , my own be of little value in the market , and I could not get a guinea from any money - dealer in or . could I get the rascal from the latter place to visit I at : owe to that unlucky affair I have with when I make he lend I the money he bring down , and old the be rob of the bond I give he after leave my house , [ : these exploit of be not relate in the narrative . he probably , in the case above allude to , take the law into he own hand . ] the people would not trust themselves within my wall any more . we rent , too , be in the hand of receiver by this time , and it be as much as I could do to get enough money from the rascal to pay my wine - merchant they bill . we English property , as I have say , be equally hamper ; and , as often as I apply to my lawyer and agent for money , would come a reply demand money of I , for debt and pretend claim which the rapacious rascal say they have on I . it be , then , with some feeling of pleasure that I get a letter from my confidential man in 's , , say ( in reply to some ninety - ninth demand of mine ) that he think he could get I some money ; and inclose a letter from a respectable firm in the city of , connect with the mining interest , which offer to redeem the incumbrance in take a long lease of certain property of ours , which be still pretty free , upon the Countess 's signature ; and provide they could be assure of she free will in give it . they say they hear she live in terror of she life from I , and meditate a separation , in which case she might repudiate any deed sign by she while in durance , and subject they , at any rate , to a doubtful and expensive litigation ; and demand to be make assure of she Ladyship 's perfect free will in the transaction before they advance a shilling of they capital . they term be so exorbitant , that I see at once they offer must be sincere ; and , as my be in she gracious mood
mood , have no difficulty in persuade she to write a letter , in she own hand , declare that the account of we misunderstanding be utter calumny ; that we live in perfect union , and that she be quite ready to execute any deed which she husband might desire she to sign . this proposal be a very timely one , and fill I with great hope . I have not pester my reader with many account of my debt and law affair ; which be by this time so vast and complicat that I never thoroughly know they myself , and be render half wild by they urgency . Suffice it to say , my money be go -- my credit be done . I be live at off my own beef and mutton , and the bread , turf , and potato off my own estate : I have to watch within , and the bailiff without . for the last two year , since I go to to receive money ( which I unluckily lose at play there , to the disappointment of my creditor ) , I do not venture to show in that city : and could only appear at we own county town at rare interval , and because I know the sheriffs : whom I swore I would murder if any ill chance happen to I . a chance of a good loan , then , be the most welcome prospect possible to I , and I hail it with all the eagerness imaginable . in reply to 's letter , come , in course of time , a answer from the confound merchant , state that if she Ladyship would confirm by word of mouth , at they counting - house in , , the statement of she letter , they , have survey she property , would no doubt come to term ; but they decline incurr the risk of a visit to to negotiate , as they be aware how other respectable party , such as Messrs . and of , have be treat there . this be a hit at I ; but there be certain situation in which people can not dictate they own term : and , ' faith , I be so press now for money , that I could have sign a bond with himself , if he have come provide with a good round sum . I resolve to go and take the Countess to . it be in vain that my mother pray and warne I . ' Depend on it , ' say she , ' there be some artifice . when once you get into that wicked town , you be not safe . here you may live for year and year , in luxury and splendour , bar claret and all the window break ; but as soon as they have you in , they will get the better of my poor innocent lad ; and the first thing I shall hear of you will be , that you be in trouble . ' ' why go , ? ' say my wife . 'I be happy here , as long as you be kind to I , as you be now . we can not appear in as we ink ; the little money you will get will be spend , like all the rest have be . let we turn shepherd and shepherdess , and look to we flock and be content . ' and she take my hand and kiss it ; while my mother only say , ' Humph ! I believe she be at the bottom of it -- the wicked Schamer ! ' I tell my wife she be a fool ; bay Mrs . not be uneasy , and be hot upon go : I would take no denial from either party . how I be to get the money to go be the question ; but that be solve by my good mother , who be always ready to help I on a pinch , and who produce sixty guinea from a stocking . this be all the ready money that , of , and marry to a fortune of forty thousand a year , could command : such have be the havoc make in this fine fortune by my own extravagance ( as I must confess ) , but chiefly by my misplaced confidence and the rascality of other . we do not start in state , you may be sure . we do not let the country know we be go , or leave notice of adieu with we neighbour . the famous and he noble wife travel in a hack - chaise and pair to , under the name of and , and thence take shipping for , where we arrive quite without accident . when a man be go to the deuce , how easy and pleasant the journey be ! the thought of the money quite put I in a good humour , and my wife , as she lay on my shoulder in the post-chaise go to , say it be the happiest ride she have take since we marriage . one night we stay at , whence I despatch a note to my agent at 's , say I would be with he during the day , and begge he to procure I a lodging , and to hasten the preparations for the loan . my and I agree that we would go to , and wait there for better time ; and that night , over we supper , form a score of plan both for pleasure and retrenchment . you would have think it be and together over they supper . of woman ! woman ! when I recollect 's smile and blandishment -- how happy she seem to be on that
that night ! what a air of innocent confidence appear in she behaviour , and what affectionate name she call I !-- I be lose in wonder at the depth of she hypocrisy . who can be surprise that a unsuspecting person like myself should have be a victim to such a consummate deceiver ! we be in at three o'clock , and half - a - hour before the time appoint we chaise drive to 's . I easily find out 's apartment -- a gloomy den it be , and in a unlucky hour I enter it ! as we go up the dirty back - stair , light by a feeble lamp and the dim sky of a dismal afternoon , my wife seem agitated and faint . ' , ' say she , as we get up to the door , ' do not go in : I be sure there be danger . there be time yet ; let we go back -- to -- anywhere ! ' and she put herself before the door , in one of she theatrical attitude , and take my hand . I just push she away to one side . ' , ' say I , ' you be a old fool ! ' ' ! ' say she ; and she jump at the bell , which be quickly answer by a mouldy - look gentleman in a unpowdered wig , to whom she cry , ' be here ;' and stalk down the passage mutter ' . ' it be ' old ' which be the epithet that touch she . I might call she anything but that . be in he musty room , surround by he parchment and tin box . he advance and bow ; beg she Ladyship to be seat ; point towards a chair for I , which I take , rather wonder at he insolence ; and then retreat to a side - door , say he would be back in one moment . and back he do come in one moment , bring with he -- whom do you think ? another lawyer , six constable in red waistcoat with bludgeon and pistol , my , and he aunt . when my see she old flame , she fling herself into he arm in a hysterical passion . she call he she saviour , she preserver , she gallant knight ; and then , turn round to I , pour out a flood of invective which quite astonished I . ' old fool as I be , ' say she , 'I have outwit the most crafy and treacherous monster under the sun . yes , I be a fool when I marry you , and give up other and nobler heart for you sake -- yes , I be a fool when I forget my name and lineage to unite myself with a base - bear adventurer -- a fool to bear , without repin , the most monstrous tyranny that ever woman suffer ; to allow my property to be squander ; to see woman , as base and low - bear as yourself '-- ' for 's sake , be calm ! ' cry the lawyer ; and then bounde back behind the constable , see a threatening look in my eye which the rascal do not like . indeed . I could have tear he to piece , have he come near I . meanwhile , my continue in a strain of incoherent fury ; scream against I , and against my mother especially , upon whom she heape abuse worthy of , and always begin and end the sentence with the word fool . ' you do not tell all , my , ' say I bitterly ; 'I say . ' 'I have no doubt you say and do , sy , everything that a blackguard could say or do , ' interpose little Poyning . ' this lady be now safe under the protection of she relation and the law , and need fear you infamous persecution no longer . ' ' but you be not safe , ' roar I ; ' and , as sure as I be a man of honour , and have taste you blood once , I will have you heart 's blood now . ' ' take down he word , constable : swear the peace against he ! ' scream the little lawyer , from behind he tipstaff . 'I would not sully my sword with the blood of such a ruffian , ' cry my , rely on the same doughty protection . ' if the scoundrel remain in another day , he will be seize as a common swindler . ' and this threat indeed make I wince ; for I know that there be score of writ out against I in town , and that once in prison my case be hopeless . ' where be the man will seize I ! ' shoute I , draw my sword , and place my back to the door . ' let the scoundrel come . you -- you cowardly braggart , come first , if you have the soul of a man ! ' ' we be not go to seize you ! ' say the lawyer ; my Ladyship , she aunt , and a division of the bailiff move off as he speak . ' my dear sir , we do not wish to seize you : we will give you a handsome sum to leave the country ; only leave she Ladyship in peace ! ' ' and the country will be well rid of such a villain ! ' say my , retreate too , and not sorry to get out of my reach : and the scoundrel of a lawyer follow he , leave I in possession of
of the apartment , and in company of the bully from the police -office , who be all armed to the tooth . I be no longer the man I be at twenty , when I should have charge the ruffian sword in hand , and have send at least one of they to he account . I be break in spirit ; regularly catch in the toil : utterly baffle and beat by that woman . be she relent at the door , when she pause and beg I turn back ? have she not a lingering love for I still ? she conduct show it , as I come to reflect on it . it be my only chance now leave in the world , so I put down my sword upon the lawyer 's desk . ' gentlemen , ' say I , 'I shall use no violence ; you may tell I be quite ready to speak with he when he be at leisure ! ' and I sit down and fold my arm quite peaceably . what a change from the of old day ! but , as I have read in a old book about the , when he invade the Romans , he troops , which be the most gallant in the world , and carry all before they , go into cantonment in some city where they be so sate with the luxuries and pleasur of life , that they be easily beat in the next campaign . it be so with I now . my strength of mind and body be no longer those of the brave youth who shot he man at fifteen , and fight a score of battle within six year afterwards . now , in the , where I write this , there be a small man who be always jeer I and make game of I ; who ask I to fight , and I have not the courage to touch he . but I be anticipate the gloomy and wretch event of my history of humiliation , and have better proceed in order . I take a lodging in a coffee - house near 's ; take care to inform of my whereabouts , and anxiously expect a visit from he . he come and bring I the term which 's friend propose - a paltry annuity of L300 a year ; to be pay on the condition of my remaining abroad out of the three kingdom , and to be stop on the instant of my return . he tell I what I very well know , that my stay in would infallibly plunge I in gaol ; that there be writ innumerable take out against I here , and in the of ; that my credit be so blown upon that I could not hope to raise a shilling ; and he leave I a night to consider of he proposal ; say that , if I refuse it , the family would proceed : if I acced , a quarter 's salary should be pay to I at any foreign port I should prefer . what be the poor , lonely , and break - heart man to do ? I take the annuity , and be declare outlaw in the course of next week . the rascal Quin have , I find , be , after all , the cause of my undoing . it be he devise the scheme for bring I up to ; seal the attorney 's letter with a seal which have be agree upon between he and the Countess formerly : indeed he have always be for try the plan , and have propose it at first ; but she Ladyship , with she inordinate love of romance , prefer the project of elopement . of these point my mother write I word in my lonely exile , offer at the same time to come over and share it with I ; which proposal I decline . she leave a very short time after I have quit it ; and there be silence in that hall where , under my authority , have be exhibit so much hospitality and splendour . she think she would never see I again , and bitterly reproach I for neglect she ; but she be mistaken in that , and in she estimate of I . she be very old , and be sit by my side at this moment in the prison , work : she have a bedroom in over the way ; and , with the fifty - pound annuity , which she have keep with a wise prudence , we manage to eke out a miserable existence , quite unworthy of the famious and fashionable . 's personal narrative finish here , for the hand of death interrupt the ingenious author soon after the period at which the memoir be compile ; after he have liv nineteen year a inmate of the , where the prison record state he die of delirium tremen . he mother attain a prodigious old age , and the inhabitant of the place in she time can record with accuracy the daily dispute which use to take place between mother and son ; until the latter , from habits of intoxication , fall into a state of almost imbecility , be ten by he tough old parent as a baby almost , and would cry if deprive of he necessary glass of brandy . he life on the continent we have not the means of follow accurately ; but he appear to have resume he former profession of a gambler , without he former success . he return secretly to , after some time , and make a abortive attempt to extort money from , under a threat of publish he correspondence with , and so prevent he Lordship 's match with
