PHINEAS FINN the irish by publish in serial form in . 's magazine_ begin in 1867 and in book form in 1869 I I . to for . be elect for . . . and . 's . and . the news about and . the . . . . . . 's . return to . return to . . . the debate on the . " do be punctual " . at . in . the . 's the . " the " . . the second reading be carry . a . 's . for . 's . 's . be he Honest ? . upon . . a . the . be . . . do not send a to . . and . 's . the . 's . " the " . the . trouble at . the . show how bear the . . at . what the in . the top of the . in . the 's 's . another . the letter that be send to . show how the . the . the at . . 's . the . the . the 's . compare . 's . . the beginning of the . p . . . I I to for , of , in county , be as well know in those part , -- the confines , that be , of the county , , , and , -- as be the bishop himself who live in the same town , and be as much respect . many say that the doctor be the richer man of the two , and the practice of he profession be extend over almost as wide a district . indeed the bishop whom he be privileged to attend , although a , always spoke of they dioceses be conterminate . it will therefore be understand that ,-- be he full name , -- have obtain a wide reputation as a country practitioner in the west of . and he be a man sufficientely well to do , though that boast make by he friend , that he be as warm a man as the bishop , have but little truth to support it . Bishops in , if they live at home , even in these day , be very warm man ; and have not a penny in the world for which he have not work hard . he have , moreover , a costly family , five daughter and one son , and , at the time of which we be speak , no provision in the way of marriage or profession have be make for any of they . of the one son , , the hero of the follow page , the mother and five sister be very proud . the doctor be accustom to say that he goose be as good as any other man 's goose , as far as he could see as yet ; but that he should like some very strong evidence before he allow himself to express a opinion that the young bird partook , in any degree , of the qualitie of a swan . from which it may be gather that be a man of common - sense . Phineas have come to be a swan in the estimation of he mother and sister by reason of certain early success at college . he father , whose religion be not of that bitter kind in which we in be apt to suppose that all the indulge , have send he son to Trinity ; and there be some in the neighbourhood of , -- patient , probably , of , of , a learn physician who have spend a fruitless life in endeavouring to make head against , -- who declare that old would not be sorry if he son be to turn and go in for a fellowship . be a protestant , and the five be , and the doctor himself be very much give to dine out among he Protestant friend on a . we Phinea , however , do not turn Protestant up in , whatever he father 's secret wish on that subject may have be . he do join a debating society , to success in which he religion be no bar ; and he there achieve a sort of distinction which be both easy and pleasant , and which , make its way down to , assist in engender those idea as to swanhood of which maternal and sisterly mind be so sweetly susceptible . " I know half a dozen old windbag at the present moment , " say the doctor , " who be great fellow at debat club when they be boy . " " be not a boy any longer , " say . " and windbag do not get college scholarship , " say , the second daughter . " but papa always snubs , " say , the youngest . " I will snub you , if you do not take care , " say the doctor , take tenderly by the ear ; -- for he youngest daughter be the doctor 's pet . the doctor certainly do not snub he son , for he allow he to go over to when he be twenty - two year of age , in order that he might read with a english barrister . it be the doctor 's wish that he son might be call to the , and the young man 's desire that he might go to the . the doctor so far give way , under the influence of himself , and of all the young woman of the family , as to pay the usual fee to a very competent and learn gentleman in the , and to allow he son one hundred and fifty pound per annum for three year
year . , however , be still firm in he intention that he son should settle in , and take the , -- believe that might come to want home influence and home connection , in spite of the swanhood which be attribute to he . sit he term for three year , and be duly call to the bar ; but no evidence come home as to the acquirement of any considerable amount of law lore , or even as to much law study , on the part of the young aspirant . the learn pundit at whose foot he have be sit be not especially loud in praise of he pupil 's industry , though he do say a pleasant word or two as to he pupil 's intelligence . Phineas himself do not boast much of he own hard work when at home during the long vacation . no rumours of expect success , -- of expect professional success ,-- reach the ear of any of the family at . but , nevertheless , there come tiding which maintain those high idea in the maternal bosom of which mention have be make , and which be of sufficient strength to induce the doctor , in opposition to he own judgment , to consent to the continue residence of he son in . belong to a excellent club , -- the , -- and go into very good society . he be hand in glove with the Hon . , the youngest son of . he be intimate with , who have be private secretary , -- one of the private secretaries , -- to the great who be lately in but be now out . he have dine three or four time with that great Whig nobleman , the of . and he have be assure that if he stick to the he would certainly do well . though he might fail to succeed in court or in chamber , he would doubtless have give to he some one of those numerous appointment for which none but clever young barrister be suppose to be fit candidate . the old doctor yield for another year , although at the end of the second year he be call upon to pay a sum of three hundred pound , which be then due by Phineas to creditor in . when the doctor 's male friend in and about hear that he have do so , they say that he be do . not one of the be as yet marry ; and , after all that have be say about the doctor 's wealth , it be suppose that there would not be above five hundred pound a year among they all , be he to give up he profession . but the doctor , when he pay that three hundred pound for he son , buck to he work again , though he have for twelve month talk of give up the midwifery . he buckle to again , to the great disgust of , who at this time say very ill - natured thing about young Phineas . at the end of the three year be call to the , and immediately receive a letter from he father ask minutely as to he professional intention . he father recommend he to settle in , and promise the one hundred and fifty pound for three more year , on condition that this advice be follow . he do not absolutely say that the allowance would be stop if the advice be not follow , but that be plainly to be imply . that letter come at the moment of a dissolution of parliament . , the Conservative , who have now be in office for the almost unprecedentedly long period of fifteen month , have find that he could not face continue majority against he in the of , and have dissolve the House . Rumou declare that he would have much prefer to resign , and betake himself once again to the easy glory of opposition ; but he party have naturally be obdurate with he , and he have resolve to appeal to the country . when receive he father 's letter , it have just be suggest to he at the that he should stand for the irish borough of . this proposition have take so much by surprise that when first make to he by it take he breath away . what ! he stand for parliament , twenty - four year old , with no vestige of property belong to he , without a penny in he purse , as completely dependent on he father as he be when he first go to school at eleven year of age ! and for , a little borough in the county , for which a brother of that fine old irish peer , the of , have be sit for the last twenty year , -- a fine , high - minded representative of the thorough - go feeling of ! and the of , to whom almost all belonge , -- or at any rate the land about , -- be one of he father 's staunchest friend ! be in county , but the of usually live at he seat in county , not more than ten mile from , and always confide he gouty foot , and the weak nerve of the old countess , and the stomach of all he domestic , to the care of . how be it possible that should stand for ? from whence be the money to come for such a contest ? it be a beautiful dream , a grand idea , lifte almost off the earth by its glory . when the proposition be first make to he in the smoking - room at the by he friend , he be aware that he blush like
like a girl , and that he be unable at the moment to express himself plainly , -- so great be he astonishment and so great he gratification . but before ten minute have pass by , while be still sit over he shoulder on the club sofa , and before the blush have altogether vanished , he have see the improbability of the scheme , and have explain to he friend that the thing could not be do . but to he increase astonishment , he friend make nothing of the difficulty . , accord to , be so small a place , that the expense would be very little . there be altogether no more than 307 register elector . the inhabitant be so far remove from the world , and be so ignorant of the world 's good thing , that they know nothing about bribery . the Hon . , who have sit for the last twenty year , be very unpopular . he have not be near the borough since the last election , he have hardly do more than show himself in parliament , and have neither give a shilling in the town nor get a place under government for a single son of . " and he have quarrell with he brother , " say . " the he have ! " say . " I think they always swore by each other . " " it be at each other they swear now , " say ; " have ask the for more money , and the have cut up rusty . " then the negotiator go on to explain that the expense of the election would be defray out of a certain fund collect for such purpose , that have be choose as a cheap place , and that have be choose as a safe and promise young man . as for qualification , if any question be raise , that should be make all right . a irish candidate be want , and a . so much the Loughshaner would require on they own account when instigate to dismiss from they service that thorough - go , the . . then " the party , " -- by which probably mean the great man in whose service he himself have become a politician ,-- require that the candidate should be a safe man , one who would support " the party , " -- not a cantankerous , red - hot semi-Fenian , run about to meeting at the , and such - like , with view of he own about tenant - right and the irish Church . " but I have view of my own , " say , blush again . " of course you have , my dear boy , " say , clapp he on the back . " I should not come to you unless you have view . but you views and ours be the same , and you be just the lad for . you might not have such a opening again in you life , and of course you will stand for . " then the conversation be over , the private secretary go away to arrange some other little matter of the kind , and be leave alone to consider the proposition that have be make to he . to become a member of the british parliament ! in all those hot contest at the two debating club to which he have belong , this have be the ambition which have move he . for , after all , to what purpose of they own have those empty debate ever ten ? he and three or four other who have call themselves liberals have be pit against four or five who have call themselves conservatives , and night after night they have discuss some ponderous subject without any idea that one would ever persuade another , or that they talk would ever conduce to any action or to any result . but each of these combatant have feel ,-- without da to announce a hope on the subject among themselves , -- that the present arena be only a trial - ground for some possible greater amphitheatre , for some future debating club in which debate would lead to action , and in which eloquence would have power , even though persuasion might be out of the question . Phineas certainly have never da to speak , even to himself , of such a hope . the labour of the have to be encounter before the dawn of such a hope could come to he . and he have gradually learn to feel that he prospects at the be not as yet very promising . as regard professional work he have be idle , and how then could he have a hope ? and now this thing , which he regard as be of all thing in the world the most honourable , have come to he all at once , and be possibly within he reach ! if he could believe , he have only to lift up he hand , and he might be in parliament within two month . and who be to be believe on such a subject if not ? this be 's special business , and such a man would not have come to he on such a subject have he not be in earnest , and have he not himself believe in success . there be a opening ready , and open to this great glory , -- if only it might be possible for he to fill it ! what would he father say ? he father would of course oppose the plan . and if he oppose he father , he father would of course stop he income . and such a income as it be ! could it be that a
a man should sit in parliament and live upon a hundred and fifty pound a year ? since that payment of he debt he have become again embarrassed , -- to a slight amount . he owe a tailor a trifle , and a bootmaker a trifle , -- and something to the man who sell glove and shirt ; and yet he have do he best to keep out of debt with more than irish pertinacity , live very closely , breakfast upon tea and a roll , and dine frequently for a shilling at a luncheon - house up a court near 's . where should he dine if the Loughshaner elect he to parliament ? and then he paint to himself a not untrue picture of the probable misery of a man who begin life too high up on the ladder , -- who succeed in mounting before he have learn how to hold on when he be aloft . for we be a young man not without sense , -- not entirely a windbag . if he do this thing the probability be that he might become utterly a castaway , and go entirely to the dog before he be thirty . he have hear of penniless man who have get into parliament , and to whom have come such a fate . he be able to name to himself a man or two whose bark , carry more sail than they could bear , have go to piece among early breaker in this way . but then , would it not be better to go to piece early than never to carry any sail at all ? and there be , at any rate , the chance of success . he be already a barrister , and there be so many thing open to a barrister with a seat in parliament ! and as he know of man who have be utterly ruin by such early mounting , so also do he know of other whose fortune have be make by happy audacity when they be young . he almost think that he could die happy if he have once take he seat in parliament , -- if he have receive one letter with those grand initial write after he name on the address . young man in battle be call upon to lead forlorn hope . three fall , perhaps , to one who get through ; but the one who get through will have the to carry for the rest of he life . this be he forlorn hope ; and as he have be invite to undertake the work , he would not turn from the danger . on the follow morning he again see by appointment , and then write the follow letter to he father :-- , , 186--. my , I be afraid that the purport of this letter will startle you , but I hope that when you have finish it you will think that I be right in my decision as to what I be go to do . you be no doubt aware that the dissolution of parliament will take place at once , and that we shall be in all the turmoil of a general election by the middle of . I have be invite to stand for , and have consent . the proposition have be make to I by my friend , 's private secretary , and have be make on behalf of the political committee of the . I need hardly say that I should not have think of such a thing with a less thorough promise of support than this give I , nor should I think of it now have I not be assure that none of the expense of the election would fall upon I . of course I could not have ask you to pay for it . but to such a proposition , so make , I have feel that it would be cowardly to give a refusal . I can not but regard such a selection as a great honour . I own that I be fond of politics , and have take great delight in they study --( " stupid young fool ! " he father say to himself as he read this ) -- and it have be my dream for year past to have a seat in parliament at some future time . ( " ! yes ; I wonder whether he have ever dream what he be to live upon . " ) the chance have now come to I much earlier than I have look for it , but I do not think that it should on that account be throw away . look to my profession , I find that many thing be open to a barrister with a seat in parliament , and that the house need not interfere much with a man 's practice . ( " not if he have get to the top of he tree , " say the doctor . ) my chief doubt arise from the fact of you old friendship with , whose brother have fill the seat for I do not know how many year . but it seem that must go ; or , at least , that he must be oppose by a liberal candidate . if I do not stand , some one else will , and I should think that will be too much of a man to make any personal quarrel on such a subject . if he be to lose the borough , why should not I have it as well as another ? I can fancy , my dear father , all that you will say as to my imprudence , and I quite confess that I have not a word to answer . I have tell myself more than once , since last night
night , that I shall probably ruin myself . ( " I wonder whether he have ever tell himself that he will probably ruin I also , " say the doctor . ) but I be prepare to ruin myself in such a cause . I have no one dependent on I ; and , as long as I do nothing to disgrase my name , I may dispose of myself as I please . if you decide on stop my allowance , I shall have no feeling of anger against you . ( " how very considerate ! " say the doctor . ) and in that case I shall endeaavor to support myself by my pen . I have already do a little for the magazine . give my best love to my mother and sister . if you will receive I during the time of the election , I shall see they soon . perhaps it will be best for I to say that I have positively decide on make the attempt ; that be to say , if the be as good as its promise . I have weigh the matter all round , and I regard the prize as be so great , that I be prepare to run any risk to obtain it . indeed , to I , with my view about politics , the running of such a risk be no more than a duty . I can not keep my hand from the work now that the work have come in the way of my hand . I shall be most anxious to get a line from you in answer to this . you most affectionate son , . I question whether , when he read this letter , do not feel more of pride than of anger ,-- whether he be not rather gratify than displease , in spite of all that he common - sense tell he on the subject . he wife and daughter , when they hear the news , be clearly on the side of the young man . . immediately express a opinion that parliament would be the making of she son , and that everybody would be sure to employ so distinguished a barrister . the girl declare that ought , at any rate , to have he chance , and almost assert that it would be brutal in they father to stand in they brother 's way . it be in vain that the doctor try to explain that go into parliament could not help a young barrister , whatever it might do for one thoroughly establish in he profession ; that , if successful at , would at once abandon all idea of earn any income , -- that the proposition , come from so poor a man , be a monstrosity , -- that such a opposition to the family , come from a son of he , would be gross ingratitude to . and the girl talk he down , and the doctor himself be almost carry away by something like vanity in regard to he son 's future position . nevertheless he write a letter strongly advise to abandon the project . but he himself be aware that the letter which he write be not one from which any success could be expect . he advise he son , but do not command he . he make no threat as to stop he income . he do not tell Phineas , in so many word , that he be propose to make a ass of himself . he argue very prudently against the plan , and , when he receive he father 's letter , of course feel that it be tantamount to a paternal permission to proceed with the matter . on the next day he get a letter from he mother full of affection , full of pride , -- not exactly tell he to stand for by all means , for Mrs . be not the woman to run openly counter to she husband in any advice give by she to they son , -- but give he every encouragement which motherly affection and motherly pride could bestow . " of course you will come to we , " she say , " if you do make up you mind to be member for . we shall all of we be so delighted to have you ! " , who have fall into a sea of doubt after write to he father , and who have demand a week from to consider the matter , be elate to positive certainty by the joint effect of the two letter from home . he understand it all . he mother and sister be altogether in favour of he audacity , and even he father be not dispose to quarrel with he on the subject . " I shall take you at you word , " he say to at the club that even . " what word ? " say , who have too many iron in the fire to be think always of and , -- or who at any rate do not choose to let he anxiety on the subject be see . " . " " all right , old fellow ; we shall be sure to carry you through . the irish writ will be out on the third of , and the sooner you be there the better . " chapter ii be elect for one great difficulty about the borough vanish in a very wonderful way at the first touch . , who be a man stout at heart , and by no means afraid of he great friend , drive himself over to to tell he news to the , as soon as he get a second letter from he son declare he intention of proceeding with the business , let the
the result be what they might . be a passionate old man , and the doctor expect that there would be a quarrel ; -- but he be prepare to face that . he be under no special debt of gratitude to the lord , have give as much as he have take in the long intercourse which have exist between they ; -- and he agree with he son in think that if there be to be a liberal candidate at , no consideration of old pill - box and gallipot should deter he son Phinea from standing . other consideration might very probably deter he , but not that . the probably would be of a different opinion , and the doctor feel it to be incumbent on he to break the news to . " the he be ! " say the , when the doctor have tell he story . " then I will tell you what , , I will support he . " " you support he , ! " " yes ; -- why should not I support he ? I suppose it be not so bad with I in the country that my support will rob he of he chance ! I will tell you one thing for certain , I will not support . " " but , my lord -- " " well ; go on . " " I have never take much part in politics myself , as you know ; but my boy be on the other side . " " I do not care a ---- for side . what have my party do for I ? look at my cousin , . there be not a clergyman in stauncher to they than he have be , and now they have give the deanery of to a man that never have a father , though I condescende to ask for it for my cousin . let they wait till I ask for anything again . " , who know all about 's debt , and who have hear of he mode of preaching , be not surprised at the decision of the Conservative bestower of irish Church patronage ; but on this subject he say nothing . " and as for , " continue the , " I will never lift my hand again for he . he stand for would be quite out of the question . my own tenant would not vote for he if I be to ask they myself . " -- be the lord 's agent -- " tell I only a week ago that it would be useless . the whole thing be gone , and for my part I wish they have disenfranchise the borough . I wish they have disenfranchise the whole country , and send we a military governor . what be the use of such members as we send ? there be not one gentleman among ten of they . you son be welcome for I . what support I can give he he shall have , but it be not much . I suppose he have better come and see I . " the doctor promise that he son should ride over to , and then take he leave , -- not specially flatter , as he feel that be he son to be return , the would not regard he as the one gentleman among ten whom the county might send to leave the remainder of its member , -- but aware that the greatest impediment in he son 's way be already remove . he certainly have not go to Castlemorris with any idea of canvassing for he son , and yet he have canvass for he most satisfactorily . when he get home he do not know how to speak of the matter otherwise than triumphantly to he wife and daughter . though he desire to curse , he mouth would speak blessing . before that evening be over the prospect of at be speak of with open enthusiasm before the doctor , and by the next day 's post a letter be write to he by , inform he that the be prepare to receive he with open arm . " have be over there and manage it all , " say . " I be tell be not go to stand , " say to Phineas the night before he departure . " he brother will not support he . he brother mean to support I , " say . " that can hardly be so . " " but I tell you it be . my father have know the these twenty year , and have manage it . " " I say , , you be not go to play we a trick , be you ? " say , with something like dismay in he voice . " what sort of trick ? " " you be not come out on the other side ? " " not if I know it , " say , proudly . " let I assure you I would not change my view in politics either for you or for the , though each of you carry seat in you breech pocket . if I go into parliament , I shall go there as a sound , -- not to support a party , but to do the best I can for the country . I tell you so , and I shall tell the the same . " turn away in disgust . such language be to he simply disgust . it fall upon he ear as false maudlin sentiment fall on the ear of the ordinary honest man of the world . be a man ordinarily honest . he would not have be untrue to he mother 's brother , , the great of the day , for any earthly
earthly consideration . he be ready to work with wage or without wage . he be really zealous in the cause , not ask very much for himself . he have some undefined belief that it be much better for the country that should be in power than that should be there . he be convince that liberal politics be good for , and that liberal politics and the party be one and the same thing . it would be unfair to to deny to he some praise for patriotism . but he hate the very name of independence in parliament , and when he be tell of any man , that that man intend to look to measure and not to man , he regard that man as be both unstable as water and dishonest as the wind . no good could possibly come from such a one , and much evil might and probably would come . such a politician be a to , from whose hand he fear to accept even the gift of a vote . Parliamentary hermits be distasteful to he , and dweller in political cafe be regard by he with aversion as be either knavish or impractical . with a good Conservative opponent he could shake hand almost as readily as with a good Whig ally ; but the man who be neither flesh nor fowl be odious to he . accord to he theory of parliamentary government , the of should be divide by a mark line , and every member should be require to stand on one side of it or on the other . " if not with I , at any rate be against I , " he would have say to every representative of the people in the name of the great leader whom he follow . he think that debate be good , because of the people outside , -- because they serve to create that public opinion which be hereafter to be use in create some future House of Commons ; but he do not think it possible that any vote should be give on a great question , either this way or that , as the result of a debate ; and he be certainly assure in he own opinion that any such changing of vote would be dangerous , revolutionary , and almost unparliamentary . a member 's vote ,-- except on some small crotchety open question throw out for the amusement of crotchety member , -- be due to the leader of that member 's party . be 's idea of the english system of parliament , and , lend semi-official assistance as he do frequently to the introduction of candidate into the house , he be naturally anxious that he candidate should be candidate after he own heart . when , therefore , talk of measure and not man , turn away in open disgust . but he remember the youth and extreme rawness of the lad , and he remember also the career of other man . be forty , and experience have teach he something . after a few seconds , he bring himself to think mildly of the young man 's vanity , -- as of the vanity of a plunge colt who resent the liberty even of a touch . " by the end of the first session the thong will be cracke over he head , as he patiently assist in pull the coach up hill , without produce from he even a flick of he tail , " say to a old parliamentary friend . " if he be to come out after all on the wrong side , " say the parliamentary friend . admit that such a trick as that would be unpleasant , but he think that old be hardly equal to so clever a stratagem . go to , and walk over the course at . he call upon , and hear that venerable nobleman talk a great deal of nonsense . to tell the truth of , I must confess that he wish to talk the nonsense himself ; but the would not hear he , and put he down very quickly . " we will not discuss politics , if you please , ; because , as I have already say , I be throw aside all political consideration . " , therefore , be not allow to express he view on the government of the country in the 's sitting - room at . there be , however , a good time come ; and so , for the present , he allow the to ramble on about the sins of he brother , and the want of all proper pedigree on the part of the new of . the conference end with a assurance on the part of that if the Loughshaner choose to elect he would not be in the least offended . the elector do elect , -- perhaps for the reason give by one of the Conservative papers , which declare that it be all the fault of the in not send a proper candidate . there be a great deal say about the matter , both in and , and the blame be suppose to fall on the joint shoulders of and he elder brother . in the meantime , we hero , , have be duly elect member of parliament for the borough of . the Finn family could not restrain they triumphing at , and I do not know that it would have be natural have they do so . a gosling from such a flock do become something of a real swan by get into parliament . the doctor have he misgiving , -- have great misgiving , fearful foreboding ; but there be the young man elect , and he could not help it . he could not refuse he right
right hand to he son or withdraw he paternal assistance because that son have be specially honoure among the young man of he country . so he pull out of he hoard what suffice to pay off outstanding debt , -- they be not heavy , -- and undertake to allow two hundred and fifty pound a year as long as the session should last . there be a widow lady live at who be name , and she have a daughter . she have a son also , bear to inherit the property of the late of , as soon as that property should have disembarrass itself ; but with he , now serve with he regiment in , we shall have no concern . be live modestly at on she widow 's jointure ,-- Floodborough have , to tell the truth , pretty nearly fall into absolute ruin , -- and with she one daughter , . now on the evening before the return of , , , to , and drank tea at the doctor 's house . " it will not make a bit of change in he , " say to she friend , up in some bedroom privacy before the tea -drink ceremony have altogether commenced . " oh , it must , " say . " I tell you it will not , my dear ; he be so good and so true . " " I know he be good , ; and as for truth , there be no question about it , because he have never say a word to I that he might not say to any girl . " " that be nonsense , . " " he never have , then , as sure as the bless watch over we ; -- only you do not believe she do . " " never mind about the now , . " " but he never have . you brother be nothing to I , . " " then I hope he will be before the evening be over . he be walk with you all yesterday and the day before . " " why should not he , -- and we that have know each other all we life ? but , , pray , pray never say a word of this to any one ! " " be it I ? would not I cut out my tongue first ? " " I do not know why I let you talk to I in this way . there have never be anything between I and , -- you brother I mean . " " I know whom you mean very well . " " and I feel quite sure that there never will be . why should there ? he will go out among great people and be a great man ; and I have already find out that there be a certain whom he admire very much . " " ! " " a man in parliament , you know , may look up to anybody , " say . " I want to look up to you , my dear . " " that would not be look up . place as he be now , that would be look down ; and he be so proud that he will never do that . but come down , dear , else they will wonder where we be . " be a little girl about twenty year of age , with the softest hair in the world , of a colour varie between brown and auburn , -- for sometimes you would swear it be the one and sometimes the other ; and she be as pretty as ever she could be . she be one of those girl , so common in , whom man , with taste that way give , feel inclined to take up and deavor on the spur of the moment ; and when she like she lion , she have a look about she which seem to ask to be devoure . there be girl so cold - look , -- pretty girl , too , ladylike , discreet , and arm with all accomplishment , -- whom to attack seem to require the same sort of courage , and the same sort of preparation , as a journey in quest of the north - west passage . one think of a pedestal near the as the most appropriate and most honourable reward of such courage . but , again , there be other girl to abstain from attacking whom be , to a man of any warmth of temperament , quite impossible . they be like water when one be athirst , like plover 's egg in , like cigar when one be out in the autumn . no one ever dream of deny himself when such temptation come in the way . it often happen , however , that in spite of appearance , the water will not come from the well , nor the egg from its shell , nor will the cigar allow itself to be light . a girl of such appearance , so charming , be of , and we hero be not allow to thirst in vain for a drop from the cool spring . when the girl go down into the drawing - room be careful to go to a part of the room quite remote from , so as to seat herself between and 's young partner , , from . but and the and all know that have no love for , and when hand she the hot cake she hardly so much as smile at he . but in two minute be behind she chair , and then she smile ; and in five minute more she have get herself so twisted round that she be sit in a corner
corner with and he sister ; and in two more minute have return to , so that and be uninterrupted . they manage these thing very quickly and very cleverly in . " I shall be off to - morrow morning by the early train , " say . " so soon ; -- and when will you have to begin , -- in parliament , I mean ? " " I shall have to take my seat on . I be go back just in time . " " but when shall we hear of you say something ? " " never , probably . not one in ten who go into parliament ever do say anything . " " but you will ; will not you ? I hope you will . I do so hope you will distinguish yourself ; -- because of you sister , and for the sake of the town , you know . " " and be that all , ? " " be not that enough ? " " you do not care a bit about myself , then ? " " you know that I do . have not we be friend ever since we be child ? of course it will be a great pride to I that a person whom I have know so intimately should come to be talk about as a great man . " " I shall never be talk about as a great man . " " you be a great man to I already , be in parliament . only think ;-- I never see a member of parliament in my life before . " " you have see the bishop score of time . " " be he in parliament ? ah , but not like you . he could not come to be a , and one never read anything about he in the newspaper . I shall expect to see you name , very often , and I shall always look for it . ' paire off with . ' what be the meaning of pai off ? " " I will explain it all to you when I come back , after learn my lesson . " " mind you do come back . but I do not suppose you ever will . you will be go somewhere to see when you be not want in parliament . " " ! " " and why should not you ? of course , with you prospect , you should go as much as possible among people of that sort . be very pretty ? " " she be about six foot high . " " Nonsense . I do not believe that . " " she would look as though she be , stand by you . " " because I be so insignificant and small . " " because you figure be perfect , and because she be straggl . she be as unlike you as possible in everything . she have thick lumpy red hair , while yours be all silk and softness . she have large hand and foot , and -- " " why , Phineas , you be make she out to be a ogress , and yet I know that you admire she . " " so I do , because she possess such a appearance of power . and after all , in spite of the lumpy hair , and in spite of large hand and straggl figure , she be handsome . one can not tell what it be . one can see that she be quite contented with herself , and intend to make other contente with she . and so she do . " " I see you be in love with she , . " " no ; not in love , -- not with she at least . of all man in the world , I suppose that I be the last that have a right to be in love . I daresay I shall marry some day . " " I be sure I hope you will . " " but not till I be forty or perhaps fifty year old . if I be not fool enough to have what man call a high ambition I might venture to be in love now . " " I be sure I be very glad that you have get a high ambition . it be what every man ought to have ; and I have no doubt that we shall hear of you marriage soon ,-- very soon . and then , -- if she can help you in you ambition , we -- shall -- all -- be so -- glad . " do not say a word further then . perhaps some commotion among the party break up the little private conversation in the corner . and he be not alone with again till there come a moment for he to put she cloak over she shoulders in the back parlour , while be finish some important narrative to he mother . it be , I think , who stand in some doorway , and prevent people from passing , and so give he the opportunity which he abuse . " , " say he , take she in he arm , without a single word of love - make beyond what the reader have hear , -- " one kiss before we part . " " no , , no ! " but the kiss have be take and give before she have even answer he . " oh , , you should not ! " " I should . why should not I ? and , , I will have one morsel of you hair . " " you shall not ; indeed you shall not ! " but the scissors be at hand , and
and the ringlet be cut and in he pocket before she be ready with she resistance . there be nothing further ; -- not a word more , and go away with she veil down , under she mother 's wing , weepe sweet silent tear which no one saw . " you do love she ; do not you , ? " ask . " bother ! do you go to bed , and do not trouble yourself about such trifle . but mind you be up , old girl , to see I off in the morning . " everybody be up to see he off in the morning , to give he coffee and good advice , and kiss , and to throw all manner of old shoe after he as he start on he great expedition to parliament . he father give he a extra twenty - pound note , and beg he for 's sake to be careful about he money . he mother tell he always to have a orange in he pocket when he intend to speak longer than usual . and in a last whisper beg he never to forget dear . have many serious , almost solemn thought on he journey towards . I be sorry I must assure my female reader that very few of they have reference to . he have , however , very carefully pack up the tress , and could bring that out for proper act of erotic worship at seasons in which he mind might be less engage with affair of state than it be at present . would he make a failure of this great matter which he have take in hand ? he could not but tell himself that the chance be twenty to one against he . now that he look nearer at it all , the difficulty loom larger than ever , and the reward seem to be less , more difficult of approach , and more evanescent . how many member be there who could never get a hearing ! how many who only speak to fail ! how many , who speak well , who could speak to no effect as far as they own worldly prospect be concerned ! he have already know many member of parliament to whom no outward respect or sign of honou be ever give by any one ; and it seem to he , as he think over it , that irish member of parliament be generally treat with more indifference than any other . there be ---- and of ---- and O' ----, for whom no one car a straw , who could hardly get man to dine with they at the club , and yet they be genuine member of parliament . why should he ever be better than of ----, or of ----, or ---- ? and in what way should he begin to be better ? he have a idea of the fashion after which it would be he duty to strive that he might excel those gentleman . he do not give any of they credit for much earnestness in they country 's behalf , and he be mind to be very earnest . he would go to he work honestly and conscientiously , determined to do he duty as best he might , let the result to himself be what they would . this be a noble resolution , and might have be pleasant to he , -- have he not remember that smile of derision which have come over he friend 's face when he declare he intention of do he duty to he country as a , and not of support a party . of ---- and of ---- and of would ---- be keen enough to support they party , only they be sometimes a little astray at know which be they party for the nonce . he know that and such man would despise he if he do not fall into the regular groove , -- and if the despise he , what would then be left for he ? he moody thought be somewhat dissipate when he find one , -- the ,-- a special friend of he own , and a very clever fellow , on board the boat as it steam out of harbwe . have also just be over about he election , and have be return as a matter of course for he father 's county . have sit in the House for the last fifteen year , and be yet well - nigh as yong a man as any in it . and he be a man altogether different from the O'b -- -- s , of ---- , and of have ----s. could always get the ear of the house if he choose to speak , and he friend declare that he might have be high up in office long since if he would have take the trouble to work . he be a welcome guest at the house of the very best people , and be a friend of whom any one might be proud . it have for two year be a feather in the cap of Phineas that he know . and yet people say that have nothing of he own , and man wonder how he liv . he be the youngest son of , a irish peer with a large family , who could do nothing for , he favourite child , beyond find he a seat in parliament . " well , , my boy , " say , shak hand with the young member on board the steamer , " so you have make it all right at . " then be begin to tell all the story , the wonderful story , of and the of , -- how the man of have elect he without opposition ; how
how he have be support by as well as ; -- how unanimous have be in elect he , , as its representative . but seem to care very little about all this , and go so far as to declare that those thing be accident which fall out sometimes one way and sometimes another , and be altogether independent of any merit or demerit on the part of the candidate himself . and it be marvellous and almost painful to Phineas that he friend should accept the fact of he membership with so little of congratulation , -- with absolutely no blowing of trumpet whatever . have he be elect a member of the municipal corporation of , instead of its representative in the british parliament , could not have make less fuss about it . be disappointed , but he take the cue from he friend too quickly to show he disappointment . and when , half a hour after they meeting , have to be remind that he companion be not in the during the last session , be able to make the remark as though he think as little about the as do the old - accustomed member himself . " as far as I can see as yet , " say , " we be sure to have seventeen . " " ? " say , not quite understand the meaning of the number quote . " a majority of seventeen . there be four irish county and three Scotch which have not return as yet ; but we know pretty well what they will do . there be a doubt about , of course , but whichever get in of the seven who be stand , it will be a vote on we side . now the government can not live against that . the uphill strain be too much for they . " " accord to my idea , nothing can justify they in try to live against a majority . " " that be gammon . when the thing be so equal , anything be fair . but you see they do not like it . of course there be some among they as hungry as we be ; and would give he toe and finger to remain in . " be the ordinary name by which , among friend and foe , be know : , who at that time be the leader of the Conservative party in the of . " but most of they , " continue , " prefer the other game , and if you do not care about money , upon my word it be the pleasanter game of the two . " " but the country get nothing do by a . " " as to that , it be six of one and half a dozen of the other . I never know a government yet that want to do anything . give a government a real strong majority , as the Tory use to have half a century since , and as a matter of course it will do nothing . why should it ? do thing , as you call it , be only bidding for power , -- for patronage and pay . " " and be the country to have no service do ? " " the country get quite as much service as it pay for , -- and perhaps a little more . the clerk in the office work for the country . and the work too , if they have get anything to manage . there be plenty of work do ; -- but of work in parliament , the less the better , accord to my idea . it be very little that ever be do , and that little be generally too much . " " but the people -- " " come down and have a glass of brandy - and - water , and leave the people alone for the present . the people can take care of themselves a great deal better than we can take care of they . " 's doctrine as to the commonwealth be very different from that of , and be still less to the taste of the new member . consider that he leader , , should be intrust to make all necessary change in the law , and that a obedient House of Commons should implicitly obey that leader in authorise all change propose by he ; -- but accord to , such change should be numerous and of great importance , and would , if duly pass into law at he lord 's behest , gradually produce such a in as have never yet be see on the face of the earth . now , accord to , the present would be good enough , -- if only he himself might be once more put into possession of a certain semi-political place about the court , from which he have heretofore draw L1,000 per annum , without any work , much to he comfort . he make no secret of he ambition , and be chagrin simply at the prospect of have to return to he elector before he could enjoy those good thing which he expect to receive from the undoubted majority of seventeen , which have be , or would be , achieve . " I hate all change as a rule , " say ; " but , upon my word , we ought to alter that . when a fellow have get a crumb of comfort , after wait for it year and year , and perhaps spend thousand in election , he have to go back and try he hand again at the last moment , merely in obedience to some antiquate prejudice . look at poor Jack bond , -- the best friend I ever have in the world
world . he be wrecke upon that rock for ever . he spend every shilling he have in contesting three time running , -- and three time run he get in . then they make he Vice - Comptroller of the Granaries , and I be shot if he do not get spilt at on stand for he re-election ! " " and what become of he ? " " know . I think I hear that he marry a old woman and settle down somewhere . I know he never come up again . now , I call that a confound shame . I suppose I be safe down in , but there be no knowing what may happen in these day . " as they part at , ask he friend some little nervous question as to the best mode of make a first entrance into the house . would see he through the difficulty of the oath - take ? but make very little of the difficulty . " oh ;-- you just come down , and there will be a rush of fellow , and you will know everybody . you will have to hang about for a hour or so , and then you will get push through . there be not time for much ceremony after a general election . " Phineas reach early in the morning , and go home to be for a hour or so . the House be to meet on that very day , and he intend to begin he parliamentary duty at once if he should find it possible to get some one to accompany he ; he feel that he should lack courage to go down to alone , and explain to the policeman and door -keeper that he be the man who have just be elect member for . so about noon he go into the , and there he find a great crowd of man , among whom there be a plentiful sprinkling of member . see he in a moment , and come to he with congratulation . " so you be all right , , " say he . " yes ; I be all right ,-- I do not have much doubt about it when I go over . " " I never hear of a fellow with such a run of luck , " say . " it be just one of those fluke that occur once in a dozen election . any one on earth might have get in without spend a shilling . " Phineas do not at all like this . " I do not think any one could have get in , " say he , " without know . " " be nowhere , my dear boy , and could have nothing to say to it . but never mind that . you meet I in the lobby at two . there will be a lot of we there , and we will go in together . have you see ? " then go off to other business , and be congratulate by other man . but it seem to he that the congratulation of he friend be not hearty . he speak to some man , of whom he think that he know they would have give they eye to be in parliament ; -- and yet they speak of he success as be a very ordinary thing . " well , my boy , I hope you like it , " say one middle - aged gentleman whom he have know ever since he come up to . " the difference be between work for nothing and work for money . you will have to work for nothing now . " " that be about it , I suppose , " say . " they say the house be a comfortable club , " say the middle - aged friend , " but I confess that I should not like be ring away from my dinner myself . " at two punctually be in the lobby at , and then he find himself take into the house with a crowd of other man . the old and young , and they who be neither old nor young , be mingle together , and there seem to be very little respect of person . on three or four occasion there be some cheering when a popular man or a great leader come in ; but the work of the day left but little clear impression on the mind of the young member . he be confused , half elated , half disappointed , and have not he wit about he . he find himself constantly regret that he be there ; and as constantly tell himself that he , hardly yet twenty - five , without a shilling of he own , have achieve a entrance into that assembly which by the consent of all man be the greatest in the world , and which many of the rich magnate of the country have in vain spend heap of treasure in they endeavour to open to they own footstep . he try hard to realise what he have gain , but the dust and the noise and the crowd and the want of something august to the eye be almost too strong for he . he manage , however , to take the oath early among those who take it , and hear the Queen 's speech read and the move and second . he be seat very uncomfortably , high up on a back seat , between two man whom he do not know ; and he find the speech to be very long . he have be in the habit of see such speech report in about a column , and he think that these speech must take at least four column each .
. he sit out the debate on the address till the house be adjourn , and then he go away to dine at he club . he do go into the dining - room of the , but there be a crowd there , and he find himself alone , -- and to tell the truth , he be afraid to order he dinner . the nearest approach to a triumph which he have in come to he from the glory which he election reflect upon he landlady . she be a kindly good motherly soul , whose husband be a journeyman law - stationer , and who keep a very decent house in . here Phineas have lod since he have be in , and be a great favourite . " bless my soul , , " say she , " only think of you be a member of parliament ! " " yes , I be a member of parliament , . " " and you will go on with the room the same as ever ? well , I never think to have a member of parliament in th'ey . " really have realise the magnitude of the step which she lodger have take , and be grateful to she . , in describe to at , have not paint she in very glowing colour . nevertheless he admire very much , and she be worthy of admiration . it be probably the greatest pride of we hero 's life that be he friend , and that she have instigate he to undertake the risk of parliamentary life . be intimate also with , who be , in some distant degree , she cousin ; and be not without a suspicion that he selection for , from out of all the young liberal candidate , may have be in some degree owe to 's influence with . he be not unwill that it should be so ; for though , as he have repeatedly tell himself , he be by no means in love with , -- who be , as he imagine , somewhat older than himself , -- nevertheless , he would feel gratify at accept anything from she hand , and he feel a keen desire for some increase to those tie of friendship which bound they together . no ;--he be not in love with . he have not the remotest idea of ask she to be he wife . so he tell himself , both before he go over for he election , and after he return . when he have find himself in a corner with poor little , he have kiss she as a matter of course ; but he do not think that he could , in any circumstance , be temp to kiss . he suppose that he be in love with he darling little ,-- after a fashion . of course , it could never come to anything , because of the circumstance of he life , which be so imperious to he . he be not in love with , and yet he hope that he intimacy with she might come to much . he have more than once ask himself how he would feel when somebody else come to be really in love with , -- for she be by no means a woman to lack lover , -- when some one else should be in love with she , and be receive by she as a lover ; but this question he have never be able to answer . there be many question about himself which he usually answer by tell himself that it be he fate to walk over volcanoe . " of course , I shall be blow into atom some fine day , " he would say ; " but after all , that be better than be slowly boil down into pulp . " the have meet on a , again on the morning , and the debate on the address have be adjourn till the . on the , determine that he would see . she profess to be always at home on , and from three to four in the afternoon she draw - room would probably be half full of people . there would , at any rate , be comer and goer , who would prevent anything like real conversation between himself and she . but for a few minute before that he might probably find she alone , and he be most anxious to see whether she reception of he , as a member of parliament , would be in any degree warmer than that of he other friend . Hitherto he have find no such warmth since he come to , except that which have glow in the bosom of . be the daughter of the of , and be the only remain lady of the 's family . the Countess have be long dead ; and , the younger daughter , who have be the great beauty of she day , be now the wife of a russian nobleman whom she have persist in preferring to any of she English suitor , and live at . there be a aunt , old , who come up to town about the middle of ; but she be always in the country except for some six week in the season . there be a certain , the 's son and heir , who do indeed live at the family town house in ; but be a man of whom 's set do not often speak , and , frequently as he have be at the house , have never see there . he be a young nobleman of whom various account be give by various people ; but I fear that the account most readily accept in attribute to he a great intimacy with the affair
affair at , and a partiality for convivial pleasure . respecte have never as yet exchange a word with . with she father he be acquaint , as he have dine perhaps half a dozen time at the house . the point in 's character which have more than any other struck we hero , be the unlimited confidence which he seem to place in he daughter . seem to have perfect power of do what she please . she be much more mistress of herself than if she have be the wife instead of the daughter of the of , -- and she seem to be quite as much mistress of the house . Phineas have declare at that be six foot high , that she have red hair , that she figure be straggling , and that she hand and foot be large . she be in fact about five foot seven in height , and she carry she height well . there be something of nobility in she gait , and she see thus to be taller than she inch . she hair be in truth red , -- of a deep thorough redness . she brother 's hair be the same ; and so have be that of she father , before it have become sandy with age . she sister 's have be of a soft auburn hue , and hers have be say to be the prettiest head of hair in at the time of she marriage . but in these day we have get to like red hair , and 's be not suppose to stand in the way of she be consider a beauty . she face be very fair , though it lack that softness which we all love in woman . she eye , which be large and bright , and very clear , never seem to quail , never rise and sink or show themselves to be afraid of they own power . indeed , have nothing of fear about she . she nose be perfectly cut , but be rather large , have the slightest possible tendency to be aquiline . she mouth also be large , but be full of expression , and she tooth be perfect . she complexion be very bright , but in spite of its brightness she never blush . the shade of she complexion be set and steady . those who know she say that she heart be so fully under command that nothing could stir she blood to any sudden motion . as to that accusation of straggling which have be make against she , it have spring from ill - natured observation of she mode of sitting . she never straggle when she stand or walk ; but she would lean forward when sit , as a man do , and would use she arm in talking , and would put she hand over she face , and pass she finger through she hair ,-- after the fashion of man rather than of woman ; -- and she seem to despise that soft quiescence of she sex in which be generally find so many charms . she hand and foot be large , -- as be she whole frame . be ; and have be untrue to himself and to he own appreciation of the lady when he have describe she in disparage term to . but , though he have speak of in disparaging term , he have so spoken of she as to make quite understand that he think a great deal about . and now , early on the , he make he way to in order that he might learn whether there might be any sympathy for he there . Hitherto he have find none . everything have be terribly dry and hard , and he have gather as yet none of the fruit which he have expect that he good fortune would bear for he . it be true that he have not as yet go among any friend , except those of he club , and man who be in the along with he ; -- and at the club it might be that there be some who envy he he good fortune , and other who think nothing of it because it have be theirs for year . now he would try a friend who , he hope , could sympathise ; and therefore he call in at about half - past two on the morning . yes , -- be in the drawing - room . the hall - porter admit as much , but evidently seem to think that he have be disturb from he dinner before he time . do not care a straw for the hall - porter . if be not kind to he , he would never trouble that hall - porter again . he be especially sore at this moment because a value friend , the barrister with whom he have be read for the last three year , have spend the best part of a hour that morning in proving to he that he have as good as ruin himself . " when I first hear it , of course I think you have inherit a fortune , " say . " I have inherit nothing , " Phineas reply ;--" not a penny ; and I never shall . " then have open he eye very wide , and shake he head very sadly , and have whistle . " I be so glad you have come , , " say , meet half - way across the large room . " thanks , " say he , as he take she hand . " I think that perhaps you would manage to see I before any one else be here . " " well ; -- to tell the truth , I have wish
wish it ; though I can hardly tell why . " " I can tell you why , . but never mind ;--come and sit down . I be so very glad that you have be successful ;-- so very glad . you know i tell you that I should never think much of you if you do not at least try it . " " and therefore I do try . " " and have succeed . Faint heart , you know , never do any good . I think it be a man 's duty to make he way into the house ; -- that be , if he ever mean to be anybody . of course it be not every man who can get there by the time that he be five - and - twenty . " " every friend that I have in the world say that I have ruin myself . " " no ;-- I do not say so , " say . " and you be worth all the other put together . it be such a comfort to have some one to say a cheery word to one . " " you shall hear nothing but cheery word here . shall say cheery word to you that shall be better than mine , because they shall be weighte with the wisdom of age . I have hear he say twenty time that the earlier a man go into the house the better . there be much to learn . " " but you father be think of man of fortune . " " not at all ; -- of younger brother , and barrister , and of man who have they way to make , as you have . let I see , -- can you dine here on ? there will be no party , of course , but papa will want to shake hand with you ; and you legislator of the be more easily reach on than on any other day . " " I shall be delighted , " say , feel , however , that he do not expect much sympathy from . " dine here ; -- you know , of ; and we will ask you friend . there will be nobody else . as for catching , that be out of the question at such a time as this . " " but go back to my be ruin -- " say , after a pause . " do not think of anything so disagreeable . " " you must not suppose that I be afraid of it . I be go to say that there be worse thing than ruin , -- or , at any rate , than the chance of ruin . Suppose that I have to emigrate and skin sheep , what do it matter ? I myself , be unencumbered , have myself as my own property to do what I like with . with it be or a peerage . with I it be parliamentary success or sheep - skinn . " " there shall be no sheep - skinn , . I will guarantee you . " " then I shall be safe . " at that moment the door of the room be open , and a man enter with quick step , come a few yard in , and then retreate , slam the door after he . he be a man with thick short red hair , and a abundance of very red beard . and he face be red , -- and , as it see to , he very eye . there be something in the countenance of the man which strike he almost with dread , -- something approach to ferocity . there be a pause a moment after the door be close , and then spoke . " it be my brother . I do not think that you have ever meet he . " and that terrible apparition of the red have disturb in the moment of he happiness as he sit listen to the kind flattery of ; and though have vanish as quickly as he have appear , there have come no return of he joy . have say some word about she brother , and have reply that he have never chance to see . then there have be a awkward silence , and almost immediately other person have come in . after greet one or two old acquaintance , among whom a elder sister of be one , he take he leave and escape out into the square . " be go to dine with we on , " say . " she say she will not answer for she brother , but she will bring he if she can . " " and you be a member of parliament now too , they tell I , " say , hold up she hand . " I think everybody will be in parliament before long . I wish I know some man who be not , that I might think of change my condition . " but care very little what say to he . everybody know , and all who know she be accustom to put up with the violence of she joke and the bitterness of she remark . she be a old maid , over forty , very plain , who , have reconcile herself to the fact that she be a old maid , choose to take advantage of such poor privileges as the position give she . within the last few year a considerable fortune have fall into she hand , some twenty - five thousand pound , which have come to she unexpectedly , -- a wonderful windfall . and now she be the only one of she family who have money at command . she live in a
a small house by herself , in one of the smallest street of , and walk about sturdily by herself , and speak she mind about everything . she be greatly devote to she brother , -- so devoted that there be nothing she would not do for he , short of lend he money . but when he find himself out in the square think nothing of . he have go to for sympathy , and she have give it to he in full measure . she understand he and he aspiration if no one else do so on the face of the earth . she rejoice in he triumph , and be not too hard to tell he that she look forward to he success . and in what delightful language she have do so ! " Fbe not hebe never win fair lady . " it be thus , or almost thus , that she have encourage he . he know well that she have in truth mean nothing more than she word have seem to signify . he do not for a moment attribute to she atch else . but might not he get another lesson from they ? he have often tell himself that he be not in love with ; -- but why should he not how tell himself that he be in love with she ? of course there would be difficulty . but be it not the business of he life to overcome difficulty ? have he not already overcome one difficulty almost as great ; and why should he be afraid of this other ? Faint heart never win fair lady ! and this fair lady , -- for at this moment he be ready to swear that she be very fair , -- be already half win . she could not have take he by the hand so warmly , and look into he face so keenly , have she not feel for he something stronger than common friendship . he have turn down from the square , and be now walk towards the 's . he would go and see the beasts in the , and make up he mind as to he future mode of life in that delightful solitude . there be very much as to which it be necessary that he should make up he mind . if he resolve that he would ask to be he wife , when should he ask she , and in what manner might he propose to she that they should live ? it would hardly suit he to postpone he courtship indefinitely , know , as he do know , that he would be one among many suitor . he could not expect she to wait for he if he do not declare himself . and yet he could hardly ask she to come and share with he the allowance make to he by he father ! whether she have much fortune of she own , or little , or none at all , he do not in the least know . he do know that the have be distress by he son 's extravagance , and that there have be some money difficulty arise from this source . but he great desire would be to support he own wife by he own labour . at present he be hardly in a fair way to do that , unless he could get pay for he parliamentary work . those fortunate gentleman who form " the government " be so pay . yes ; -- there be the open to he , and he must resolve that he would seat himself there . he would make understand this , and then he would ask he question . it be true that at present he political opponent have possession of the ; -- but all government be mortal , and Conservative government in this country be especially prone to die . it be true that he could not hold even a Treasury lordship with a poor thousand a year for he salary without have to face the elector of again before he enter upon the enjoyment of he place ; -- but if he could only do something to give a grace to he name , to show that he be a rise man , the elector of , who have once be so easy with he , would surely not be cruel to he when he show himself a second time among they . be he friend , and he have those point of law in he favour which possession bestow . and then he remember that be related to almost everybody who be anybody among the high Whigs . she be , he know , second cousin to , who for year have be the leader of the Whigs , and be third cousin to . the late of the , the of , and have marry sister , and the people , and the people , and the people have all some sort of connection with the Palliser people , of whom the heir and come chiefinitely , , would certainly be of the in the next government . simply as a introduction into official life nothing could be more conducive to chance of success than a matrimonial alliance with . not that he would have think of such a thing on that account ! no ;--he think of it because he love she ; honestly because he love she . he swore to that half a dozen time , for he own satisfaction . but , love she as he do , and resolve that in spite of all difficulty she should become he wife , there could be no reason why he should not , -- on she account as well as on he own , -- take advantage of any circumstance that there might be in
in he favour . as he wandere among the unsavoury beasts , elbow on every side by the visitor to the garden , he make up he mind that he would first let understand what be he intention with regard to he future career , and then he would ask she to join she lot to he . at every turn the chance would of course be very much against he ; -- ten to one against he , perhaps , on every point ; but it be he lot in life to have to face such odd . twelve month since it have be much more than ten to one against he get into parliament ; and yet he be there . he expect to be blow into fragment , -- to sheep - skinn in , or pack preserve meat on the plain of ; but when the blowing into atom should come , he be resolve that courage to bear the ruin should not be want . then he quote a line or two of a poet , and feel himself to be comfortable . " so , here you be again , , " say a voice in he ear . " yes , ; here I be again . " " I fancie you member of parliament have something else to do besides look at wild beasts . I think you always spend in arrange how you might most effectually badger each other on . " " we get through all that early this morning , , while you be say you prayer . " " here be too ;--you know he I daresay . he also be a member ; but then he can afford to be idle . " but it so happen that do not know , and consequently there be some slight form of introduction . " I believe I be to meet you at dinner on , " -- say , -- " at 's . " " and I too , " say . " which will be the greatest possible addition to we pleasure , " say . , who seem to be afflict with some difficulty in speaking , and whose bow to we hero have hardly do more than produce the slightest possible motion to the top of he hat , hereupon mutter something which be take to mean a assent to the proposition as to 's dinner . then he stand perfectly still , with he two hand fix on the top of he umbrella , and gaze at the great monkey ' cage . but it be clear that he be not look at any special monkey , for he eye never wander . " do you ever see such a contrast in you life ? " say to ,-- hardly in a whisper . " between what ? " say . " and a monkey . the monkey have so much to say for himself , and be so delightfully wick ! I do not suppose that ever do anything wrong in he life . " be a man who have very little temptation to do anything wrong . he be possess of over a million and a half of money , which he be mistaken enough to suppose he have make himself ; whereas it may be doubt whether he have ever earn a penny . he father and he uncle have create a business in , and that business now belong to he . but he father and he uncle , who have toil through they long life , have leave behind they servants who understand the work , and the business now go on prosper almost by its own momentum . the of the present day , the sole owner of the business , though he do occasionally go to , certainly do nothing towards maintain it . he have a magnificent place in , call , and he sit for a group of borough , and he have a house in , and a stud of horse in , which he rarely visit , and be unmarried . he never speak much to any one , although he be constantly in society . he rarely do anything , although he have the means of do everything . he have very seldom be on he leg in the of , though he have sit there for ten year . he be see about everywhere , sometimes with one acquaintance and sometimes with another ; -- but it may be doubt whether he have any friend . it may be doubt whether he have ever talk enough to any man to make that man he friend . try he for one season , and after a month or two ask for a loan of a few hundred pound . " I never lend money to any one under any circumstance , " say , and it be the longest speech which have ever fall from he mouth in the hearing of . but though he would not lend money , he give a great deal , -- and he would give it for almost every object . " , , , , " appear on almost every charitable list that be advertise . no one ever speak to he as to this expenditure , nor do he ever speak to any one . Circulars come to he and the cheque be return . the duty be a very easy one to he , and he perform it willingly . have any amount of inquiry be necessary , it be possible that the labour would have be too much for he . be , as to whom have hear that he have during the last winter entertaine and , with very many other people of note , at he place in . " I very much prefer the monkey , " say to
to . " I think you would , " say she . " like to like , you know . you have both of you the same aptitude for climbing . but the monkey never fall , they tell I . " Phineas , know that he could gain nothing by sparring with , raise he hat and take he leave . go out of a narrow gate he find himself again bring into contact with . " what a crowd there be here , " he say , finde himself bound to say something . , who be behind he , answer he not a word . then Phineas make up he mind that be insolent with the insolence of riche , and that he would hate . he be engage to dine on this with , the barrister , with whom he have be read for the last three year . have take a strong liking to , as have also Mrs . low , and the tutor have more than once tell he pupil that success in he profession be certainly open to he if he would only stick to he work . be himself a ambitious man , look forward to enter parliament at some future time , when the exigency of he life of labou might enable he to do so ; but he be prudent , give to close calculation , and resolve to make the ground sure beneath he foot in every step that he take forward . when he first hear that intend to stand for he be stricken with dismay , and strongly dissuad he . " the elector may probably reject he . that be he only chance now , " have say to he wife , when he find that be , as he think , foolhardy . but the elector of have not reject 's pupil , and be now call upon to advise what should do in he present circumstance . there be nothing to prevent the work of a Chancery barrister be do by a member of parliament . indeed , the most successful barrister be member of parliament . but be begin at the wrong end , and know that no good would come of it . " only think of you be in parliament , , " say . " it be wonderful , be not it ? " say . " it take we so much by surprise ! " say . " as a rule one never hear of a barrister go into parliament till after he be forty . " " and I be only twenty - five . I do feel that I have disgrac myself . I do , indeed , . " " no ; -- you have not disgrace yourself , . the only question be , whether it be prudent . I hope it will all turn out for the best , most heartily . " . be a very matter - of - fact lady , four or five year older than she husband , who have have a little money of she own , and be possessed of every virtue under the sun . nevertheless she do not quite like the idea of she husband 's pupil have get into parliament . if she husband and be dine anywhere together , , who have come to they quite a boy , would walk out of the room before she husband . this could hardly be right ! nevertheless she help Phineas to the nicest bit of fish she could find , and have he be ill , would have nurse he with the greatest care . after dinner , when . low have go up - stair , there come the great discussion between the tutor and the pupil , for the sake of which this little dinner have be give . when Phineas have last be with , -- on the occasion of he show himself at he tutor 's chamber after he return from , -- he have not make up he mind so thoroughly on certain point as he have do since he have see . the discussion could hardly be of any avail now , -- but it could not be avoid . " well , , and what do you mean to do ? " say . everybody who know we hero , or nearly everybody , call he by he Christian name . there be man who seem to be so treat by general consent in all societie . even , who be very prosaic , and unlikely to be familiar in she mode of address , have fall into the way of do it before the election . but she have drop it , when the Phinea whom she use to know become a member of parliament . " that be the question ; -- be not it ? " say . " of course you will stick to you work ? " " what ; -- to the ? " " yes ; -- to the . " " I be not think of give it up permanently . " " give it up , " say , raise he hand in surprise . " if you give it up , how do you intend to live ? man be not pay for be member of parliament . " " not exactly . but , as I say before , I be not think of give it up , -- permanently . " " you must not give it up at all , -- not for a day ; that be , if you ever mean to do any good . " " there I think that perhaps you may be wrong , ! " " how can I be wrong ? do a period of idleness ever help a man in any profession ? and be
be it not acknowledge by all who know anything about it , that continuous labour be more necessary in we profession than in any other ? " " I do not mean to be idle . " " what be it you do mean , ? " " why simply this . here I be in parliament . we must take that as a fact . " " I do not doubt the fact . " " and if it be a misfortune , we must make the best of it . even you would not advise I to apply for the Chiltern hundred at once . " " I would ; -- to -morrow . my dear fellow , though I do not like to give you pain , if you come to I I can only tell you what I think . my advice to you be to give it up to - morrow . would laugh at you for a few week , but that be better than be ruin for life . " " I can not do that , " say , sadly . " very well ; -- then let we go on , " say . " if you will not give up you seat , the next best thing will be to take care that it shall interfere as little as possible with you work . I suppose you must sit upon some Committees . " " my idea be this , -- that I will give up one year to learn the practice of the . " " and do nothing ? " " nothing but that . why , the thing be a study in itself . as for learn it in a year , that be out of the question . but I be convince that if a man intend to be a useful member of parliament , he should make a study of it . " " and how do you mean to live in the meantime ? " , who be a energetic man , have assume almost a angry tone of voice . Phinea for a while sit silent ;-- not that he feel himself to be without word for a reply , but that he be think in what fewest word he might best convey he idea . " you have a very modest allowance from you father , on which you have never be able to keep yourself free from debt , " continue . " he have increase it . " " and will it satisfy you to live here , in what will turn out to be parliamentary club idleness , on the savings of he industrious life ? I think you will find yourself unhappy if you do that . , my dear fellow , as far as I have as yet be able to see the world , man do not begin either very good or very bad . they have generally good aspiration with infirm purpose ; -- or , as we may say , strong body with weak leg to carry they . then , because they leg be weak , they drift into idleness and ruin . during all this drifting they be wretch , and when they have thoroughly drift they be still wretch . the agony of they old disappointment still cling to they . in nine case out of ten it be some one small unfortunate event that put a man astray at first . he see some woman and lose himself with she ; -- or he be take to a racecourse and unluckily win money ; -- or some devil in the shape of a friend lure he to tobacco and brandy . you temptation have come in the shape of this accurse seat in parliament . " have never say a soft word in he life to any woman but the wife of he bosom , have never see a racehorse , always confin himself to two glassis of port after dinner , and look upon smoking as the darkest of all the vex . " you have make up you mind , then , that I mean to be idle ? " " I have make up my mind that you time will be wholly unprofitable , -- if you do as you say you intend to do . " " but you do not know my plan ; -- just listen to I . " then do listen , and explain he plan , -- say , of course , nothing of he love for , but give to understand that he intend to assist in turn out the exist government and to mount up to some seat , -- a humble seat at first , -- on the Treasury bench , by the help of he exalted friend and by the use of he own gift of eloquence . hear he without a word . " of course , " say , " after the first year my time will not be fully employ , unless I succeed . and if I fail totally , -- for , of course , I may fail altogether -- " " it be possible , " say . " if you be resolve to turn yourself against I , I must not say another word , " say , with anger . " turn myself against you ! I would turn myself any way so that I might save you from the sort of life which you be prepare for yourself . I see nothing in it that can satisfy any manly heart . even if you be successful , what be you to become ? you will be the creature of some minister , not he colleague . you be to make you way up the ladder by pretend to agree whenever agreement be demand from you , and by voting
voting whether you agree or do not . and what be to be you reward ? some few precarious hundred a year , last just so long as a party may remain in power and you can retain a seat in parliament ! it be at the best slavery and degradation , -- even if you be lucky enough to achieve the slavery . " " you yourself hope to go into parliament and join a ministry some day , " say . be not quick to answer , but he do answer at last . " that be true , though I have never tell you so . indeed , it be hardly true to say that I hope it . I have my dream , and sometimes dare to tell myself that they may possibly become waking fact . but if ever I sit on a bench I shall sit there by special invitation , have be summon to take a high place because of my professional success . it be but a dream after all , and I would not have you repeat what I have say to any one . I have no intention to talk about myself . " " I be sure that you will succeed , " say . " yes ;-- I shall succeed . I be succeed . I live upon what I earn , like a gentleman , and can already afford to be indifferent to work that I dislike . after all , the other part of it , -- that of which I dream , -- be but a unnecessary adjunct ; the gilding on the gingerbread . I be inclin to think that the cake be more wholesome without it . " do not go up - stair into . 's drawing - room on that evening , nor do he stay very late with . he have hear enough of counsel to make he very unhappy , -- to shake from he much of the audacity which he have acquire for himself during he morning 's walk , -- and to make he almost doubt whether , after all , the Chiltern Hundreds would not be for he the safest escape from he difficulty . but in that case he must never venture to see again . 's dinner no ;-- in such case as that ,-- should he resolve upon take the advice of he old friend , must make up he mind never to see again ! and he be in love with ; -- and , for atch he know , might be in love with he . as he walk home from 's house in , he be by no means a triumphant man . there have be much more say between he and than could be laid before the reader in the last chapter . have urge he again and again , and have prevail so far that , before he leave the house , have promise to consider that suicidal expedient of the . what a by - word he would become if he be to give up parliament , have sit there for about a week ! but such immediate give up be one of the necessity of 's programme . accord to 's teaching , a single year pass amidst the miasma of the of would be altogether fatal to any chance of professional success . and have at any rate succeed in make believe that he be right in this lesson . there be he profession , as to which assure he that success be within he reach ; and there be parliament on the other side , as to which he know that the chance be all against he , in spite of he advantage of a seat . that he could not combine the two , begin with parliament , he do believe . which should it be ? that be the question which he try to decide as he walk home from to . he could not answer the question satisfactorily , and go to be a unhappy man . he must at any rate go to 's dinner on , and , to enable he to join in the conversation there , must attend the debate on and . the reader may perhaps be best make to understand how terrible be we hero 's state of doubt by be tell that for a while he think of absent himself from these debate , as be likely to weaken he purpose of withdrawing altogether from the house . it be not very often that so strong a fury rage between party and party at the commencement of the session that a division be take upon the address . it be customary for the leader of the opposition on such occasion to express he opinion in the most courteous language , that he right honourable friend , sit opposite to he on the bench , have be , be , and will be wrong in everything that he think , say , or do in public life ; but that , as anything like factious opposition be never adopt on that side of the , the address to the , in answer to that most fatuous speech which have be put into she Majesty 's gracious mouth , shall be allow to pass unquestioned . then the leader of the thanks he adversary for he consideration , explain to all man how happy the country ought to be that the government have not fall into the disgracefully incapable hand of he right honourable friend opposite ; and after that the address be carry amidst universal serenity . but such be not the order of the day on the present occasion . , the veteran leader of the liberal side of the , have move a amendment to the address , and have urge upon the ,
, in very strong language , the expediency of show , at the very commencement of the session , that the country have return to parliament a strong majority determine not to put up with Conservative inactivity . " I conceive it to be my duty , " have say , " at once to assume that the country be unwilling that the right honourable gentleman opposite should keep they seat on the bench upon which they sit , and in the performance of that duty I be call upon to divide the house upon the address to she . " and if use strong language , the reader may be sure that 's follower use language much stronger . and , who be the present leader of the , and representative there of the , -- , the premier , sit in the of , -- be not the man to allow these amenity to pass by without adequate reply . he and he friend be very strong in sarcasm , if they fail in argument , and lack nothing for word , though it might perhaps be prove that they be short in number . it be consider that the speech in which review the long political life of , and show that have be at one time a bugbear , and then a nightmare , and latterly simply a fungus , be one of the severest attack , if not the most severe , that have be hear in that since the . , the while , be sit with he hat low down over he eye , and many man say that he do not like it . but this speech be not make till after that dinner at 's , of which a short account must be give . have it not be for the overwhelming interest of the doings in parliament at the commencement of the session , Phineas might have perhaps abstain from attending , in spite of the charm of novelty . for , in truth , 's word have move he much . but if it be to be he fate to be a member of parliament only for ten day , surely it would be well that he should take advantage of the time to hear such a debate as this . it would be a thing to talk of to he child in twenty year ' time , or to he grandchild in fifty ; -- and it would be essentially necessary that he should be able to talk of it to . he do , therefore , sit in the house till one on the night , and till two on the night , and hear the debate adjourn till the . on the be to make he great speech , and then the division would come . when Phineas enter 's drawing - room on the before dinner , he find the other guest all assemble . why man should have be earlier in keep they dinner engagement on that day than on any other he do not understand ; but it be the fact , probably , that the great anxiety of the time make those who be at all concerned in the matter very keen to hear and to be hear . during these day everybody be in a hurry ,-- everybody be eager ; and there be a common feeling that not a minute be to be lose . there be three lady in the room , -- , , and . the latter be the wife of a gentleman who have be a junior of the in the late government , and who live in the expectation of filling , perhaps , some higher office in the government which , as he hope , be soon to be call into existence . there be five gentleman besides Phineas Finn himself ,-- , , , , who have be catch in spite of all that have say as to the difficulty of such a operation , and . be quick to observe that every male guest be in parliament , and to tell himself that he would not have be there unless he also have have a seat . " we be all here now , " say the , ring the bell . " I hope I have not keep you wait , " say . " not at all , " say . " I do not know why we be in such a hurry . and how many do you say it will be , ? " " , I suppose , " say . " more likely twenty - two , " say . " there be so ill they can not possibly bring he up , and young be at , and be sulk about something , and have lose he eldest son . by ! they press he to come up , although will not be bury till . " " I do not believe it , " say . " you ask some of the fellow , and they will own it . " " if I would lose every relation I have in the world , " say , " I would vote on such a question as this . stay away will not bring poor back to life . " " but there be a decency in these matters , be there not , ? " say . " I think they have throw all that kind of thing overboard long ago , " say . " it would be better that they should have no veil , than squabble about the thickness of it . " then dinner be announce . the walk off with , take , and take . " I will bet four pound to two it be over nineteen , " say , as he pass through the drawing - room
room door . the remark seem to have be address to , and Phineas therefore make no reply . " I daresay it will , " say , " but I never bet . " " but you vote -- sometimes , I hope , " say . " sometimes , " say . " I think he be the most odious man that ever I set my eye on , " say to himself as he follow into the dining - room . he have observ that have be stand very near to in the drawing - room , and that have say a few word to he . he be more determined than ever that he would hate , and would probably have be moody and unhappy throughout the whole dinner have not Lady call he to a chair at she left hand . it be very generous of she ; and the more so , as have , in a half - hesitating manner , prepare to seat himself in that very place . as it be , and be neighbour , but have the place of honou . " I suppose you will not speak during the debate ? " say . " who ? I ? certainly not . in the first place , I could not get a hearing , and , in the next place , I should not think of commencing on such a occasion . I do not know that I shall ever speak at all . " " indeed you will . you be just the sort of man who will succeed with the house . what I doubt be , whether you will do as well in office . " " I wish I might have the chance . " " of course you can have the chance if you try for it . begin so early , and be on the right side , -- and , if you will allow I to say so , among the right set , -- there can be no doubt that you may take office if you will . but I be not sure that you will be tractable . you can not begin , you know , by be . " " I have see enough to realise that already , " say . " if you will only keep that little fact steadily before you eye , there be nothing you may not reach in official life . but be at four - and - twenty , and that precedent have ruin half we young politician . " " it have not affec I , . " " as far as I can see , there be no great difficulty in government . a man must learn to have word at command when he be on he leg in the of , in the same way as he would if he be talk to he own servants . he must keep he temper ; and he must be very patient . as far as I have see , they be not more clever than other people . " " I think there be generally one or two man of ability in the cabinet . " " yes , of fair ability . be a good specimen . there be not , and never be , anything brilliant in he . he be not eloquent , nor , as far as I be aware , do he ever create anything . but he have always be a steady , honest , persever man , and circumstance have make politics come easy to he . " " think of the momentous question which he have be call upon to decide , " say . " every question so handle by he have be decide rightly accord to he own party , and wrongly accord to the party opposite . a political leader be so sure of support and so sure of attack , that it be hardly necessary for he to be even anxious to be right . for the country 's sake , he should have official under he who know the routine of business . " " you think very badly then of politics as a profession . " " no ; I think of they very highly . it must be better to deal with the repeal of law than the defending of criminal . but all this be 's wisdom , not mine . have never be in the yet , and therefore of course he be a little caustic . " " I think he be quite right , " say stoutly . he speak so stoutly that everybody at the table listen to he . " I do not exactly see the necessity for such internecine war just at present , " say . " I must say I do , " say the other . " take office know that he be in a minority . we have a fair majority of nearly thirty when he come in . " " then how very soft you must have be to go out , " say . " not in the least soft , " continue . " we could not command we man , and be bound to go out . for atch we know , some score of they might have choose to support , and then we should have own ourselves beat for the time . " " you be beaten , -- hollow , " say . " then why do dissolve ? " " a be quite right to dissolve in such a position , " say . " he must do so for the 's sake . it be he only chance . " " just so . it be , as you say , he only chance , and it be he right . he very possession of power
power will give he near a score of vote , and if he think that he have a chance , let he try it . we maintain that he have no chance , and that he must have know that he have none ; -- that if he could not get on with the late house , he certainly could not get on with a new . we let he have he own way as far as we could in . we have fail last summer , and if he could get along he be welcome . but he could not get along . " " I must say I think he be right to dissolve , " say . " and we be right to force the consequence upon he as quickly as we can . he practically lose nine seat by he dissolution . look at . " " yes ; look at , " say . " the country at any rate have gain something there . " " it be a ill wind that blow nobody any good , , " say the . " what on earth be to become of poor ? " say . " I wonder whether any one know where he be . be not a bad sort of fellow . " " use to think that he be a very bad fellow , " say . " use to swear that it be hopeless try to catch he . " it may be as well to explain that be a Conservative gentleman of great fame who have for year act as under , and who now fill the high office of to the Treasury . " I believe in my heart , " continue , " that be rejoice that poor should be out in the cold . " " if seat be halveable , he should share mine , for the sake of auld lang syne , " say . " but not to - morrow night , " say ; " the division to - morrow will be a thing not to be joke with . upon my word I think they be right about old . all private consideration should give way . and as for , I would have he up or I would know the reason why . " " and shall we have no defaulter , ? " ask . " I be not go to boast , but I do not know of one for whom we need blush . be so bad with gout that he can not even bear any one to look at he , but say that he will bring he up . " be in those day the Whip on the liberal side of the House . " unfortunate wretch ! " say . " the worst of it be that he scream in he paroxysm , " say . " and you mean to say that you will take he into the lobby , " say . " undoubtedly , " say . " why not ? he have no business with a seat if he can not vote . but be a good man , and he will be there if laudanum and bath - chair make it possible . " the same kind of conversation go on during the whole of dinner , and become , if anything , more animate when the three lady have leave the room . make but one remark , and then he observe that as far as he could see a majority of nineteen would be as serviceable as a majority of twenty . this he say in a very mild voice , and in a tone that be intend to be expressive of doubt ; but in spite of he humility fly at he almost savagely , -- as though a liberal member of the of be disgrac by so mean a spirit ; and find himself despise the man for he want of zeal . " if we be to beat they , let we beat they well , " say . " let there be no doubt about it , " say . " I should like to see every man with a seat poll , " say . " poor ! " say . " it will kill he , no doubt , but I suppose the seat be safe . " " oh , yes ; be quite safe , " say , in he eagerness omitt to catch 's grim joke . Phineas go up into the drawing - room for a few minute after dinner , and be eagerly desirous of say a few more word , -- he know not what word , -- to . and have leave the dining - room first , and again find stand close to 's shoulder . could it be possible that there be anything in it ? be a unmarried man , with a immense fortune , a magnificent place , a seat in parliament , and be not perhaps above forty year of age . there could be no reason why he should not ask to be he wife ,-- except , indeed , that he do not seem to have sufficient word at command to ask anybody for anything . but could it be that such a woman as could accept such a man as because of he wealth , and because of he fine place ,-- a man who have not a word to throw to a dog , who do not seem to be possess of a idea , who hardly look like a gentleman ; -- so tell himself . but in truth , though he be a plain , unattractive man , with nothing in he personal appearance to call for remark , be not unlike a gentleman in he usual demeanour . Phineas himself , it may
may be here say , be six foot high , and very handsome , with bright blue eye , and bry wavy hair , and light silken beard . . have tell she husband more than once that he be much too handsome to do any good . , however , have reply that young have never show himself to be conscious of he own personal advantage . " he will learn it soon enough , " say . " some woman will tell he , and then he will be spoil . " I do not think that depend much as yet on he own good look , but he feel that ought to be despise by such a one as , because he look be not good . and she must despise he ! it could not be that a woman so full of life should be willing to put up with a man who absolutely seem to have no life within he . and yet why be he there , and why be he allow to hang about just over she shoulders ? begin to feel himself to be a injured man . but have the power of dispelling instantly this sense of injury . she have do it effectually in the dining - room by call he to the seat by she side , to the express exclusion of the millionaire , and she do it again now by walk away from to the spot on which have place himself somewhat sulkily . " of course you will be at the club on morning after the division , " she say . " no doubt . " " when you leave it , come and tell I what be you impressions , and what you think of 's speech . there will be nothing do in the before four , and you will be able to run up to I . " " certainly I will . " " I have ask to come , and . I be so anxious about it , that I want to hear what different people say . you know , perhaps , that papa be to be in the cabinet if there be a change . " " be he indeed ? " " oh yes ; -- and you will come up ? " " of course I will . do you expect to hear much of a opinion from ? " " yes , I do . you do not quite know yet . and you must remember that he will say more to I than he will to you . he be not quick , you know , as you be , and he have no enthusiasm on any subject ; -- but he have opinion , and sound opinion too . " feel that be in a slight degree scold he for the disrespectful manner in which he have speak of ; and he feel also that he have commit himself , -- that he have show himself to be sore , and that she have see and understand he soreness . " the truth be I do not know he , " say he , try to correct he blunder . " no ;-- not as yet . but I hope that you may some day , as he be one of those man who be both useful and estimable . " " I do not know that I can use he , " say ; " but if you wish it , I will endeaavor to esteem he . " " I wish you to do both ; -- but that will all come in due time . I think it probable that in the early autumn there will be a great gathering of the real at ; -- of those , I mean , who have they heart in it , and be at the same time gentleman . if it be so , I should be sorry that you should not be there . you need not mention it , but have just say a word about it to papa , and a word from he always mean so much ! well ; -- good - night ; and mind you come up on . you be go to the club , now , of course . I envy you men you club more than I do the house ; -- though I feel that a woman 's life be only half a life , as she can not have a seat in parliament . " then go away , and walk down to with . he would have prefer to take he walk alone , but he could not get rid of he affectionate countryman . he want to think over what have take place during the evening ; and , indeed , he do so in spite of he friend 's conversation . , when she first see he after he return to , have tell he how anxious she father be to congratulate he on he seat , but the have not speak a word to he on the subject . the have be courteous , as host customarily be , but have be in no way specially kind to he . and then ! as to go to , he would not do such a thing , -- not though the success of the liberal party be to depend on it . he declare to himself that there be some thing which a man could not do . but although he be not altogether satisfied with what have occur in , he feel as he walk down arm - in - arm with that and 's counsel must be scatter to the wind . he have throw the die in consent to stand for , and must stand the hazard of the cast . " , , my
my boy , I do not think you be listen to I at all , " say . " I be listen to every word you say , " say . " and if I have to go down to the ould country again this session , you will go with I ? " " if I can I will . " " that be my boy ! and it be I that hope you will have the chance . what be the good of turn these fellow out if one be not to get something for one 's trouble ? " and it be three o'clock on the night before 's speech be finish . I do not think that there be any truth in the allegation make at the time , that he continue on he leg a hour longer than the necessity of he speech require , in order that five or six very ancient Whigs might be weary out and shrink to they bed . let a Whig have be ever so ancient and ever so weary , he would not have be allow to depart from that night . be there in he bath - chair at twelve , with a doctor on one side of he and a friend on the other , in some purlieu of the , and do he duty like a fine old as he be . that speech of 's will never be forget by any one who hear it . its study bitterness have perhaps never be equall , and yet not a word be uttere for the saying of which he could be accuse of go beyond the limit of parliamentary antagonism . it be true that personalitie could not have be closer , that accusation of political dishonesty and of almost worse than political cowardice and falsehood could not have be clearer , that no word in the language could have attribute meaner motives or more unscrupulous conduct . but , nevertheless , in all that he say be parliamentary , and show himself to be a gladiator thoroughly well train for the arena in which he have descende to the combat . he arrow be poisone , and he lance be bar , and he shot be heat red , -- because such thing be allow . he do not poison he enemy 's well or use fire , because those thing be not allow . he know exactly the rule of the combat . sit and hear he without once raise he hat from he brow , or speak a word to he neighbour . man on both side of the say that suffer terribly ; but as utter no word of complaint to any one , and be quite ready to take by the hand the next time they meet in company , I do not know that any one be able to form a true idea of 's feeling . be a impassive man who rarely speak of he own feeling , and no doubt sit with he hat low down over he eye in order that no man might judge of they on that occasion by the impression on he feature . " if he could have leave off half a hour earlier it would have be perfect as a attack , " say in criticise 's speech , " but he allow himself to sink into comparative weakness , and the glory of it be over before the end . " -- then come the division . the liberal have 333 vote to 314 for the conservatives , and therefore count a majority of 19 . it be say that so large a number of member have never before vote at any division . " I own I be disappointed , " say to . " I think there would be twenty , " say . " I never go beyond that . I know they would have old up , but I think would have be too hard for they . " " they say they have promise they both peerage . " " yes ; -- if they remain in . but they know they be go out . " " they must go , with such a majority against they , " say . " of course they must , " say . " want nothing better , but it be rather hard upon poor Daubeny . I never see such a unfortunate old . " " he get 's a good drop of real water now and again , and I do not pity he in the least . he be clever of course , and have make he own way , but I have always a feeling that he have no business where he be . I suppose we shall know all about it at 's by one o'clock to - morrow . " Phineas , though it have be past five before he go to bed , -- for there have be much triumphant talk to be do among liberal member after the division , -- be up at he breakfast at 's lodging by nine . there be a matter which he be call upon to settle immediately in which herself be much interested , and respecte which he have promise to give a answer on this very morning . a set of very dingy chamber up two pair of stair at no. 9 , , 's , to which have recommend he to transfer himself and all he belonging , be wait he occupation , should he resolve upon occupy they . if he intend to commence operation as a barrister , it would be necessary that he should have chamber and a clerk ; and before he have leave 's house on evening he have almost give that gentleman authority to secure for he these room at . 9 . " whether
whether you remain in parliament or no , you must make a beginning , " have say ; " and how be you even to pretend to begin if you do not have chamber ? " hope that he might be able to wean away from he parliament bauble ; -- that he might induce the young barrister to give up he madness , if not this session or the next , at any rate before a third year have commence . be a persistent man , like very much when he do like , and love very strongly when he do love . he would have many a tug for before he would allow that false to carry off the prey as altogether he own . if he could only get into the dingy chamber he might do much ! but have now become so imbued with the atmosphere of politics , have be so breathe upon by and , that he could no longer endure the thought of any other life than that of a life spend among the lobby . a desire to help to beat the conservative have fasten on he very soul , and almost make odious in he eye . he be afraid of , and for the nonce would not go to he any more ; -- but he must see the porter at 's , he must write a line to , and he must tell . Bunce that for the present he would still keep on she room . he letter to be as follow :-- great , , 186--. my , I have make up my mind against take the chamber , and be now off to the to say that I shall not want they . of course , I know what you will think of I , and it be very grievous to I to have to bear the hard judgment of a man whose opinion I value so highly ; but , in the tooth of you terribly strong argument , I think that there be something to be say on my side of the question . this seat in parliament have come in my way by chance , and I think it would be pusillanimous in I to reject it , feel , as I do , that a seat in parliament confer very great honour . I be , too , very fond of politics , and regard legislation as the finest profession go . have I any one dependent on I , I probably might not be justified in follow the bent of my inclination . but I be all alone in the world , and therefore have a right to make the attempt . if , after a trial of one or two session , I should fail in that which I be attempt , it will not even then be too late to go back to the better way . I can assure you that at any rate it be not my intention to be idle . I know very well how you will fret and fume over what I say , and how utterly I shall fail in bring you round to my way of think ; but as I must write to tell you of my decision , I can not refrain from defend myself to the best of my ability . yours always faithfully , . receive this letter at he chamber , and when he have read it , he simply press he lip closely together , place the sheet of paper back in its envelope , and put it into a drawer at he left hand . have do this , he go on with what work he have before he , as though he friend 's decision be a matter of no consequence to he . as far as he be concerned the thing be do , and there should be a end of it . so he tell himself ; but nevertheless he mind be full of it all day ; and , though he write not a word of answer to , he make a reply within he own mind to every one of the argument use in the letter . " great honour ! how can there be honour in what come , as he say , by chance ? he have not sense enough to understand that the honour come from the mode of win it , and from the mode of wear it ; and that the very fact of he be member for at this instant simply prove that should have have no privilege to return a member ! no one dependent on he ! be not he father and he mother and he sister dependent on he as long as he must eat they bread till he can earn bread of he own ? he will never earn bread of he own . he will always be eat bread that other have earn . " in this way , before the day be over , become very angry , and swore to himself that he would have nothing more to say to . but yet he find himself create plan for encountering and conquer the parliamentary fiend who be at present so cruelly potent with he pupil . it be not till the third evening that he tell he wife that have make up he mind not to take chamber . " then I would have nothing more to say to he , " say , savagely . " for the present I can have nothing more to say to he . " " but neither now nor ever , " say , with great emphasis ; " he have be false to you . " " no , " say , who be a man thoroughly and thoughtfully just at all point ; " he have not be false
false to I . he have always mean what he have say , when he be say it . but he be weak and blind , and fly like a moth to the candle ; one pity the poor moth , and would save he a stump of he wing if it be possible . " Phineas , when he have write he letter to , start off for 's , make he way through the well - know dreary street of , and through 's , to . he know every corner well , for he have walk the same road almost daily for the last three year . he have conceive a liking for the route , which he might easily have change without much addition to the distance , by passing through and ; but there be a air of business on which he pride himself in go by the most direct passage , and he declare to himself very often that thing dreary and dingy to the eye might be good in themselves . 's itself be dingy , and the law court therein be perhaps the meanest in which equity ever disclose herself . 's three room in the , each of they bry with the binding of law book and with the dust collect on law papers , and with furniture that have be bry always , and have become browner with year , be perhaps as unattractive to the eye of a young pupil as any room which be ever enter . and the study of the law itself be not a allur pursuit till the mind have come to have some insight into the beauty of its ultimate object . , during he three year ' course of reason on these thing , have teach himself to believe that thing ugly on the outside might be very beautiful within ; and have therefore come to prefer cross and , and so continue he travel by the and . he morning walk be of a piece with he morning study , and he take pleasure in the gloom of both . but now the taste of he palate have be already change by the glare of the lamps in and about palatial Westminster , and he find that 's be disagreeable . the way about and across the to , or to the Treasury , be much pleasanter , and the new office in , already half build , absorb all that interest which he have hithertoo be able to take in the suggested but uncommenced erection of new law court in the neighbourhood of 's . as he make he way to the porter 's lodge under the great gateway of 's , he tell himself that he be glad that he have escape , at any rate for a while , from a life so dull and dreary . if he could only sit in chamber at the instead of chamber in that old court , how much pleasanter it would be ! after all , as regard that question of income , it might well be that the Treasury chamber should be the more remunerative , and the more quickly remunerative , of the two . and , as he think , might be compatible with the Treasury chamber and parliament , but could not possibly be make compatible with , 's . but nevertheless there come upon he a feeling of sorrow when the old man at the lodge seem to be rather glad than otherwise that he do not want the chamber . " then can have they , " say the porter ; " that will be good news for . I do not know what the gen'leman will do for chamber if thing go on as they be go . " be welcome to the chamber as far as be concerned ; but feel nevertheless a certain amount of regret that he should have be compelle to abandon a thing which be regard both by the porter and by as be so desirable . he have however write he letter to , and make he promise to , and be bound to ; and he walk out through the old gateway into , resolve that he would not even visit 's inn again for a year . there be certain book , -- law book , -- which he would read at such interval of leisure as politics might give he ; but within the precinct of the of he would not again put he foot for twelve month , let learn pundit of the law , -- such for instance as and . , -- say what they might . he have tell , before he leave he home after breakfast , that he should for the present remain under she roof . she have be much gratified , not simply because lodging in Great be less readily let than chamber in 's , but also because it be a great honour to she to have a member of parliament in she house . member of parliament be not so common about as they be in the neighbourhood of and 's . but , when he come home to he dinner , do not join as heartily as he should have do in he wife 's rejoicing . be in the employment of certain copy law - stationer in , and have a strong belief in the law as a profession ; -- but he have none whatever in the of . " and he be give up go into chamber ? " say to he wife . " give it up altogether for the present , " say . " and he do not mean to have no clerk ? " say . " not unless it be for he parliament work . " " there be not no clerk want for that , and
and what be worse , there be not no fee to pay th'ey . I will tell you what it be , ; -- if you do not look sharp there will not be nothing to pay you before long . " " and he in , ! " " there be not no salary for be in parliament . there be score of they parliament gent be not get so much as will pay they dinner for th'ey . and then if anybody do trust th'ey , there be no getting at th'ey to make them pay as there be at other folk . " " I do not know that we will ever be like that , . " " that be , . that be the way as woman get themselves take in always . we ! why should we be better than anybody else ? " " he be always act handsome , . " " there be one time he could not pay he lodging for wellnigh nine month , till he governor come down with the money . I do not know whether that be handsome . it knock I about terrible , I know . " " he always mean honest , . " " I do not know that I care much for a man 's meaning when he run short of money . how be he go to see he way , with he seat in parliament , and this give up of he profession ? he owe we near a quarter now . " " he pay I two month this morning , ; so he do not owe a farthing . " " very well ; -- so much the better for we . I shall just have a few word with , and see what he say to it . for myself I do not think half so much of parliament folk as some do . they be for promise everything before they be elect ; but not one in twenty of th'ey be as good as he word when he get there . " be a copying journeyman , who spend ten hour a day in with a pen between he finger ; and after that he would often spend two or three hour of the night with a pen between he finger in . he be a thoroughly hard - work man , do pretty well in the world , for he have a good house over he head , and always could find raiment and bread for he wife and eight child ; but , nevertheless , he be a unhappy man because he suffer from political grievance , or , I should more correctly say , that he grievance be semi-political and semi-social . he have no vote , not be himself the tenant of the house in great . the tenant be a tailor who occupy the shop , whereas occupy the whole of the remainder of the premise . he be a lodger , and lodger be not as yet trust with the franchise . and he have idea , which he himself admit to be very raw , as to the injustice of the manner in which he be pay for he work . so much a folio , without reference to the way in which he work be do , without regard to the success of he work , with no question ask of himself , be , as he think , no proper way of remunerat a man for he labour . he have long since join a trade Union , and for two year past have pay a subscription of a shilling a week towards its fund . he longe to be do some battle against he superior , and to be put himself in opposition to he employer ; -- not that he object personally to . Foolscap , , and , who always make much of he as a useful man ; -- but because some such antagonism would be manly , and the fighting of some battle would be the right thing to do . " if Labwe do not mean to go to the wall himself , " would say to he wife , " Labwe must look alive , and put somebody else there . " be a comfortable motherly woman , who love she husband but hate politics . as he have a aversion to he superior in the world because they be superiors , so have she a liking for they for the same reason . she despise people poorer than herself , and think it a fair subject for boasting that she child always have meat for dinner . if it be ever so small a morsel , she take care that they have it , in order that the boast might be maintain . the world have once or twice be almost too much for she , -- when , for instance , she husband have be ill ; and again , to tell the truth , for the last three month of that long period in which have omit to pay he bill ; but she have keep a fine brave heart during those trouble , and could honestly swear that the child always have a bit of meat , though she herself have be occasionally without it for day together . at such time she would be more than ordinarily meek to , and especially courteous to the old lady who lod in she first - floor drawing - room , -- for Phineas live up two pair of stair , -- and she would excuse such servility by declare that there be no know how soon she might want assistance . but she husband , in such emergency , would become furious and quarrelsome , and would declare that be go to the wall , and that
that something very strong must be do at once . that shill which Bunce pay weekly to the union she regard as be absolutely throw away , -- as much so as though he cast it weekly into the Thame . and she have tell he so , over and over again , make heart - piercing allusion to the eight child and to the bit of meat . he would always endeaavor to explain to she that there be no other way under the sun for keep from be send to the wall ; -- but he would do so hopelessly and altogether ineffectually , and she have come to regard he as a lunatic to the extent of that one weekly shilling . she have a woman 's instinctive partiality for comeliness in a man , and be very fond of because he be handsome . and now she be very proud of he because he be a member of parliament . she have hear , -- from she husband , who have tell she the fact with much disgust , -- that the son of Dukes and Earls go into parliament , and she like to think that the fine young man to whom she talk more or less every day should sit with the son of Dukes and Earls . when Phineas have really bring distress upon she by owe she some thirty or forty pound , she could never bring herself to be angry with he , -- because he be handsome and because he dine out with Lords . and she have triumph greatly over she husband , who have desire to be severe upon he aristocratic debtor , when the money have all be pay in a lump . " I do not know that he be any great catch , " have say , when the prospect of they lodger 's departure have be debate between they . " , " say he wife , " I do not think you feel it when you have get people respectable about you . " " the only respectable man I know , " say , " be the man as earn he bread ; and , as I take it , be a long way from that yet . " return to he lodging before he go down to he club , and again tell Bunce that he have altogether make up he mind about the chamber . " if you will keep I I shall stay here for the first session I daresay . " " of course we shall be only too proud , ; and though it may not perhaps be quite the place for a member of parliament -- " " but I think it be quite the place . " " it be very good of you to say so , , and we will do we very best to make you comfortable . respectable we be , I may say ; and though be a bit rough sometimes -- " " never to I , . " " but he be rough , -- and silly , too , with he radical nonsense , pay a shilling a week to a nasty union just for nothing . still he mean well , and there be not a man who work harder for he wife and child ; -- that I will say of he . and if he do talk politics -- " " but I like a man to talk politics , . " " for a gentleman in parliament of course it be proper ; but I never could see what good it could do to a law - stationer ; and when he talk of go to the wall , I always ask he whether he do not get he wage regular last . but , love you , , when a man as be a journeyman have take up politics and join a trade Union , he be not no better than a milestone for he wife to take and talk to he . " after that go down to the , and make one of those who be buz there in little crowd and uttere they prophecy as to future event . be to go out . that be certain . whether be to come in be uncertain . that he would go to to - morrow morning be not to be doubt ; but it be think very probable that he might plead he age , and decline to undertake the responsibility of form a . " and what then ? " say to he friend . " why , then there will be a choice out of three . there be the , who be the most incompetent man in ; there be , who be the most unfit ; and there be , who be the most unpopular . I can not conceive it possible to find a worse than either of the three ; -- but the country afford no other . " " and which would name ? " " all of they , -- one after the other , so as to make the embarrassment the greater . " that be 's description of the crisis ; but then it be understand that be give to romance . the about and and start together from for , -- as both of they have promise to call on , -- but turn in at 's as they walk up 's , and go on by himself in a cab . " you should belong here , " say as he friend enter the cab , and immediately begin to feel that he would have do nothing till he could get into 's . it might be very well to begin by talk politics at the . such talking have procure for he he seat at . but that
that be do now , and something more than talking be want for any further progress . nothing , as he tell himself , of political import be manage at the . no influence from thence be ever bring to bear upon the adjustment of place under the government , or upon the arrangement of cabinet . it might be very well to count vote at the ; but after the vote have be count , -- have be count successfully , -- 's be the place , as Phineas believe , to learn at the earliest moment what would be the exact result of the success . he must get into 's , if it might be possible for he . be not exactly the man to propose he . perhaps the of would do it . be at home , and with she be sit -- . Phineas have intend to be triumphant as he enter 's room . he be there with the express purpose of triumphing in the success of they great party , and of singe a pleasant paean in conjunction with . but he trumpet be put out of tune at once when he see . he say hardly a word as he give he hand to , -- and then afterwards to , who choose to greet he with this show of cordiality . " I hope you be satisfied , , " say , laugh . " oh yes . " " and be that all ? I think to have find you joy quite irrepressible . " " a bottle of soda - water , though it be a very lively thing when open , will not maintain its vivacity beyond a certain period , . " " and you have have you gas let off already ? " " well , -- yes ; at any rate , the sputtering part of it . be very well , but the question be whether we might not have have twenty - one . " " have just be say that not a single available vote have be miss on we side . he have just come from 's , and that seem to be what they say there . " so also be a member of 's ! at the there certainly have be a idea that the number might have be swell to twenty - one ; but then , as Phineas begin to understand , nothing be correctly know at the . for a accurate appreciation of the political balance of the day , you must go to 's . " must of course be right , " say . " I do not belong to 's myself . but I be only joke , . there be , I suppose , no doubt that be out , and that be everything . " " he have probably tender he resignation , " say . " that be the same thing , " say , roughly . " not exactly , " say . " should there be any difficulty about , he might , at the 's request , make another attempt . " " with a majority of nineteen against he ! " say . " surely be not the only man in the country . there be the , and there be , -- and there be . " have at he tongue 's end all the lesson that he have be able to learn at the . " I should hardly think the would venture , " say . " nothing venture , nothing have , " say . " it be all very well to say that the Duke be incompetent , but I do not know that anything very wonderful be require in the way of genius . the have hold he own in both house successfully , and he be both honest and popular . I quite agree that a at the present day should be commonly honest , and more than commonly popular . " " so you be all for the , be you ? " say , again smile as she speak to he . " certainly ; -- if we be desert by . do not you think so ? " " I do not find it quite so easy to make up my mind as you do . I be inclin to think that will form a government ; and as long as there be that prospect , I need hardly commit myself to a opinion as to he probable successor . " then the objectionable take he leave , and be leave alone with . " it be glorious ; -- be it not ? " he begin , as soon as he find the field to be open for himself and he own manoeuvring . but he be very young , and have not as yet learn the manner in which he might best advance he cause with such a woman as . he be tell she too clearly that he could have no gratification in talk with she unless he could be allow to have she all to himself . that might be very well if be in love with he , but would hardly be the way to reduce she to that condition . " , " say she , smile as she speak , " I be sure that you do not mean it , but you be uncourteous to my friend . " " who ? I ? be I ? upon my word , I do not intend to be uncourteous . " " if I have think you have intend it , of course I could not tell you of it . and now I take the liberty ; -- for it be a liberty -- " " oh no . " " because I feel so anxious that you
you should do nothing to mar you chance as a rise man . " " you be only too kind to I , -- always . " " I know how clever you be , and how excellent be all you instinct ; but I see that you be a little impetuous . I wonder whether you will be angry if I take upon myself the task of mentor . " " nothing you could say would make I angry , -- though you might make I very unhappy . " " I will not do that if I can help it . a mentor ought to be very old , you know , and I be infinitely older than you be . " " I should have think it be the reverse ; -- indeed , I may say that I know that it be , " say . " I be not talk of year . Years have very little to do with the comparative ag of man and woman . a woman at forty be quite old , whereas a man at forty be young . " Phineas , remember that he have put down 's age as forty in he own mind , frown when he hear this , and walk about the room in displeasure . " and therefore , " continue , " I talk to you as though I be a kind of grandmother . " " you shall be my great - grandmother if you will only be kind enough to I to say what you really think . " " you must not then be so impetuous , and you must be a little more careful to be civil to person to whom you may not take any particular fancy . now be a man who may be very useful to you . " " I do not want to be of use to I . " " that be what I call be impetuous , -- be young , -- be a boy . why should not be of use to you as well as any one else ? you do not mean to conquer the world all by yourself . " " no ; -- but there be something mean to I in the expressed idea that I should make use of any man , -- and more especially of a man whom I do not like . " " and why do you not like he , ? " " because he be one of my . " " you do not like he simply because he do not talk much . that may be a good reason why you should not make of he a intimate companion , -- because you like talkative people ; but it should be no ground for dislike . " Phineas pause for a moment before he answer she , think whether or not it would be well to ask she some question which might produce from she a truth which he would not like to hear . then he do ask it . " and do you like he ? " he say . she too pause , but only for a second . " yes , -- I think I may say that I do like he . " " no more than that ? " " certainly no more than that ; -- but that I think be a great deal . " " I wonder what you would say if any one ask you whether you like I , " say , look away from she through the window . " just the same ; -- but without the doubt , if the person who question I have any right to ask the question . there be not above one or two who could have such a right . " " and I be wrong , of course , to ask it about , " say , look out into the . " I do not say so . " " but I see you think it . " " you see nothing of the kind . I be quite willing to be ask the question by you , and quite willing to answer it . be a man of great wealth . " " what can that have to do with it ? " " wait a moment , you impetuous irish boy , and hear I out . " like be call a impetuous irish boy , and come close to she , sit where he could look up into she face ; and there come a smile upon he own , and he be very handsome . " I say that he be a man of great wealth , " continue ; " and as wealth give influence , he be of great use , -- politically , -- to the party to which he belong . " " oh , politically ! " " be I to suppose you care nothing for politics ? to such man , to man who think as you think , who be to sit on the same benche with yourself , and go into the same lobby and be see at the same club , it be you duty to be civil both for you own sake and for that of the cause . it be for the hermit of society to indulge in personal disliking , -- for man who have never be active and never mean to be active . I have be tell how much I think of you , -- as a good . " " and I come in and spoil it all . " " yes , you do . you knock down my little house , and I must build it all up again . " " do not trouble yourself , . " " I shall . it will be a
a great deal of trouble , -- a great deal , indeed ; but I shall take it . I mean you to be very intimate with , and to shoot he grouse , and to stalk he deer , and to help to keep he in progress as a liberal member of parliament . I be quite prepared to admit , as a friend , that he would go back without some such help . " " oh ;-- I understand . " " I do not believe that you do understand at all , but I must endeaavor to make you do so by degree . if you be to be my political pupil , you must at any rate be obedient . the next time you meet , ask he he opinion instead of tell he you own . he have be in parliament twelve year , and he be a good deal older than you when he begin . " at this moment a side door be open , and the red -haired , red - bearded man whom Phineas have see before enter the room . he hesitate a moment , as though he be go to retreat again , and then begin to pull about the book and toy which lay on one of the distant table , as though he be in quest of some article . and he would have retreate have not call to he . " , " she say , " let I introduce you to . , I do not think you have ever meet my brother , . " then the two young man bow , and each of they mutter something . " do not be in a hurry , . you have nothing special to take you away . here be come to tell we who be all the possible new . he be uncivil enough not to have name papa . " " my father be out of the question , " say . " of course he be , " say , " but I may be allow my little joke . " " I suppose he will at any rate be in the cabinet , " say . " I know nothing whatever about politics , " say . " I wish you do , " say he sister , -- " with all my heart . " " I never do , -- and I never shall , for all you wishing . it be the meanest trade go I think , and I be sure it be the most dishonest . they talk of leg on the turf , and of course there be leg ; but what be they to the leg in the house ? I do not know whether you be in parliament , . " " yes , I be ; but do not mind I . " " I beg you pardon . of course there be honest man there , and no doubt you be one of they . " " he be indifferent honest , -- as yet , " say . " I be speak of man who go into parliament to look after government place , " say . " that be just what I be do , " say . " why should not a man serve the Crown ? he have to work very hard for what he earn . " " I do not believe that the most of they work at all . however , I beg you pardon . I do not mean you in particular . " " be such a thorough politician that he will never forgive you , " say . " yes , I will , " say , " and I will convert he some day . if he do come into the house , , I suppose he will come on the right side ? " " I will never go into the house , as you call it , " say . " but , I will tell you what ; I shall be very happy if you will dine with I to - morrow at 's . they give you a capital little dinner at 's , and they have the best in . " " do , " say , in a whisper . " Oblige I . " be engage to dine with one of the Vice - Chancellor on the day name . he have never before dine at the house of this great law luminary , whose acquaintance he have make through , and he have think a great deal of the occasion . have send he the invitation nearly a fortnight ago , and he understand there be to be a elaborate dinner party . he do not know it for a fact , but he be in hope of meet the expire . he consider it to be he duty never to throw away such a chance . he would in all respects have prefer 's dinner in , dull and heavy though it might probably be , to the chance of 's companion at 's . whatever might be the fault of we hero , he be not give to what be generally call dissipation by the world at large , -- by which the world mean self - indulgence . he care not a brass farthing for 's , nor for the wondrously study repast which he would doubtless find prepare for he at that celebrate establishment in 's ;-- not a farthing as compare with the chance of meet so great a man as . and 's friend might probably be just the man whom he would not desire to know . but 's request overrode everything with he . she have ask he to oblige she , and of course he would do so . have he be go
go to dine with the income , he would have put off he engagement at she request . he be not quick enough to make a answer without hesitation ; but after a moment 's pause he say he should be most happy to dine with at 's . " that be right ; 7.30 sharp ,-- only I can tell you you will not meet any other member . " then the servant announce more visitor , and escape out of the room before he be see by the new comer . these be and , and then , -- and after they , the Whip , who be in a violent hurry , and do not stay there a moment , and then and young - , the youngest son of the of . in twenty or thirty minute there be a gathering of liberal political notability in 's draw - room . there be two great piece of news by which they be all enthrall . would not be , and be -- dead . of course nothing quite positive could be know about . he be to be with the Queen at on the morrow at eleven o'clock , and it be improbable that he would tell he mind to any one before he tell it to she . but there be no doubt that he have engage " the , " -- so he be call by , -- to go down to with he , that he might be in readiness if wante . " I have learn that at home , " say , who have just hear the news from he sister , who have hear it from the Duchess . be delighted with the importance give to he by he father 's come journey . from this , and from other equally well - know circumstance , it be surmise that would decline the task propose to he . this , nevertheless , be only a surmise ,--whereas the fact with reference to be fully substantiate . the gout have flow to he stomach , and he be dead . " by ---- yes ; as dead as a herring , " say , who at that moment , however , be not within hearing of either of the ladie present . and then he rub he hand , and look as though he be delighted . and he be delighted , -- not because he old friend be dead , but by the excitement of the tragedy . " have do so good a deed in he last moment , " say , " we may take it for grant that he will go straight to heaven . " " I hope there will be no crowner be quest , , " say ; " if there be I do not know how you will get out of it . " " I do not see anything in it so horrible , " say . " if a fellow die lead he regiment we do not think anything of it . 's vote be of more service to he country than anything that a colonel or a captain can do . " but nevertheless I think that be somewhat in dread of future newspaper paragraph , should it be find necessary to summon a coroner 's inquisition to sit upon poor . while this be go on take apart for a moment . " I be so much oblige to you ; I be indeed , " she say . " what nonsense ! " " never mind whether it be nonsense or not ;-- but I be . I can not explain it all now , but I do so want you to know my brother . you may be of the greatest service to he , -- of the very greatest . he be not half so bad as people say he be . in many way he be very good , -- very good . and he be very clever . " " at any rate I will think and believe no ill of he . " " just so ; -- do not believe evil of he , -- not more evil than you see . I be so anxious , -- so very anxious to try to put he on he leg , and I find it so difficult to get any connecting link with he . will not speak with he , -- because of money . " " but he be friend with you . " " yes ; I think he love I . I see how distasteful it be to you to go to he ; -- and probably you be engage ? " " one can always get off those sort of thing if there be a object . " " yes ; -- just so . and the object be to oblige I ;-- be it not ? " " of course it be . but I must go now . we be to hear 's statement at four , and I would not miss it for worlds . " " I wonder whether you would go abroad with my brother in the autumn ? but I have no right to think of such a thing ; -- have I ? at any rate I will not think of it yet . good - bye ,-- I shall see you perhaps on if you be in town . " walk down to with he mind very full of and . what do she mean by she affectionate manner to himself , and what do she mean by the continual praise which she lavish upon ? of whom be she think most , of , or of he ? she have call herself he mentor . be the description of she feeling towards himself , as convey in that name ,
, of a kind to be gratify to he ? no ;--he think not . but then might it not be within he power to change the nature of those feeling ? she be not in love with he at present . he could not make any boast to himself on that head . but it might be within he power to compel she to love he . the female mentor might be soften . that she could not love , he think that he be quite sure . there be nothing like love in she manner to . as to , would do whatever might be in he power . all that he really know of be that he have gamble and that he have drink . the government in the House of Lords that night , and in the of , the outgoing make they explanations . as we business at the present moment be with the , we will confine ourselves to they chamber , and will do so the more willingly because the upshot of what be say in the two place be the same . the outgoing minister be very grave , very self - laudatory , and very courteous . in regard to courtesy it may be declare that no stranger to the way of the place could have understand how such soft word could be speak by , beat , so quickly after the very sharp word which he have utter when he only expect to be beat . he announce to he fellow - commoner that he right honourable friend and colleague have think it right to retire from the Treasury . , in constitutional obedience to the vote of the , have resign , and the have be graciously pleased to accept 's resignation . could only inform the house that she have signify she pleasure that should wait upon she to - morrow at eleven o'clock . , -- so ,-- would be with she to - morrow at that hour . have find it to be he duty to recommend she to send for . such be the real import of 's speech . that further portion of it in which he explain with blandest , most beneficent , honey - flow word that he party would have do everything that the country could require of any party , have the allow it to remain on the Treasury benche for a month or two , -- and explain also that he party would never recriminate , would never return evil for evil , would in no wise copy the factious opposition of they adversary ; that he party would now , as it ever have do , carry itself with the meekness of the dove , and the wisdom of the serpent , -- all this , I say , be so generally feel by gentleman on both side of the to be " leather and prunella " that very little attention be pay to it . the great point be that have resign , and that have be summon to . the have send for Mildmay in compliance with advice give to she by . and yet and he first lieutenant have use all the most practised effort of they eloquence for the last three day in endeavouring to make they countryman believe that no more unfitting than ever attempt to hold the rein of office ! nothing have be too bad for they to say of , -- and yet , in the very first moment in which they find themselves unable to carry on the government themselves , they advise the to send for that most incompetent and baneful statesman ! we who be conversant with we own method of politics , see nothing odd in this , because we be use to it ; but surely in the eyes of strangers we practice must be very singular . there be nothing like it in any other country , -- nothing as yet . nowhere else be there the same good - humoured , affectionate , prize - fight ferocity in politics . the leader of we two great party be to each other exactly as be the two champion of the ring who knock each other about for the belt and for five hundred pound a side once in every two year . how they fly at each other , strike as though each blow should carry death if it be but possible ! and yet there be no one whom the respects so highly as he do the , or with whom he have so much delight in discuss the merit of a pot of half - and - half . and so it be with and . in private life almost adulate he elder rival , -- and never omit a opportunity of take warmly by the hand . it be not so in the . there the same political enmity exist , but the political enmity produce private hatred . the leader of party there really mean what they say when they abuse each other , and be in earnest when they talk as though they be about to tear each other limb from limb . I doubt whether would have injure a hair of 's venerable head , even for a assurance of six continue month in office . when have complete he statement , simply tell the house that he have receive and would obey she 's command . the House would of course understand that he by no means mean to aver that the Queen would even commission he to form a . but if he take no such command from she it would become he duty to recommend she to impose the task upon some other person . then everything be say that have to be say , and member return to they club . a certain damp be
be throw over the joy of some excitable liberal by tiding which reach the during 's speech . be no more dead than be himself . now it be very unpleasant to find that you news be untrue , when you have be at great pain to disseminate it . " oh , but he be dead , " say . " assure I half a hour ago , " say 's opponent , " that he be at that moment a great deal better than he have be for the last three month . the journey down to the do he a world of good . " " then we will have he down for every division , " say . the political portion of be in a ferment for the next five day . on the morning it be know that have decline to put himself at the head of a liberal government . he and the of , and , have be in conference so often , and so long , that it may almost be say they liv together in conference . then have be with , -- and also . at the club it be say by many that have be with ; but it be also say very vehemently by other that no such interview have take place . be a radical , much admire by the people , sit in parliament for that most radical of all constituency , the , who have never as yet be in power . it be the great question of the day whether would or would not ask to join he ; and it be say by those who habitually think at every period of change that the time have now come in which the difficulty to form a government will at last be find to be insuperable , that could not succeed either with or without he . there be at the present moment two section of these gentleman , -- the section which declare that have send for , and the section which declare that he have not . but there be other , who perhaps know better what they be say , by whom it be assert that the whole difficulty lay with . be willing to serve with , -- with certain stipulation as to the special seat in the cabinet which he himself be to occupy , and as to the introduction of certain friend of he own ; but ,-- so say these gentleman who be suppose really to understand the matter ,-- be not willing to serve with the and with . now , everybody who know anything know that the and be indispensable to . and a liberal government , with in the opposition , could not live half through a session ! all and these thing be discuss ; and on the absolutely state to the that he have receive she Majesty 's command to form another government . , in half a dozen most modest word , -- in word hardly audible , and most unlike himself , -- make he statement in the to the same effect . then , and , and , and arouse themselves and swore that such thing could not be . should the prey which they have win for themselves , the spoil of they bow and arrow , be snatch from out of they very mouth by treachery ? and could not venture even to make another attempt unless they do so in combination with . such a combination , say , would be disgraceful to both party , but would prove to be as false as himself . Early on the morning , when it be know that have be at 's house , be free to confess that he have always be afraid of . " I have felt for year , " say he , " that if anybody could break up the party it would be . " on that morning certainly be with , but nothing come of it . be either not enough like for the occasion , or else he be too closely like he . do not bid high enough , or else do not like biddings from that quarter . nothing then come from this attempt , and on the afternoon the again send for . on the mor the gentleman who think that the insuperable difficulty have at length arrive , begin to wear they longest face , and to be triumphant with melancholy foreboding . now at last there be a dead lock . nobody could form a government . it be assert that have fall at she Majesty 's foot dissolve in tear , and have implor to be relieve from further responsibility . it be well know to many at the club that the have on that morning telegraph to for advice . there be man so gloomy as to declare that the Queen must throw herself into the arm of , unless Mildmay would consent to rise from he knee and once more buckle on he ancient armour . " even that would be better than , " say , in he anger . " I will tell you what it be , " say , " we shall have and together , and you and I shall have to do they biddings . " 's reply to that suggestion I may not dare to insert in these page . on the night , however , it be know that everything have be arrange , and before the meet on the every place have be bestow , either in reality or in imagination . the _Time _, in its second edition on the , give a list of the cabinet , in which four place out of fourteen be rightly fill . on the it name ten place aright , and indicate the law officer , with
with only one mistake in reference to ; and on the it give a list of the of , and secretaries and Vice - President generally , with wonderful correctness as to the individual , though the office be a little jumble . the government be at last form in a manner which everybody have see to be the only possible way in which a government could be form . nobody be surprised , and the week 's work be regard as though the regular routine of government make have simply be follow . be ; be at the ; be at the board of trade ; the be of the ; the of be ; and be of the . make a step up in the world , and go to the as ; be send again to the Admiralty ; and become a junior of the Treasury . be , of course , install as to the same board . be perhaps the only man in the party as to whose destination there could not possibly be a doubt . have really qualifie himself for a position in such a way as to make all man feel that he would , as a matter of course , be call upon to fill it . I do not know whether as much could be say on behalf of any other man in the new government . during all this excitement , and through all these movement , feel himself to be leave more and more out in the cold . he have not be such a fool as to suppose that any office would be offer to he . he have never hinte at such a thing to he one dearly intimate friend , . he have not hithertoo open he mouth in parliament . indeed , when the new government be form he have not be sit for above a fortnight . of course nothing could be do for he as yet . but , nevertheless , he feel himself to be out in the cold . the very man who have discuss with he the question of the division , -- who have discuss it with he because he vote be then as good as that of any other member , -- do not care to talk to he about the distribution of place . he , at any rate , could not be one of they . he , at any rate , could not be a rival . he could neither mar nor assist . he could not be either a successful or a disappointed sympathiser , -- because he could not himself be a candidate . the affair which perhaps disgust he more than anything else be the offer of a office , -- not in the cabinet , indeed , but one suppose to confer high dignity , -- to . refuse the offer , and this somewhat lessen 's disgust , but the offer itself make he unhappy . " I suppose it be make simply because of he money , " he say to . " I do not believe that , " say . " people seem to think that he have get a head on he shoulders , though he have get no tongue in it . I wonder at he refuse it because of the . " " I be so glad that refuse , " say to he . " and why ? he would have be the . for ever and ever . " Phineas when he say this do not as yet know exactly how it would have come to pass that such honour , -- the honour of the endure prefix to he name , -- would have come in the way of have accept the office in question ; but he be very quick to learn all these thing , and , in the meantime , he rarely make any mistake about they . " what would that have be to he , -- with he wealth ? " say . " he have a position of he own and need not care for such thing . there be man who should not attempt what be call independence in parliament . by do so they simply decline to make themselves useful . but there be a few whose special walk in life it be to be independent , and , as it be , unmove by party . " " great Akinetose ! you know , " say . " be not a , " say . " he hold a very proud position , " say , ironically . " a very proud position indeed , " say , in sober earnest . the dinner at 's have be eat , and have give a account of the entertainment to 's sister . there have be only two other guest , and both of they have be man on the turf . " I be the first there , " say , " and he surprise I ever so much by tell I that you have speak to he of I before . " " yes ; I do so . I wish he to know you . I want he to know some man who think of something besides horse . he be very well educate , you know , and would certainly have take honour if he have not quarrell with the people at . " " do he take a degree ? " " no ; -- they send he down . it be best always to have the truth among friend . of course you will hear it some day . they expel he because he be drink . " then burst out into tear , and sit near she , and consol she , and swore that if in any way he could befriend she brother he would
would do so . at this time claim a promise which he say that have make to he , -- that Phineas would go over with he to to assist at he re-election . and do go . the whole affair occupy but a week , and be chiefly memorable as be the means of cement the friendship which exist between the two irish member . " a thousand a year ! " say , speak of the salary of he office . " it be not much ; be it ? and every fellow to whom I owe a shilling will be down upon I . if I have study my own comfort , I should have do the same as . " it be now the middle of , and a month have elapse since the terrible difficulty about the 's government have be solve . a month have elapse , and thing have shake themselves into they place with more of ease and apparent fitness than man have give they credit for possessing . , , and be the best friend in the world , swear by each other in they own house , and support in the other by as gallant a phalanx of per as ever be get together to fight against the instinct of they own order in compliance with the instinct of those below they . 's father be in the cabinet , to 's infinite delight . it be she ambition to be bring as near to political action as be possible for a woman without surrender any of the privileges of feminine inaction . that woman should even wish to have vote at parliamentary election be to she abominable , and the cause of the rights of generally be odious to she ; but , nevertheless , for herself , she delighte in hoping that she too might be useful , -- in think that she too be perhaps , in some degree , politically powerful ; and she have receive considerable increase to such hope when she father accept the . the himself be not a ambitious man , and , but for he daughter , would have sever himself altogether from political life before this time . he be a unhappy man ; -- be a obstinate man , and have in he obstinacy quarrell with he only son . in he unhappiness he would have keep himself alone , live in the country , brood over he wretchedness , be it not for he daughter . on she behalf , and in obedience to she requirement , he come yearly up to , and , perhaps in compliance with she persuasion , have take some part in the debate of the house of Lords . it be easy for a peer to be a statesman , if the trouble of the life be not too much for he . be now a statesman , if a seat in the cabinet be proon of statesmanship . at this time , in , there be stay with in a very dear friend of hers , by name . be a orphan , a heiress , and a beauty ; with a terrible aunt , one , who be suppose to be the dragon who have , as a captive maiden , in charge . but as be of age , and be mistress of she own fortune , be , in truth , not omnipotent as a dragon should be . the dragon , at any rate , be not now stay in , and the captivity of the maiden be therefore not severe at the present moment . be very pretty , but could hardly be say to be beautiful . she be small , with light crispy hair , which seem to be ever on the flutter round she brows , and which yet be never a hair astray . she have sweet , soft grey eye , which never look at you long , hardly for a moment , -- but which yet , in that half moment , nearly kill you by the power of they sweetness . she cheek be the softest thing in nature , and the colour of it , when its colour be fix enough to be tell , be a shade of pink so faint and creamy that you would hardly dare to call it by its name . she mouth be perfect , not small enough to give that expression of silliness which be so common , but almost divine , with the temptation of its full , rich , ruby lip . she tooth , which she but seldom show , be very even and very white , and there rest on she chin the dearest dimple that ever act as a loadstar to men 's eye . the fault of she face , if it have a fault , be in she nose , -- which be a little too sharp , and perhaps too small . a woman who want to depreciate have once call she a pug -nosed puppet ; but I , as she chronicler , deny that she be pug -nosed , -- and all the world who know she soon come to understand that she be no puppet . in figure she be small , but not so small as she look to be . she foot and hand be delicately fine , and there be a softness about she whole person , a apparent compressibility , which seem to indicate that she might go into very small compass . into what compass and how compressed , there be very many man who hold very different opinion . be certainly no puppet . she be great at dancing , -- as perhaps might be a puppet , -- but she be great also at archery , great at skating , -- and great ,
, too , at hunting . with reference to that last accomplishment , she and have have more than one terrible tussle , not always with advantage to the dragon . " my dear aunt , " she have say once during the last winter , " I be go to the meet with , " -- be she cousin , , and be the dragon 's son , -- " and there , let there be a end of it . " " and you will promise I that you will not go further , " say the dragon . " I will promise nothing to - day to any man or to any woman , " say . what be to be say to a young lady who speak in this way , and who have become of age only a fortnight since ? she ride that day the famous run from 's to , and be in at the death . be now sit in conference with she friend , and they be discuss matter of high import , -- of very high import , indeed , -- to the interest of both of they . " I do not ask you to accept he , " say . " that be lucky , " say the other , " as he have never ask I . " " he have do much the same . you know that he love you . " " I know , -- or fancy that I know , -- that so many man love I ! but , after all , what sort of love be it ? it be just as when you and I , when we see something nice in a shop , call it a dear duck of a thing , and tell somebody to go and buy it , let the price be ever so extravagant . I know my own position , . I be a dear duck of a thing . " " you be a very dear thing to . " " but you , , will some day inspire a grand passion , -- or I daresay have already , for you be a great deal too close to tell ; -- and then there will be cut of throat , and a mighty hubbub , and a real tragedy . I shall never go beyond genteel comedy ,--unless I run away with somebody beneath I , or do something awfully improper . " " do not do that , dear . " " I should like to , because of my aunt . I should indeed . if it be possible , without compromise myself , I should like she to be tell some morning that I have go off with the curate . " " how can you be so wicked , ! " " it would serve she right , and she countenance would be so awfully comic . mind , if it be ever to come off , I must be there to see it . I know what she would say as well as possible . she would turn to poor . ' , ' she would say , 'i always expect it . I always do . ' then I should come out and curtsey to she , and say so prettily , ' dear aunt , it be only we little joke . ' that be my line . but for you , -- you , if you plan it , would go off to - morrow with himself if you like he . " " but fail , I shall probably be very humdrum . " " you do not mean that there be anything settle , ? " " there be nothing settle , -- or any beginning of anything that ever can be settle , but I be not talk about myself . he have tell I that if you will accept he , he will do anything that you and I may ask he . " " yes ; -- he will promise . " " do you ever know he to break he word ? " " I know nothing about he , my dear . how wshould I ? " " do not pretend to be ignorant and meek , . you do know he , -- much better than most girl know the man they marry . you have know he , more or less intimately , all you life . " " but be I bound to marry he because of that accident ? " " no ; you be not bound to marry he ,-- unless you love he . " " I do not love he , " say , with slow , emphatic word , and a little forward motion of she face , as though she be specially eager to convince she friend that she be quite in earnest in what she say . " I fancy , Violet , that you be nearer to love he than any other man . " " I be not at all near to love any man . I doubt whether I ever shall be . it do not seem to I to be possible to myself to be what girl call in love . I can like a man . I do like , perhaps , half a dozen . I like they so much that if I go to a house or to a party it be quite a matter of importance to I whether this man or that will or will not be there . and then I suppose I flirt with they . at least tell I that my aunt say that I do . but as for care about any one of they in the way of love he , -- want to marry he , and have he all to
to myself , and that sort of thing ,-- I do not know what it mean . " " but you intend to be marry some day , " say . " certainly I do . and I do not intend to wait very much longer . I be heartily tired of , and though I can generally escape among my friend , that be not sufficient . I be begin to think that it would be pleasant to have a house of my own . a girl become such a Bohemian when she be always go about , and do not quite know where any of she thing be . " then there be a silence between they for a few minute . be double up in a corner of a sofa , with she foot tuck under she , and she face recline upon one of she shoulders . and as she talk she be play with a little toy which be construct to take various shape as it be flng this way or that . a bystander look at she would have think that the toy be much more to she than the conversation . be sit upright , in a common chair , at a table not far from she companion , and be manifestly devote herself altogether to the subject that be be discuss between they . she have take no lounging , easy attitude , she have find no employment for she finger , and she look steadily at as she talk ,--whereas be look only at the little manikin which she toss . and now get up and come to the sofa , and sit close to she friend . Violet , though she somewhat move one foot , so as to seem to make room for the other , still go on with she play . " if you do marry , , you must choose some one man out of the lot . " " that be quite true , my dear , I certainly can not marry they all . " " and how do you mean to make the choice ? " " I do not know . I suppose I shall toss up . " " I wish you would be in earnest with I . " " well ;-- I will be in earnest . I shall take the first that come after I have quite make up my mind . you will think it very horrible , but that be really what I shall do . after all , a husband be very much like a house or a horse . you do not take you house because it be the best house in the world , but because just then you want a house . you go and see a house , and if it be very nasty you do not take it . but if you think it will suit pretty well , and if you be tired of look about for house , you do take it . that be the way one buy one 's horse , -- and one be husband . " " and you have not make up you mind yet ? " " not quite . be a little more decent than usual just before I leave . when I tell she that I mean to have a pair of pony , she merely throw up she hand and grunt . she do not gnash she tooth , and curse and swear , and declare to I that I be a child of perdition . " " what do you mean by cursing and swear ? " " she tell I once that if I buy a certain little dog , it would lead to my be everlastingly -- you know what . she be not so squeamish as I be , and say it out . " " what do you do ? " " I buy the little dog , and it bit my aunt 's heel . I be very sorry then , and give the creature to . he be such a beauty ! I hope the perdition have go with he , for I do not like at all . I have to give the poor beasty to somebody , and happen to be there . I tell she that be connect with , but she do not mind that . Puck be worth twenty guinea , and I daresay she have sell he . " " may have a equal chance then among the other favourite ? " say , after another pause . " there be no favourite , and I will not say that any man may have a chance . why do you press I about you brother in this way ? " " because I be so anxious . because it would save he . because you be the only woman for whom he have ever care , and because he love you with all he heart ; and because he father would be reconcile to he to - morrow if he hear that you and he be engage . " " , my dear -- " " well . " " you will not be angry if I speak out ? " " certainly not . after what I have say , you have a right to speak out . " " it seem to I that all you reason be reason why he should marry I ;-- not reason why I should marry he . " " be not he love for you a reason ? " " no , " say , pause , -- and speak the word in the lowest possible whisper . " if he do not love I , that , if know to I , should be a reason why I should not marry he . ten man may love I
I ,-- I do not say that any man do -- " " he do . " " but I can not marry all the ten . and as for that business of save he -- " " you know what i mean ! " " I do not know that I have any special mission for save young man . I sometimes think that I shall have quite enough to do to save myself . it be strange what a propensity I feel for the wrong side of the post . " " I feel the strongest assurance that you will always keep on the right side . " " thank you , my dear . I mean to try , but I be quite sure that the jockey who take I in hand ought to be very steady himself . now , -- " " well , -- out with it . what have you to say ? " " he do not bear the best reputation in this world as a steady man . be he altogether the sort of man that mamma of the best kind be seek for they daughter ? I like a roue myself ; -- and a prig who sit all night in the house , and talk about nothing but church - rate and suffrage , be to I intolerable . I prefer men who be improper , and all that sort of thing . if I be a man myself I should go in for everything I ought to leave alone . I know I should . but you see , -- I be not a man , and I must take care of myself . the wrong side of a post for a woman be so very much the wrong side . I like a fast man , but I know that I must not dare to marry the sort of man that I like . " " to be one of we , then , -- the very first among we ;--would that be the wrong side ? " " you mean that to be in the present tense , and in the future , would be promotion for in the past ? " " how hard you be , ! " " fancy , -- that it should come to this , -- that you should call I hard , . I should like to be you sister . I should like well enough to be you father 's daughter . I should like well enough to be 's friend . I be he friend . Nothe that any one have ever say of he have estrange I from he . I have fight for he till I have be black in the face . yes , I have , -- with my aunt . but I be afraid to be he wife . the risk would be so great . suppose that I do not save he , but that he bring I to shipwreck instead ? " " that could not be ! " " could it not ? I think it might be so very well . when I be a child they use to be always tell I to mind myself . it seem to I that a child and a man need not mind themselves . let they do what they may , they can be set right again . let they fall as they will , you can put they on they foot . but a woman have to mind herself ; -- and very hard work it be when she have a dragon of she own drive she ever the wrong way . " " I want to take you from the dragon . " " yes ; -- and to hand I over to a griffin . " " the truth be , Violet , that you do not know . he be not a griffin . " " I do not mean to be uncomplimentary . take any of the dangerous wild beasts you please . I merely intend to point out that he be a dangerous wild beast . I daresay he be noble - minded , and I will call he a lion if you like it better . but even with a lion there be risk . " " of course there will be risk . there be risk with every man ,-- unless you will be contente with the prig you describe . of course there would be risk with my brother . he have be a gambler . " " they say he be one still . " " he have give it up in part , and would entirely at you instance . " " and they say other thing of he , . " " it be true . he have have paroxysm of evil life which have well - nigh ruin he . " " and these paroxysm be so dangerous ! be he not in debt ? " " he be , -- but not deeply . every shilling that he owe would be pay ;--every shilling . mind , I know all he circumstance , and I give you my word that every shilling should be pay . he have never lie , -- and he have tell I everything . he father could not leave a acre away from he if he would , and would not if he could . " " I do not ask as fear that . I speak only of a dangerous habit . a paroxysm of spending money be apt to make one so uncomfortable . and then -- " " well . " " I do not know why I should make a catalogue of you brother 's weakness . " " you mean to say that he drink too much ? " " I do not say so . people
people say so . the dragon say so . and as I always find she saying to be untrue , I suppose this be like the rest of they . " " it be untrue if it be say of he as a habit . " " it be another paroxysm , -- just now and then . " " do not laugh at I , Violet , when I be take he part , or I shall be offend . " " but you see , if I be to be he wife , it be -- rather important . " " still you need not ridicule I . " " dear , you know I do not ridicule you . you know I love you for what you be do . would not I do the same , and fight for he down to my nails if I have a brother ? " " and therefore I want you to be 's wife ; -- because I know that you would fight for he . it be not true that he be a -- drunkard . look at he hand , which be as steady as yours . look at he eye . be there a sign of it ? he have be drink , once or twice , perhaps , -- and have do fearful thing . " " it might be that he would do fearful thing to I . " " you never know a man with a softer heart or with a finer spirit . I believe as I sit here that if he be marry to - morrow , he vice would fall from he like old clothes . " " you will admit , , that there will be some risk for the wife . " " of course there will be a risk . be there not always a risk ? " " the man in the city would call this double - dangerous , I think , " say . then the door be open , and the man of whom they be speak enter the room . the reader have be tell that be a red man , and that peculiarity of he personal appearance be certainly the first to strike a stranger . it impart a certain look of ferocity to he , which be apt to make man afraid of he at first sight . woman be not actuate in the same way , and be accustom to look deeper into man at the first sight than other man will trouble themselves to do . he beard be red , and be clipped , so as to have none of the softness of waving hair . the hair on he head also be keep short , and be very red , -- and the colour of he face be red . nevertheless he be a handsome man , with well - cut feature , not tall , but very strongly build , and with a certain curl in the corner of he eyelid which give to he a look of resolution , -- which perhaps he do not possess . he be know to be a clever man , and when very young have have the reputation of be a scholar . when he be three - and - twenty grey - haire votary of the turf declare that he would make he fortune on the race - course , -- so clear - heade be he as to odd , so excellent a judge of a horse 's performance , and so gif with a memory of event . when he be five - and - twenty he have lose every shilling of a fortune of he own , have squeeze from he father more than he father ever choose to name in speaking of he affair to any one , and be know to be in debt . but he have sacrifice himself on one or two memorable occasion in conformity with turf law of honour , and man say of he , either that he be very honest or very chivalric , -- in accordance with the special view on the subject of the man who be speak . it be report now that he no longer own horse on the turf ; -- but this be doubt by some who could name the animal which they say that he own , and which he run in the name of , -- say some ; of , -- say other ; of ,--say a third set of informant . the fact be that at this moment have no interest of he own in any horse upon the turf . but all the world know that he drank . he have take by the throat a proctor 's bull - dog when he have be drink at , have nearly strangle the man , and have be expel . he have fall through he violence into some terrible misfortune at , have be bring before a public judge , and he name and he infamy have be make notorious in every newspaper in the two capital . after that he have fight a ruffian at , and have really kill he with he fists . in reference to this latter affray it have be prove that the attack have be make on he , that he have not be to blame , and that he have not be drink . after a prolonge investigation he have come forth from that affair without disgrace . he would have do so , at least , if he have not be heretofore disgrace . but we all know how the man well speak of may steal a horse , while he who be of evil repute may not look over a hedge . it be assert widely by many who be suppose to know all about everything that be
be in a fit of delirium tremen when he kill the ruffian at . the worst of that latter affair be that it produce the total estrangement which now exist between and he son . would not believe that he son be in that matter more sinn against than sinning . " such thing do not happen to other man 's son , " he say , when plead for she brother . could not induce she father to see he son , but so far prevail that no sentence of banishment be pronounce against . there be nothing to prevent the son sit at he father 's table if he so pleased . he never do so please , -- but nevertheless he continue to live in the house in ; and when he meet the , in the hall , perhaps , or on the staircase , would simply bow to he . then the would bow again , and shuffle on , -- and look very wretched , as no doubt he be . a grow - up son must be the greatest comfort a man can have , -- if he be he father 's best friend ; but otherwise he can hardly be a comfort . as it be in this house , the son be a constant thorn in he father 's side . " what do he do when we leave ? " once say to he daughter . " he stay here , papa . " " but he hunt still ? " " yes , he hunt , -- and he have a room somewhere at a inn , -- down in . but he be mostly in . they have train on purpose . " " what a life for my son ! " say the . " what a life ! of course no decent person will let he into he house . " do not know what to say to this , for in truth be not fond of stay at the house of person whom the would have call decent . , the father of , and have be the closest and dearest of friend . they have be young man in the same regiment , and through life each have confide in the other . when the general 's only son , then a youth of seventeen , be kill in one of we grand wars , the bereaved father and the have be together for a month in they sorrow . at that time 's career have still be open to hope , -- and the one man have contrast he lot with the other . live long enough to hear the declare that he lot be the happier of the two . now the general be dead , and , the daughter of a second wife , be all that be leave of the . this second wife have be a , a lady from the city with much money , whose sister have marry . Violet in this way have fall to the care of the people , and not into the hand of she father 's friend . but , as the reader will have surmise , she have idea of she own of emancipat herself from . twice before that last terrible affair at , before the quarrel between the father and the son have be complete , have say a word to he daughter ,-- merely a word , -- of he son in connection with . " if he think of it I shall be glad to see he on the subject . you may tell he so . " that have be the first word . he have just then resolve that the affair in should be regard as condone , -- as among the thing to be forgote . " she be too good for he ; but if he ask she let he tell she everything . " that have be the second word , and have be speak immediately subsequent to a payment of twelve thousand pound make by the towards the settlement of certain Doncaster account . in negotiate for the money have be very eloquent in describe some honest , -- or shall we say chivalric , -- sacrifice which have bring she brother into this special difficulty . since that the have decline to interest himself in he son 's matrimonial affair ; and when have once again mention the matter , declare she belief that it would be the means of save she brother , the have desire she to be silent . " would you wish to destroy the poor child ? " he have say . nevertheless feel sure that if she be to go to she father with a positive statement that and be engage , he would relent and would accept as he daughter . as for the payment of 's present debt ; -- she have a little scheme of she own about that . , who have be already two day in , have not as yet see . she know that he live in the house , that be , that he sleep there , and probably eat he breakfast in some apartment of he own ; -- but she know also that the habits of the house would not by any means make it necessary that they should meet . and she brother probably see each other daily , -- but they never go into society together , and do not know the same set of people . when she have announce to she intention of spend the first fortnight of she season with she friend , have as a matter of course -- " jump upon she , " as would herself call it . " you be go to the house of the worst reprobate in all , " say . "
" what ; --dear old , whom papa love so well ! " " I mean , who , only last year ,-- murder a man ! " " that be not true , aunt . " " there be worse than that ,-- much worse . he be always -- tipsy , and always gambl , and always -- but it be quite unfit that I should speak a word more to you about such a man as . he name ought never to be mention . " " then why do you mention it , aunt ? " 's process of jump upon she niece , -- in which I think the aunt have generally the worst of the exercise , -- go on for some time , but of course carry she point . " if she marry he there will be a end of everything , " say to she daughter . " she have more sense than that , mamma , " say . " I do not think she have any sense at all , " say ; --" not in the least . I do wish my poor sister have liv ;-- I do indeed . " be now in the room with , -- immediately upon that conversation between and he sister as to the expediency of become he wife . indeed he entrance have interrupt the conversation before it be over . " I be so glad to see you , , " he say . " I come in think that I might find you . " " here I be , as large as life , " she say , get up from she corner on the sofa and give he she hand . " and I have be discuss the affair of the nation for the last two day , and have nearly bring we discussion to a end . " she could not help look , first at he eye and then at he hand , not as want evidence to the truth of the statement which he sister have make , but because the idea of a drunkard 's eye and a drunkard 's hand have be bring before she mind . 's hand be like the hand of any other man , but there be something in he eye that almost frightene she . it look as though he would not hesitate to wr he wife 's neck round , if ever he should be bring to threat to do so . and then he eye , like the rest of he , be red . no ;--she do not think that she could ever bring herself to marry he . why take a venture that be double - dangerous , when there be so many venture open to she , apparently with very little of danger attach to they ? " if it should ever be say that I love he , I would do it all the same , " she say to herself . " if I do not come and see you here , I suppose that I should never see you , " say he , seat himself . " I do not often go to party , and when I do you be not likely to be there . " " we might make we little arrangement for meeting , " say she , laugh . " my aunt , , be go to have a evening next week . " " the servant would be order to put I out of the house . " " oh no . you can tell she that I invite you . " " I do not think that and be great friend , " say . " or he might come and take you and I to the on . that be the proper sort of thing for a brother and a friend to do . " " I hate that place in the 's , " say . " when be you there last ? " demand . " when I come home once from . but I will not go again till I can come home from again . " then he alter he tone as he continue to speak . " people would look at I as if I be the wildest beast in the whole collection . " " then , " say , " if you will not go to 's or to the , we must confine ourselves to 's drawing - room ;--unless , indeed , you like to take I to the top of the Monument . " " I will take you to the top of the Monument with pleasure . " " what do you say , ? " " I say that you be a foolish girl , " say , " and that I will have nothing to do with such a scheme . " " then there be nothing for it but that you should come here ; and as you live in the house , and as I be sure to be here every morning , and as you have no possible occupation for you time , and as we have nothing particular to do with ours ,-- I daresay I sha not see you again before I go to my aunt 's in . " " very likely not , " he say . " and why not , ? " ask he sister . he pass he hand over he face before he answer she . " because she and I run in different groove now , and be not such meet playfellow as we use to be once . do you remember my take you away right through once on the old pony , and not bring you back till tea - time , and go and tell my father ? " " do I
I remember it ? I think it be the happiest day in my life . he pockets be cramm full of gingerbread and toffy , and we have three bottle of lemonade slung on to the pony 's saddlebow . I think it be a pity that we should ever come back . " " it be a pity , " say . " but , nevertheless , substantially necessary , " say . " fail we power of reproduce the toffy , I suppose it be , " say . " you be not then , " say . " no , -- not as yet . these disagreeable reality of life grow upon one ; do they not ? you take off my shoe and dry they for I at a woodman 's cottage . I be oblige to put up with my maid 's do those thing now . and the mild be change for the martinet . and if I ride about with you in a wood all day I should be send to instead of to bed . and so you see everything be change as well as my name . " " everything be not change , " say , get up from he seat . " I be not change , -- at least not in this , that as I love you better than any being in the world , -- better even than there , -- so do I love you now infinitely the best of all . do not look so surprised at I . you know it before as well as you do now ;-- and know it . there be no secret to be keep in the matter among we three . " " but , , -- " say , rise also to she foot , and then pause , not know how to answer he . there have be a suddenness in he mode of address she which have , so to say , almost take away she breath ; and then to be tell by a man of he love before he sister be in itself , to she , a matter so surprising , that none of those word come at she command which will come , as though by instinct , to yoing lady on such occasion . " you have know it always , " say he , as though he be angry with she . " , " she reply , " you must excuse I if I say that you be , at the least , very abrupt . I do not think when I be go back so joyfully to we childish day that you would turn the table on I in this way . " " he have say nothing that ought to make you angry , " say . " only because he have drive I to say that which will make I appear to be uncivil to himself . , I do not love you with that love of which you be speak now . as a old friend I have always regard you , and I hope that I may always do so . " then she get up and leave the room . " why be you so sudden with she , -- so abrupt , -- so loud ? " say he sister , come up to he and take he by the arm almost in anger . " it would make no difference , " say he . " she do not care for I . " " it make all the difference in the world , " say . " such a woman as can not be have after that fashion . you must begin again . " " I have begin and end , " he say . " that be nonsense . of course you will persist . it be madness to speak in that way to - day . you may be sure of this , however , that there be no one she like better than you . you must remember that you have do much to make any girl afraid of you . " " I do remember it . " " do something now to make she fear you no longer . speak to she softly . tell she of the sort of life which you would live with she . tell she that all be change . as she come to love you , she will believe you when she would believe no one else on that matter . " " be I to tell she a lie ? " say , look he sister full in the face . then he turn upon he heel and leave she . the session go on very calmly after the opening battle which oust and send back to the Treasury , -- so calmly that be unconsciously disappointed , as lack that excitement of contest to which he have be introduce in the first day of he parliamentary career . from time to time certain waspish attack be make by , now on this Secretary of and now on that ; but they be feel by both party to mean nothing ; and as no great measure be bring forward , nothing which would serve by the magnitude of its interest to divide the liberal side of the house into fraction , 's be allow to hold its own in comparative peace and quiet . it be now , -- the middle of , -- and the member for have not yet address the House . how often have he meditate do so ; how he have compose he speech walk round the on he way down to the house ; how he get he subjects up , -- only to find on hearing they discuss that he really know little or nothing about they ; how
how he have he argument and almost he very word take out of he mouth by some other member ; and lastly , how he have actually be deter from get upon he leg by a certain tremor of blood round he heart when the moment for rising have come , -- of all this he never say a word to any man . since that last journey to county , have be he most intimate friend , but he say nothing of all even to . to he other friend , , he do explain something of he feeling , not absolutely describe to she the extent of hindrance to which he modesty have subject he , but let she know that he have he qualm as well as he aspiration . but as always recommend patience , and more than once express she opinion that a young member would be better to sit in silence at least for one session , he be not drive to the mortification of feeling that he be incurr she contempt by he bashfulness . as regard the man among whom he liv , I think he be almost annoyed at find that no one seem to expect that he should speak . , when he have first talk of send down to , have predict for he all manner of parliamentary success , and have express the warmest admiration of the manner in which have discuss this or that subject at the union . " we have not above one or two man in the who can do that kind of thing , " have once say . but now no allusion whatever be make to he power of speech , and in he modest moment begin to be more amazed than ever that he should find himself seat in that chamber . to the form and technicality of parliamentary business he do give close attention , and be unremitting in he attendance . on one or two occasion he venture to ask a question of the speaker , and as the word of experience fall into he ear , he would tell himself that he be go through he education , -- that he be learn to be a work member , and perhaps to be a statesman . but he regrets with reference to and the dingy chamber in be very frequent ; and have it be possible for he to undo all that he have do , he would often have abandon to some one else the honour of represent the elector of . but he be support in all he difficulty by the kindness of he friend , . he be often in the house in , and be always receive with cordiality , and , as he think , almost with affection . she would sit and talk to he , sometimes say a word about she brother and sometimes about she father , as though there be more between they than the casual intimacy of acquaintance . and in he have be introduce to , and have find to be -- very nice . have quite take to he , and he have dance with she at two or three party , talk always , as he do so , about . " I declare , , I think you friend be in love with you , " say to one night . " I do not think that . he be fond of I , and so be I of he . he be so honest , and so naive without be awkward ! and then he be undoubtedly clever . " " and so uncommonly handsome , " say . " I do not know that that make much difference , " say . " I think it do if a man look like a gentleman as well . " " certainly look like a gentleman , " say . " and no doubt be one , " say . " I wonder whether he have get any money . " " not a penny , I should say . " " how do such a man manage to live ? there be so many man like that , and they be always mystery to I . I suppose he will have to marry a heiress . " " whoever get he will not have a bad husband , " say . Phinea during the summer have very often meet . they sit on the same side of the house , they belong to the same club , they dine together more than once in , and on one occasion have accept a invitation to dinner send to he by himself . " a slower affair I never see in my life , " he say afterwards to . " though there be two or three man there who talk everywhere else , they could not talk at he table . " " he give you good wine , I should say , " say , " and let I tell you that that cover a multitude of sins . " in spite , however , of all these opportunity for intimacy , now , nearly at the end of the session , Phineas have hardly speak a dozen word to , and really know nothing whatsoever of the man , as one friend , -- or even as one acquaintance know another . have desire he to be on good term with , and for that reason he have dine with he . nevertheless he dislike , and feel quite sure that dislike he . he be therefore rather surprise when he receive the follow note :-- , 3 , 17 , 186 --. my , I shall have some friend at next month , and should be very glad if you will join we . I will name the . I do not
not know whether you shoot , but there be grouse and deer . yours truly , . what be he to do ? he have already begin to feel rather uncomfortable at the prospect of be separate from all he new friend as soon as the session should be over . have ask he to make another visit to county , but that he have decline . have say something to he about go abroad with she brother , and since that there have spring up a sort of intimacy between he and ; but nothing have be fix about this foreign trip , and there be pecuniary objection to it which put it almost out of he power . the holiday he would of course pass with he family at , but he hardly like the idea of hurrie off to immediately the session should be over . everybody around he seem to be look forward to pleasant leisure doings in the country . talk about grouse , and of the ladie at the house to which they be go and of the people whom they be to meet . have say nothing of she own movement for the early autumn , and no invitation have come to he to go to the 's country house . he have already feel that every one would depart and that he would be leave , -- and this have make he uncomfortable . what be he to do with the invitation from ? he dislike the man , and have tell himself half a dozen time that he despise he . of course he must refuse it . even for the sake of the scenery , and the grouse , and the pleasant party , and the feeling that go to in would be the proper sort of thing to do , he must refuse it ! but it occur to he at last that he would call in before he write he note . " of course you will go , " say , in she most decide tone . " and why ? " " in the first place it be civil in he to ask you , and why should you be uncivil in return ? " " there be nothing uncivil in not accept a man 's invitation , " say . " we be go , " say , " and I can only say that I shall be disappoint if you do not go too . both and will be there , and I believe they have never stay together in the same house before . I have no doubt there be a dozen man on you side of the who would give they eye to be there . of course you will go . " of course he do go . the note accept 's invitation be write at the within a quarter of a hour of he leave . he be very careful in write to be not more familiar or more civil than have be to himself , and then he sign himself " yours truly , . " but another proposition be make to he , and a most charming proposition , during the few minute that he remain in . " I be so glad , " say , " because I can now ask you to run down to we at for a couple of day on you way to . till this be fix I could not ask you to come all the way to Saulsby for two day ; and there will not be room for more between we leave and start to . " swore that he would have go if it have be but for one hour , and if have be twice the distance . " very well ; come on the 13th and go on the 15th . you must go on the 15th , unless you choose to stay with the housekeeper . and remember , , we have get no grouse at . " declare that he do not care a straw for grouse . there be another little occurrence which happen before leave , and which be not altogether so charme as he prospect at and . Early in , when the session be still incomplete , he dine with at the . Laurence have specially invite he to do so , and make very much of he on the occasion . " by , my dear fellow , " say to he that morning , " nothing have happene to I this session that have give I so much pleasure as you be in the house . of course there be fellow with whom one be very intimate and of whom one be very fond , -- and all that sort of thing . but most of these on we side be such cold fellow ; or else they be like and , think of nothing but politics . and then as to we own man , there be so many of they one can hardly trust ! that be the truth of it . you be in the house have be such a comfort to I ! " , who really like he friend , express himself very warmly in answer to this , and become affectionate , and make sundry protestation of friendship which be perfectly sincere . they sincerity be test after dinner , when , as they two be seat on a sofa in the corner of the smoking - room , ask to put he name to the back of a bill for two hundred and fifty pound at six month ' date . " but , my dear Laurence , " say , " two hundred and fifty pound be a sum of money utterly beyond my reach . " " exactly , my dear boy , and that be why I have come
come to you . D'ye think I would have ask anybody who by any impossibility might have be make to pay anything for I ? " " but what be the use of it then ? " " all the use in the world . it be for I to judge of the use , you know . why , would 'ye think I would ask it if it be not any use ? I will make it of use , my boy . and take my word , you will never hear about it again . it be just a forestalling of my salary ; that be all . I would not do it till I see that we be at least safe for six month to come . " then Phineas Finn with many misgiving , with much inward hatred of himself for he own weakness , do put he name on the back of the bill which have prepare for he signature . " so you will not come to again ? " say to he friend . " not this autumn , . you father would think that I want to live there . " " , it be my father would be glad to see you , -- and the oftener the better . " " the fact be , my time be fill up . " " you be not go to be one of the party at ? " " I believe I be . ask I , and people seem to think that everybody be to do what he bid they . " " I should think so too . I wish he have ask I . I should have think it as good as a promise of a under - secretaryship . all the cabinet be to be there . I do not suppose he ever have a in he house before . when do you start ? " " well ; -- on the 12th or 13th . I believe I shall go to on my way . " " the you will . upon my word , , my boy , you be the luckiest fellow I know . this be you first year , and you be ask to the two most difficult house in . you have only to look out for a heiress now . there be little ; -- she be sure to be at . good - bye , old fellow . do not you be in the least unhappy about the bill . I will see to make that all right . " be rather unhappy about the bill ; but there be so much that be pleasant in he cup at the present moment , that he resolve , as far as possible , to ignore the bitter of that one ingredient . he be a little in the dark as to two or three matter respecte these come visit . he would have like to have take a servant with he ; but he have no servant , and felt asham to hire one for the occasion . and then he be in trouble about a gun , and the paraphernalia of shooting . he be not a bad shot at snipe in the bog of county , but he have never even see a gun use in . however , he buy himself a gun , -- with other paraphernalia , and take a license for himself , and then groan over the expense to which he find that he journey would subject he . and at last he hire a servant for the occasion . he be intensely asham of himself when he have do so , hate himself , and tell himself that he be go to the headlong . and why have he do it ? not that would like he the better , or that she would care whether he have a servant or not . she probably would know nothing of he servant . but the people about she would know , and he be foolishly anxious that the people about she should think that he be worthy of she . then he call on low before he start . " I do not like to leave without see you , " he say ; " but I know you will have nothing pleasant to say to I . " " I shall say nothing unpleasant certainly . I see you name in the division , and I feel a sort of envy myself . " " any fool could go into a lobby , " say . " to tell you the truth , I have be gratify to see that you have have the patience to abstain from speaking till you have look about you . it be more than I expect from you hot irish blood . go to meet and , -- be you ? well , I hope you may meet they in the cabinet some day . mind you come and see I when parliament meet in . " be delighte when she find that have hire a servant ; but predict nothing but evil from so avain a expense . " do not tell I ; where be it to come from ? he be not know richer because he be in parliament . there be not no wage . and , " -- whereby , I fear , mean empty , -- " be pretty much alike when a man have not a fortune at he back . " " but he be go to stay with all the lord in the cabinet , " say , to whom , in he pride , have confide perhaps more than be necessary . " cabinet , indeed , " say ; " if he would stick to chamber , and let alone cabinet , he would do a deal
deal better . give up he room , have he ,-- till ? he do not expect we be go to keep they empty for he ! " find that the house be full at , although the sojourn of the visitor would necessarily be so short . there be three or four there on they way on to , like himself ,-- and , with , the Chancellor of the , and he wife , -- and there be , who , however , be not go to . " no , indeed , " she say to we hero , who on the first evening have the pleasure of take she in to dinner , " unfortunately I have not a seat in parliament , and therefore I be not ask . " " be go . " " yes ; -- but have a in she keeping . I have only one comfort ;-- you will be awfully dull . " " I daresay it would be very much nicer to stay here , " say . " if you want to know my real mind , " say , " I would give one of my little finger to go . there will be four in the house , and four un - cabinet ministers , and half a dozen other member of parliament , and there will be , who be the best fun in the world ; and , in point of fact , it be the thing of the year . but I be not ask . you see I belong to the Baldock faction , and we do not sit on you side of the house . think that I should tell secret . " why on earth have invite he , , to meet four and ? he could only have do so at the instance of . it be delightful for to think that care for he so deeply ; but it be not equally delightful when he remember how very close must be the alliance between and , when she be thus powerful with he . at do not see much of he hostess . when they be make they plan for the one entire day of this visit , she say a soft word of apology to he . " I be so busy with all these people , that I hardly know what I be do . but we shall be able to find a quiet minute or two at ,-- unless , indeed , you intend to be on the mountain all day . I suppose you have bring a gun like everybody else ? " " yes ;-- I have bring a gun . I do shoot ; but I be not a inveterate sportsman . " on that one day there be a great riding party make up , and find himself mount , after luncheon , with some dozen other equestrian . among they be and , and the of himself . , whose husband be , as have be say , of the , and who be still a young woman , and a very pretty woman , have take lately very strongly to politics , which she discuss among man and woman of both party with something more than ordinary audacity . " what a nice , happy , lazy time you have have of it since you have be in , " say she to the . " I hope we have be more happy than lazy , " say the . " but you have do nothing . have twenty scheme of reform , all mature ; but among you you have not let he bring in one of they . the and and you will break he heart among you . " " poor ! " " the truth be , if you do not take care he and and will arise and shake themselves , and turn you all out . " " we must look to ourselves , . " " indeed , yes ; -- or you will be know to all posterity as the faineant government . " " let I tell you , , that a faineant government be not the worst government that can have . it have be the great fault of we politician that they have all want to do something . " " be at any rate innocent of that charge , " say . they be now ride through a vast wood , and find himself delightfully establish by the side of . " have be explain to I that he must have nineteen next session . now , if I be you , , I would decline to be count up in that way as one of 's sheep . " " but what be I to do ? " " do something on you own hook . you man in parliament be so much like sheep ! if one jump at a gap , all go after he , -- and then you be penn into lobbie , and then you be feed , and then you be fleece . I wish I be in parliament . I would get up in the middle and make such a speech . you all seem to I to be so much afraid of one another that you do not quite dare to speak out . do you see that cottage there ? " " what a pretty cottage it be ! " " yes ; -- be it not ? twelve year ago I take off my shoe and stocking and have they dry in that cottage , and when I get back to the house I be put to be for have be out all day in the wood . " " be you wander about alone ? " " no , I be not alone . be
be with I . we be child then . do you know he ? " " ; -- yes , I know he . he and I have be rather friend this year . " " he be very good ; -- be he not ? " " good , -- in what way ? " " Honest and generous ! " " I know no man whom I believe to be more so . " " and he be clever ? " ask . " very clever . that be , he talk very well if you will let he talk after he own fashion . you would always fancy that he be go to eat you ; -- but that be he way . " " and you like he ? " " very much . " " I be so glad to hear you say so . " " be he a favourite of yours , ? " " not now , -- not particularly . I hardly ever see he . but he sister be the best friend I have , and I use to like he so much when he be a boy ! I have not see that cottage since that day , and I remember it as though it be yesterday . be quite change , be he not ? " " change , -- in what way ? " " they use to say that he be -- unsteady you know . " " I think he be change . but be at heart a Bohemian . it be impossible not to see that at once . he hate the decency of life . " " I suppose he do , " say . " he ought to marry . if he be marry , that would all be cure ; -- do not you think so ? " " I can not fancy he with a wife , " say , " there be a savagery about he which would make he a uncomfortable companion for a woman . " " but he would love he wife ? " " yes , as he do he horse . and he would treat she well , -- as he do he horse . but he expect every horse he have to do anything that any horse can do ; and he would expect the same of he wife . " Phineas have no idea how deep a injury he might be do he friend by this description , nor do it once occur to he that he companion be think of herself as the possible wife of this red indian . ride on in silence for some distance , and then she say but one word more about . " he be so good to I in that cottage . " on the follow day the party at be break up , and there be a regular pilgrimage towards . Phineas resolve upon sleep a night at on he way , and he find himself join in the bands of close companionship with for the occasion . the evening be by no means throw away , for he learn much of he trade from . and be hear to declare afterwards at that be a pleasant young man . it soon come to be admit by all who know that he have a peculiar power of make himself agreeable which no one know how to analyse or define . " I think it be because he listen so well , " say one man . " but the woman would not like he for that , " say another . " he have study when to listen and when to talk , " say a third . the truth , however , be , that have make no study in the matter at all . it be simply he nature to be pleasant . reach together with in a post -chaise from the neighbour town . , who have do this kind of thing very often before , travel without impediment , but the new servant of we hero be stick outside with the driver , and be in the way . " I never bring a man with I , " say to he young friend . " the servant of the house like it much better , because they get fee ' ; you be just as well wait on , and it do not cost half as much . " Phineas blush as he hear all this ; but there be the impediment , not to be get rid of for the nonce , and Phineas make the best of he attendant . " it be one of those point , " say he , " as to which a man never quite make up he mind . if you bring a fellow , you wish you have not bring he ; and if you do not , you wish you have . " " I be a great deal more decide in my way that that , " say . , as they approach it , see to to be a much finer place than . and so it be , except that want that graceful beauty of age which possess . Loughlinter be all of cut stone , but the stone have be cut only yesterday . it stand on a gentle slope , with a greensward fal from the front entrance down to a mountain lake . and on the other side of the there rise a mighty mountain to the sky , . at the foot of it , and all round to the left , there run the wood of , stretch for mile through crag and bog and mountain lands . no better ground for deer than the side of be there in all those highland . and the Linter , rush down into
into the Lough through rock which , in some place , almost meet together above its water , run so near to the house that the pleasant noise of its cataract could be hear from the hall door . behind the house the expanse of drain park land seem to be interminable ; and then , again , come the mountain . there be and ; -- and the whole territory belong to . he be laird of and laird of , as he people use to say . and yet he father have walk into as a little boy , -- no doubt with the normal half - crown in he breech pocket . " magnificent ; -- be it not ? " say Phineas to the , as they be be drive up to the door . " very grand ; -- but the young tree show the new man . a new man may buy a forest ; but he can not get park tree . " Phineas , at the moment , be think how far all these thing which he see , the mountain stretch everywhere around he , the castle , the lake , the river , the wealth of it all , and , more than the wealth , the nobility of the beauty , might act as temptation to . if a woman be ask to have the half of all this , would it be possible that she should prefer to take the half of he nothing ? he think it might be possible for a girl who would confess , or seem to confess , that love should be everything . but it could hardly be possible for a woman who look at the world almost as a man look at it , -- as a oyster to be open with such weapon as she could find ready to she hand . profess to have a care for all the affair of the world . she love politics , and could talk of social science , and have broad idea about religion , and be devoted to certain educational view . such a woman would feel that wealth be necessary to she , and would be willing , for the sake of wealth , to put up with a husband without romance . Nay ; might it not be that she would prefer a husband without romance ? thus be argue to himself as he be drive up to the door of , while be eloquent on the beauty of old park tree . " after all , a forest be a very scrubby sort of thing , " say . there be nobody in the house , -- at least , they find nobody ; and within half a hour be walk about the grounds by himself . have declare himself to be delight at have a opportunity of writing letter , -- and no doubt be write they by the dozen , all date from , and all detaile the fact that , and , and , and be in the same house with he . Phineas have no letter to write , and therefore rush down across the broad lawn to the river , of which he hear the noisy tumbling water . there be something in the air which immediately fill he with high spirit ; and , in he desire to investigate the glory of the place , he forgot that he be go to dine with four in a row . he soon reach the stream , and begin to make he way up it through the ravine . there be waterfall over waterfall , and there be little bridge here and there which look to be half natural and half artificial , and a path which require that you should climb , but which be yet a path , and all be so arrange that not a pleasant splashing rush of the water be lose to the visitor . he go on and on , up the stream , till there be a sharp turn in the ravine , and then , look upward , he see above he head a man and a woman stand together on one of the little half - make wooden bridge . he eye be sharp , and he see at a glance that the woman be . he have not recognise the man , but he have very little doubt that it be . of course it be , because he would prefer that it should be any other man under the sun . he would have turn back at once if he have think that he could have do so without be observe ; but he feel sure that , stand as they be , they must have observe he . he do not like to join they . he would not intrude himself . so he remain still , and begin to throw stone into the river . but he have not throw above a stone or two when he be call from above . he look up , and then he perceive that the man who call he be he host . of course it be . Thereupon he cease to throw stone , and go up the path , and join they upon the bridge . step forward , and bay he welcome to . he manner be less cold , and he seem to have more word at command than be usual with he . " you have not be long , " he say , " in find out the most beautiful spot about the place . " " be it not lovly ? " say . " we have not be here a hour yet , and insist on bring I here . " " it be wonderfully beautiful , " say . " it be this very spot where
where we now stand that make I build the house where it be , " say , " and I be only eighteen when I stand here and make up my mind . that be just twenty - five year ago . " " so he be forty - three , " say to himself , think how glorious it be to be only twenty - five . " and within twelve month , " continue , " the foundation be be dug and the stone - cutter be at work . " " what a good - natured man you father must have be , " say . " he have nothing else to do with he money but to pour it over my head , as it be . I do not think he have any other enjoyment of it himself . will you go a little higher , ? we shall get a fine view over to just now . " declare that she would go as much higher as he choose to take she , and be rather in doubt as to what it would become he to do . he would stay where he be , or go down , or make himself to vanish after any most acceptable fashion ; but if he be to do so abruptly it would seem as though he be attribute something special to the companionship of the other two . see he doubt , and ask he to join they . " you may as well come on , . we do not dine till eight , and it be not much past six yet . the man of business be all write letter , and the lady who have be travel be in bed , I believe . " " not all of they , , " say . then they go on with they walk very pleasantly , and the lord of all that they survey take they from one point of vantage to another , till they both swore that of all spot upon the be surely the most lovely . " I do delight in it , I own , " say the lord . " when I come up here alone , and feel that in the midst of this little bit of a crowded island I have all this to myself , -- all this with which no other man 's wealth can interfere , -- I grow proud of my own , till I become thoroughly asham of myself . after all , I believe it be better to dwell in city than in the country , -- better , at any rate , for a rich man . " have now speak more word than have hear to fall from he lip during the whole time that they have be acquaint with each other . " I believe so too , " say , " if one be oblige to choose between the two . for myself , I think that a little of both be good for man and woman . " " there be no doubt about that , " say . " no doubt as far as enjoyment go , " say . he take they up out of the ravine on to the side of the mountain , and then down by another path through the wood to the back of the house . as they go he relapse into he usual silence , and the conversation be keep up between the other two . at a point not very far from the castle , -- just so far that one could see by the break of the ground where the castle stood , leave they . " will take you back in safety , I be sure , " say he , " and , as I be here , I will go up to the farm for a moment . if I do not show myself now and again when I be here , they think I be indifferent about the ' bestial '. " " now , , " say , " you be go to pretend to understand all about sheep and oxen . " , own that it be so , go away to he farm , and with return towards the house . " I think , upon the whole , " say , " that that be as good a man as I know . " " I should think he be a idle one , " say . " I doubt that . he be , perhaps , neither zealous nor active . but he be thoughtful and high - principl , and have a method and a purpose in the use which he make of he money . and you see that he have poetry in he nature too , if you get he upon the right string . how fond he be of the scenery of this place ! " " any man would be fond of that . I be asham to say that it almost make I envy he . I certainly never have wish to be in , but I should like to be the of . " " ' of and of , -- Here in summer , go in winter . ' there be some ballad about the old laird ; but that belong to a time when have not be hear of , when some branch of the liv down at that wretch old tower which you see as you first come upon the lake . when old buy it there be hardly a hundred acre on the property under cultivation . " " and it belong to the . " " yes ; -- to the of , as he be call . it be , the old man , who be first call . that be , and they
they live there for hundred of year . but these Highlander , with all that be say of they family pride , have forget the already , and be quite proud of they rich landlord . " " that be unpoetical , " say . " yes ; -- but then poetry be so usually false . I doubt whether would not have be as prosaic a country as any under the sun but for ; -- and I have no doubt that owe the romance of he character altogether to . " " I sometimes think you despise poetry , " say . " when it be false I do . the difficulty be to know when it be false and when it be true . be always false . " " not so false as , " say Phineas with energy . " Much more so , my friend . but we will not discuss that now . have you see since you have be here ? " " I have see no one . I come with . " " why with ? you can not find a companion much to you taste . " " chance bring we together . but be a man of sense , , and be not to be despise . " " it always seem to I , " say , " that nothing be to be gain in politics by sit at the foot of the little Gamaliels . " " but the great Gamaliel will not have a novice on they footstool . " " then sit at no man 's foot . be it not astonish that the price generally put upon any article by the world be that which the owner put on it ?-- and that this be specially true of a man 's own self ? if you hered with , man will take it for grant that you be a Ratlerite , and no more . if you consort with Greshams and Pallisers , you will equally be suppose to know you own place . " " I never know a Mentor , " say , " so apt as you be to fill he Telemachus with pride . " " it be because I do not think you fault lie that way . if it do , or if I think so , my , you may be sure that I should resign my position as . here be and and on the step . " then they go up through the Ionic column on to the broad stone terrace before the door , and there they find a crowd of man and woman . for the legislator and statesman have write they letter , and the lady have take they necessary rest . Phineas , as he be dress , consider deeply all that have say to he , -- not so much with reference to the advice which she have give he , though that also be of importance , as to the fact that it have be give by she . she have first call herself he Mentor ; but he have accept the name and have address she as she Telemachus . and yet he believe himself to be older than she , -- if , indeed , there be any difference in they age . and be it possible that a female Mentor should love she , -- should love he as Phineas desire to be love by ? he would not say that it be impossible . perhaps there have be mistakes between they ; -- a mistake in he manner of address she , and another in hers of address he . perhaps the old bachelor of forty - three be not think of a wife . have this old bachelor of forty - three be really in love with , would he have allow she to walk home alone with , leave she with some flimsy pretext of have to look at he sheep ? Phineas resolve that he must at any rate play out he game ,-- whether he be to lose it or to win it ; and in play it he must , if possible , drop something of that Mentor and Telemachus style of conversation . as to the advice give he of herding with Greshams and Pallisers , instead of with Ratlers and Fitzgibbons , -- he must use that as circumstance might direct . to he , himself , as he think of it all , it be sufficiently astonish that even the Ratler and Fitzgibbons should admit he among they as one of themselves . " when I think of my father and of the old house at , and remember that hitherto I have do nothing myself , I can not understand how it be that I should be at . " there be only one way of understand it . if really love he , the riddle might be read . the room at be splendid , much larger and very much more richly furnished than those at . but there be a certain stiffness in the movement of thing , and perhaps in the manner of some of those present , which be not feel at . Phineas at once miss the grace and prettiness and cheery audacity of , and feel at the same time that would be out of she element at . at they be meet for business . it be at least a semi-political , or perhaps rather a semi-official gathering , and he become aware that he ought not to look simply for amusement . when he enter the drawing - room before dinner , and , and and , with sundry other , be stand in a wide group before the fireplace , and among they be and and . as he approach they it see as though a sort
sort of opening be make for himself ; but he could see , though other do not , that the movement come from . " I believe , , " say , " that you and I be the only two in the whole party who really know what we would be at . " " if I must be divide from so many of my friend , " say , " I be happy to go astray in the company of . " " and might I ask , " say , with a peculiar smile for which he be famous , " what it be that you and be really at ? " " make man and woman all equal , " say . " that I take to be the gist of we political theory . " " , I must cry off , " say . " yes ; -- no doubt . if I be in the cabinet myself I should not admit so much . there be reticence , -- of course . and there be a official discretion . " " but you do not mean to say , , that you would really advocate equality ? " say . " I do mean to say so , . and I mean to go further , and to tell you that you be no liberal at heart unless you do so likewise ; unless that be the basis of you political aspiration . " " pray let I speak for myself , . " " by no means , -- not when you be criticise I and my politics . do you not wish to make the lower order comfortable ? " " certainly , " say . " and educate , and happy and good ? " " undoubtedly . " " to make they as comfortable and as good as yourself ? " " better if possible . " " and I be sure you wish to make yourself as good and as comfortable as anybody else , -- as those above you , if anybody be above you ? you will admit that ? " " yes ; -- if I understand you . " " then you have admit everything , and be a advocate for general equality , -- just as be , and as I be . there be no get out of it ; -- be there , ? " then dinner be announce , and walk off with the french on he arm . as she go , she whisper into 's ear , " you will understand I . I be not say that people be equal ; but that the tendency of all law - make and of all governing should be to reduce the inequality . " in answer to which say not a word . 's politics be too fast and furious for he nature . a week pass by at , at the end of which Phineas find himself on term of friendly intercourse with all the political magnate assemble in the house , but especially with . he have determine that he would not follow 's advice as to he selection of companion , if in do so he should be drive even to a seeming of intrusion . he make no attempt to sit at the foot of anybody , and would stand aloon when bigger man than himself be talk , and be content to be less , -- as indeed he be less , -- than or . but at the end of a week he find that , without any effort on he part ,-- almost in opposition to effort on he part , -- he have fall into a easy pleasant way with these man which be very delightful to he . he have kill a stag in company with , and have stop beneath a crag to discuss with he a question as to the duty on irish malt . he have play chess with , and have be tell that 's opinion on the trial of . have -- at last -- call he , and have prove to he that nothing be know in about sheep . but with he have have long discussion on abstract question in politics , -- and before the week be over be almost disposed to call himself a disciple , or , at least , a follower of . why not of as well as of any one else ? be in the cabinet , and of all the member of the cabinet be the most advanced . " be not so far wrong the other night , " say to he . " be a ugly word and should not be use . it mislead , and frightens , and be a bugbear . and she , in use it , have not perhaps a clearly defined meaning for it in she own mind . but the wish of every honest man should be to assist in lift up those below he , till they be something nearer he own level than he find they . " to this Phinea assent , -- and by degree he find himself assent to a great many thing that say to he . be a thing , tall , gaunt man , who have devote he whole life to politics , hithertoo without any personal reward beyond that which come to he from the reputation of he name , and from the honour of a seat in parliament . he be one of four or five brother , -- and all besides he be in trade . they have prosper in trade , whereas he have prosper solely in politics ; and man say that he be dependent altogether on what he relative supply for he support . he have now be in parliament for more than twenty
twenty year , and have be know not only as a but as a . ten year since , when he have risen to fame , but not to repute , among the man who then govern , nobody dream that would ever be a pay servant of the Crown . he have inveigh against one minister after another a though they all deserve impeachment . he have advocate political doctrine which at that time seem to be altogether at variance with any possibility of govern accord to rule of government . he have be regard as a pestilent thorn in the side of all ministers . but now he be a member of the cabinet , and those whom he have terrify in the old day begin to find that he be not so much unlike other man . there be but few horse which you can not put into harness , and those of the highest spirit will generally do you work the best . , who have he eye about he , think that he could perceive that do not shoot a deer with , and that play no chess with . Bonteen , indeed , be a noisy pushing man whom nobody seem to like , and wonder why he should be at , and why he should be in office . he friend have indeed once endeavoured to explain this . " a man who can vote hard , as I call it ; and who will speak a few word now and then as they be want , without any ambition that way , may always have he price . and if he have a pretty wife into the bargain , he ought to have a pleasant time of it . " no doubt be a very useful man , who thoroughly know he business ; but yet , as it see to , no very great distinction be show to at . " if I get as high as that , " he say to himself , " I should think myself a miracle of luck . and yet nobody seem to think anything of . it be all nothing unless one can go to the very top . " " I believe I do right to accept office , " say to he one day , as they sit together on a rock close by one of the little bridge over the Linter . " indeed , unless a man do so when the bond of the office tender to he be make compatible with he own view , he decline to proceed on the open path towards the prosecution of those view . a man who be combat one ministry after another , and strive to imbue those ministers with he conviction , can hardly decline to become a minister himself when he find that those conviction of he own be henceforth , -- or at least for some time to come , -- to be the ministerial conviction of the day . do you follow I ? " " very clearly , " say . " you would have deny you own child have you refuse . " " unless indeed a man be to feel that he be in some way unfitted for office work . I very nearly provide for myself a escape on that plea ; -- but when I come to sift it , I think that it would be false . but let I tell you that the delight of political life be altogether in opposition . why , it be freedom against slavery , fire against clay , movement against stagnation ! the very inaccuracy which be permit to opposition be in itself a charm worth more than all the patronage and all the prestige of ministerial power . you will try they both , and then say if you do not agree with I . give I the full swing of the benche below the gangway , where I need to care for no one , and could always enjoy myself on my leg as long as I feel that I be true to those who send I there ! that be all over now . they have get I into harness , and my shoulders be sore . the oat , however , be of the best , and the hay be unexceptionable . " 's like be tell that the pleasure of opposition and the pleasure of office be both open to he , -- and he like also to be the chosen receptacle of 's confidence . he have come to understand that he be expect to remain ten day at , and that then there be to be a general movement . since the first day he have see but little of , but he have find himself very frequently with . and then have come up the question of he project trip to with . he have receive a letter from . , be you go to with I ? yours , . there have be not a word beyond this , and before he answer it he make up he mind to tell the truth . he could not go to because he have no money . " I have just get that from you brother , " say he . " how like . he write to I perhaps three time in the year , and he letter be just the same . you will go I hope ? " " well ; -- no . " " I be sorry for that . " " I wonder whether I may tell you the real reason , . " " Nay ; -- I can not answer that ; but unless it be some political secret between you and , I should think you might . " " I can not afford to go to this autumn
autumn . it seem to be a shocking admission to make , -- though I do not know why it should be . " " I ; -- but , , I like you all the better for make it . I be very sorry , for 's sake . it be so hard to find any companion for he whom he would like and whom we , -- that be I ,-- should think altogether -- ; you know what i mean , . " " you wish that I should go with he be a great compliment , and I thoroughly wish that I could do it . as it be , I must go to and retrieve my finances . I daresay , , you can hardly conceive how very poor a man I be . " there be a melancholy tone about he voice as he say this , which make she think for the moment whether or no he have be right in go into parliament , and whether she have be right in instigate he to do so . but it be too late to recur to that question now . " you must climb into office early , and forego those pleasure of opposition which be so dear to , " she say , smile . " after all , money be a accident which do not count nearly so high as do some other thing . you and have the same enjoyment of everything around you here . " " yes ; while it last . " " and and I stand pretty much on the same footing , in spite of all she wealth ,-- except that she be a married woman . I do not know what she be worth , -- something not to be count ; and I be worth , -- just what papa choose to give I . a ten -pound note at the present moment I should look upon as great riche . " this be the first time she have ever speak to he of she own position as regard money ; but he have hear , or think that he have hear , that she have be leave a fortune altogether independent of she father . the last of the ten day have now come , and be discontent and almost unhappy . the more he see of the more he fear that it be impossible that she should become he wife . and yet from day to day he intimacy with she become more close . he have never make love to she , nor could he discover that it be possible for he to do so . she seem to be a woman for whom all the ordinary stage of love - making be quite unsuitable , of course he could declare he love and ask she to be he wife on any occasion on which he might find himself to be alone with she . and on this morning he have make up he mind that he would do so before the day be over . it might be possible that she would never speak to he again ; -- that all the pleasure and ambitious hope to which she have introduce he might be over as soon as that rash word should have be speak ! but , nevertheless , he would speak it . on this day there be to be a grouse - shoot party , and the shooter be to be out early . it have be talk of for some day or two past , and know that he could not escape it . there have be some rivalry between he and , and there be to be a sort of match as to which of the two would kill most bird before lunch . but there have also be some half promise on 's part that she would walk with he up the Linter and come down upon the lake , take a opposite direction from that by which they have return with . " but you will be shoot all day , " she say , when he propose it to she as they be start for the moor . the waggonet that be to take they be at the door , and she be there to see they start . she father be one of the shoot party , and be another . " I will undertake to be back in time , if you will not think it too hot . I shall not see you again till we meet in town next year . " " then I certainly will go with you , -- that be to say , if you be here . but you can not return without the rest of the party , as you be go so far . " " I will get back somehow , " say , who be resolve that a few mile more or less of mountain should not detain he from the prosecution of a task so vitally important to he . " if we start at five that will be early enough . " " quite early enough , " say . Phineas go off to the mountain , and shoot he grouse , and win he match , and eat he luncheon . , however , be not beaten by much , and be in consequence somewhat ill - humoured . " I will tell you what I will do , " say , " I will back myself for the rest of the day for a ten - pound note . " now there have be no money stak on the match at all , -- but it have be simply a trial of skill , as to which would kill the most bird in a give time . and the proposition for that trial have come
come from himself . " I should not think of shooting for money , " say . " and why not ? a bet be the only way to decide these thing . " " partly because I be sure I should not hit a bird , " say , " and partly because I have not get any money to lose . " " I hate bet , " say to he afterwards . " I be annoyed when offer the wager . I feel sure , however , you would not accept it . " " I suppose such bet be very common . " " I do not think man ought to propose they unless they be quite sure of they company . maybe I be wrong , and I often feel that I be strait - laced about such thing . it be so odd to I that man can not amuse themselves without pit themselves against each other . when a man tell I that he can shoot better than I , I tell he that my keeper can shoot better than he . " " all the same , it be a good thing to , " say . " I be not so sure of that , " say . " a man who can kill more salmon than anybody else , can rarely do anything else . be you go on with you match ? " " no ; I be go to make my way to Loughlinter . " " not alone ? " " yes , alone . " " it be over nine mile . you can not walk it . " look at he watch , and find that it be now two o'clock . it be a broiling day in , and the way back to , for six or seven out of the nine mile , would be along a high road . " I must do it all the same , " say he , prepare for a start . " I have a engagement with ; and as this be the last day that I shall see she , I certainly do not mean to break it . " " a engagement with , " say . " why do you not tell I , that I might have a pony ready ? but come along . have a pony . he be not much bigger than a dog , but he will carry you to . " " I can walk it , . " " yes ; and think of the state in which you would reach ! come along with I . " " but I can not take you off the mountain , " say . " then you must allow I to take you off . " so lead the way down to 's cottage , and before three o'clock find himself mount on a shaggy steed , which , in sober truth , be not much bigger than a large dog . " if be really my rival , " say to himself , as he trot along , " I almost think that I be do a unhandsome thing in take the pony . " at five o'clock he be under the portico before the front door , and there he find wait for he , -- wait for he , or at least ready for he . she have on she hat and glove and light shawl , and she parasol be in she hand . he think that he have never see she look so young , so pretty , and so fit to receive a lover 's vow . but at the same moment it occur to he that she be , the daughter of a , the descendant of a line of , -- and that he be the son of a simple country doctor in . be it fitte that he should ask such a woman to be he wife ? but then be the son of a man who have walk into with half - a - crown in he pocket . 's grandfather have be , -- think that he have hear that 's grandfather have be a drover ; whereas he own grandfather have be a little squire near , in county , and he own first cousin once remove still hold the paternal acre at . he family be suppose to be descende from king in that part of . it certainly do not become he to fear on the score of rank , if it be to be allow to to proceed without fear on that head . as to wealth , have already tell he that she fortune be no greater than he . she statement to himself on that head make he feel that he should not hesitate on the score of money . they neither have any , and he be willing to work for both . if she fear the risk , let she say so . it be thus that he argue with himself ; but yet he know , -- know as well as the reader will know , -- that he be go to do that which he have no right to do . it might be very well for he to wait ,-- presum he to be successful in he love , -- for the opening of that oyster with he political sword , that oyster on which he propose that they should both live ; but such waiting could not well be to the taste of . it could hardly be pleasant to she to look forward to he be make a junior lord or a assistant secretary before she could establish herself in she home . so he tell himself . and yet he tell himself at the same time that it be incumbent on he to persevere
persevere . " I do not expect you in the least , " say . " and yet I speak very positively . " " but there be thing as to which a man may be very positive , and yet may be allow to fail . in the first place , how on earth do you get home ? " " get I a pony ,-- 's pony . " " you tell he , then ? " " yes ; I tell he why I be come , and that I must be here . then he take the trouble to come all the way off the mountain to persuade to lend I he pony . I must acknowledge that have conquer I at last . " " I be so glad of that , " say . " I know he would ,-- unless it be you own fault . " they go up the path by the brook , from bridge to bridge , till they find themselves out upon the open mountain at the top . Phineas have resolve that he would not speak out he mind till he find himself on that spot ; that then he would ask she to sit down , and that while she be so seate he would tell she everything . at the present moment he have on he head a cap with a grouse 's feather in it , and he be dress in a velvet shooting - jacket and dark knickerbocker ; and be certainly , in this costume , as handsome a man as any woman would wish to see . and there be , too , a look of breed about he which have come to he , no doubt , from the of old , which ever serve he in great stead . he be , indeed , only , and be know by the world to be no more ; but he look as though he might have be anybody , -- a himself . and then he have that special grace of appear to be altogether unconscious of he own personal advantage . and I think that in truth he be barely conscious of they ; that he depend on they very little , if at all ; that there be nothing of personal vanity in he composition . he have never indulge in any hope that would accept he because he be a handsome man . " after all that climbing , " he say , " will you not sit down for a moment ? " as he speak to she she look at he and tell herself that he be as handsome as a god . " do sit down for one moment , " he say . " I have something that I desire to say to you , and to say it here . " " I will , " she say ; " but I also have something to tell you , and will say it while I be yet stan . yesterday I accept a offer of marriage from . " " then I be too late , " say , and put he hand into the pocket of he coat , he turn he back upon she , and walk away across the mountain . what a fool he have be to let she know he secret when she knowledge of it could be of no service to he , -- when she knowledge of it could only make he appear foolish in she eye ! but for he life he could not have keep he secret to himself . nor now could he bring himself to utter a word of even decent civility . but he go on walk as though he could thus leave she there , and never see she again . what a ass he have be in suppose that she care for he ! what a fool to imagine that he poverty could stand a chance against the wealth of Loughlinter ! but why have she lure he on ? how he wish that he be now grind , hard at work in 's chamber , or sit at home at with the hand of that pretty little irish girl within he own ! presently he hear a voice behind he , -- call he gently . then he turn and find that she be very near he . he himself have then be stand still for some moment , and she have follow he . " , " she say . " well ; -- yes : what be it ? " and turn round he make a attempt to smile . " will you not wish I joy , or say a word of congratulation ? have I not think much of you friendship , I should not have be so quick to tell you of my destiny . no one else have be tell , except papa . " " of course I hope you will be happy . of course I do . no wonder he lent I the pony ! " " you must forget all that . " " forget what ? " " well ,-- nothing . you need forget nothing , " say , " for nothing have be say that need be regret . only wish I joy , and all will be pleasant . " " , I do wish you joy , with all my heart , -- but that will not make all thing pleasant . I come up here to ask you to be my wife . " " no ; -- no , no ; do not say it . " " but I have say it , and will say it again . I , poor , penniless , plain simple fool that I be , have be ass enough to love you ,
, ; and I bring you up here to - day to ask you to share with I -- my nothingness . and this I have do on soil that be to be all you own . tell I that you regard I as a conceit fool , -- as a bewilder idiot . " " I wish to regard you as a dear friend , -- both of my own and of my husband , " say she , offer he she hand . " should I have have a chance , I wonder , if I have speak a week since ? " " how can I answer such a question , ? or , rather , I will , answer it fully . it be not a week since we tell each other , you to I and I to you , that we be both poor , -- both without other means than those which come to we from we father . you will make you way ; -- will make it surely ; but how at present could you marry any woman unless she have money of she own ? for I , -- like so many other girl , it be necessary that I should stay at home or marry some one rich enough to dispense with fortune in a wife . the man whom in all the world I think the best have ask I to share everything with he ; -- and I have think it wise to accept he offer . " " and I be fool enough to think that you love I , " say . to this she make no immediate answer . " yes , I be . I feel that I owe it you to tell you what a fool I have be . I do . I think you love I . at least I think that perhaps you love I . it be like a child want the moon ; -- be it not ? " " and why should I not have love you ? " she say slowly , lay she hand gently upon he arm . " why not ? because -- " " , ; stop . do not say to I any unkind word that I have not deserve , and that would make a breach between we . I have accept the owner of as my husband , because I verily believe that I shall thus do my duty in that sphere of life to which it have pleas to call I . I have always like he , and I will love he . for you ,--may I trust myself to speak openly to you ? " " you may trust I as against all other , except we two ourselves . " " for you , then , I will say also that I have always like you since I know you ; that I have love you as a friend ; -- and could have love you otherwise have not circumstance show I so plainly that it would be unwise . " " oh , ! " " listen a moment . and pray remember that what I say to you now must never be repeat to any ear . no one know it but my father , my brother , and . Early in the spring I pay my brother 's debt . he affection to I be more than a return for what I have do for he . but when I do this , -- when I make up my mind to do it , I make up my mind also that I could not allow myself the same freedom of choice which would otherwise have belong to I . will that be sufficient , ? " " how can I answer you , ? sufficient ! and you be not angry with I for what I have say ? " " no , I be not angry . but it be understood , of course , that nothing of this shall ever be repeat ,-- even among ourselves . be that a bargain ? " " oh , yes . I shall never speak of it again . " " and now you will wish I joy ? " " I have wish you joy , . and I will do so again . may you have every blessing which the world can give you . you can not expect I to be very jovial for a while myself ; but there will be nobody to see my melancholy mood . I shall be hide myself away in . when be the marriage to be ? " " nothing have be say of that . I shall be guide by he , -- but there must , of course , be delay . there will be settlement and I know not what . it may probably be in the spring , -- or perhaps the summer . I shall do just what my better tell I to do . " Phineas have now seat himself on the exact stone on which he have wish she to sit when he propose to tell he own story , and be look forth upon the lake . it seem to he that everything have be change for he while he have be up there upon the mountain , and that the change have be marvellous in its nature . when he have be come up , there have be apparently two alternative before he : the glory of successful love , -- which , indeed , have seem to he to be a most improbable result of the come interview , -- and the despair and utter banishment attendant on disdainful rejection . but he position be far remove from either of these alternative . she have almost tell he that she would have love
love he have she not be poor , -- that she be begin to love he and have quench she love , because it have become impossible to she to marry a poor man . in such circumstance he could not be angry with she , -- he could not quarrel with she ; he could not do other than swear to himself that he would be she friend . and yet he love she better than ever ; -- and she be the promise wife of he rival ! why have not 's pony break he neck ? " shall we go down now ? " she say . " oh , yes . " " you will not go on by the lake ? " " what be the use ? it be all the same now . you will want to be back to receive he in from shooting . " " not that , I think . he be above those little care . but it will be as well we should go the nearest way , as we have spend so much of we time here . I shall tell that I have tell you , -- if you do not mind . " " tell he what you please , " say . " but I will not have it take in that way , . you brusque want of courtesy to I I have forgive , but I shall expect you to make up for it by the alacrity of you congratulation to he . I will not have you uncourteous to . " " if I have be uncourteous I beg you pardon . " " you need not do that . we be old friend , and may take the liberty of speak plainly to each other ; -- but you will owe it to to be gracious . think of the pony . " they walk back to the house together , and as they go down the path very little be say . just as they be about to come out upon the open lawn , while they be still under cover of the rock and shrub , stop he companion by stand before she , and then he make he farewell speech to she . " I must say good - bye to you . I shall be away early in the morning . " " good - bye , and bless you , " say . " give I you hand , " say he . and she give he she hand . " I do not suppose you know what it be to love dearly . " " I hope I do . " " but to be in love ! I believe you do not . and to miss you love ! I think ,-- I be bound to think that you have never be so torment . it be very sore ; -- but I will do my best , like a man , to get over it . " " do , my friend , do . so small a trouble will never weigh heavily on shoulder such as yours . " " it will weigh very heavily , but I will struggle hard that it may not crush I . I have love you so dearly ! as we be part give I one kiss , that I may think of it and treasure it in my memory ! " what murmur word she speak to express she refusal of such a request , I will not quote ; but the kiss have be take before the denial be complete , and then they walk on in silence together , -- and in peace , towards the house . on the next morning six or seven man be go away , and there be a early breakfast . there be none of the ladie there , but , the host , be among he friend . a large drag with four horse be there to take the traveller and they luggage to the station , and there be naturally a good deal of noise at the front door as the preparation for the departure be make . in the middle of they take we hero aside . " have tell I , " say , " that she have acquaint you with my good fortune . " " and I congratulate you most heartily , " say , grasp the other 's hand . " you be indeed a lucky fellow . " " I feel myself to be so , " say . " such a wife be all that be want to I , and such a wife be very hard to find . will you remember , , that will never be so full but what there will be a room for you , or so empty but what you will be make welcome ? I say this on 's part and on my own . " Phineas , as he be be carry away to the railway station , could not keep himself from speculating as to how much knew of what have take place during the walk up the Linter . of one small circumstance that have occur , he feel quite sure that kknow nothing . to 's first session of parliament be over , -- he first session with all its adventure . when he get back to 's house , -- for receive he for a night in spite of she husband 's advice to the contrary ,-- I be afraid he almost feel that and she room be beneath he . of course he be very unhappy , -- as wretch as a man can be ; there be moment in which he think that it would hardly become he to live unless he could do something to prevent the marriage of and .
. but , nevertheless , he have he consolation . these be reflection which have in they much of melancholy satisfaction . he have not be despise by the woman to whom he have tell he love . she have not show he that she think he to be unworthy of she . she have not regard he love as a offence . indeed , she have almost tell he that prudence alone have forbide she to return he passion . and he have kiss she , and have afterwards part from she as a dear friend . I do not know why there should have be a flavour of exquisite joy in the midst of he agony as he think of this ; -- but it be so . he would never kiss she again . all future delights of that kind would belong to , and he have no real idea of interfering with that gentleman in the fruition of he privileges . but still there be the kiss , -- a eternal fact . and then , in all respects except that of he love , he visit to have be pre-eminently successful . have become he friend , and have encourage he to speak during the next session , -- set before he various model , and prescrib for he a course of reading . have become intimate with he . he be on pleasant term with and . and as for , -- he and be almost bosom friend . it seem to he that he have quite surpass the Ratler , Fitzgibbons , and in that politico-social success which go so far towards downright political success , and which in itself be so pleasant . he have surpass these man in spite of they office and they acquired position , and could not but think that even , if he know it all , would confess that he have be right . as to he bosom friendship with , that of course troublead he . ought he not to be drive a poniard into 's heart ? the convention of life forbade that ; and therefore the bosom friendship be to be excuse . if not a enemy to the death , then there could be no reason why he should not be a bosom friend . he go over to , stay but one night with , and come down upon they at like a god out of the heaven . even he father be well - nigh overwhelm by admiration , and he mother and sister think themselves only fit to minister to he pleasure . he have learn , if he have learn nothing else , to look as though he be master of the circumstance around he , and be entirely free from internal embarrassment . when he father speak to he about he legal study , he do not exactly laugh at he father 's ignorance , but he recapitulate to he father so much of 's wisdom at second hand , -- show plainly that it be he business to study the art of speech and the technicality of the house , and not to study law , -- that he father have nothing further to say . he have become a man of such dimension that a ordinary father could hardly dare to inquire into he proceedings ; and as for a ordinary mother , -- such as . Finn certainly be , -- she could do no more than look after she son 's linen with awe . , -- the reader I hope will not quite have forget , -- be in a great tremor when first she meet the hero of after return from the honour of he first session . she have be somewhat disappointed because the newspaper have not be full of the speech he have make in parliament . and indeed the lady of the household have all be ill at ease on this head . they could not imagine why Phineas have restrain himself with so much philosophy . but in discuss the matter with the have never express the slightest doubt of he capacity or he judgment . and when tiding come , -- the tiding come in a letter from to he father , -- that he do not intend to speak that session , because speech from a young member on he first session be think to be inexpedient , and the be quite willing to accept the wisdom of this decision , much as they might regret the effect of it . , when she meet she hero , hardly dared to look he in the face , but she remember accurately all the circumstance of she last interview with he . could it be that he wear that ringlet near he heart ? have receive from certain hair suppose to have come from the head of , and these she always wear near she own . and moreover , since she have see she have refuse a offer of marriage from , -- have refuse it almost ignominiously , -- and when do so have tell herself that she would never be false to . " we think it so good of you to come to see we again , " she say . " good to come home to my own people ? " " of course you might be stay with plenty of grandee if you like it . " " no , indeed , . it do happen by accident that I have to go to the house of a man whom perhaps you would call a grandee , and to meet grandee there . but it be only for a few day , and I be very glad to be take in again here , I can assure you . " " you know how very glad we all be to have
have you . " " be you glad to see I , ? " " very glad . why should I not be glad , and the dearest friend I have in the world ? of course she talk about you , -- and that make I think of you . " " if you know , , how often I think about you . " then , who be very happy at hearing such word , and who be walk in to dinner with he at the moment , could not refrain herself from press he arm with she little finger . she know that Phineas in he position could not marry at once ; but she would wait for he , -- oh , for ever , if he would only ask she . he of course be a wicked traitor to tell she that he be will not to think of she . but smile at lover ' perjury ; -- and it be well that he should do so , as such perjury can hardly be avoid altogether in the difficult circumstance of a successful gentleman 's life . be a traitor , of course , but he be almost force to be a traitor , by the simple fact that be in , and in . he remain for nearly five month at , and I doubt whether he time be altogether well spend . some of the book recommend to he by he probably do read , and be often to be find encompass by blue book . I fear that there be a grain of pretence about he blue book and parliamentary papers , and that in these day he be , in a gentle way , something of a impostor . " you must not be angry with I for not go to you , " he say once to 's mother when he have decline a invitation to drink tea ; " but the fact be that my time be not my own . " " pray do not make any apology . we be quite aware that we have very little to offer , " say , who be not altogether happy about , and who perhaps know more about member of parliament and blue book than have suppose . " Mary , you be a fool to think of that man , " the mother say to she daughter the next morning . " I do not think of he , mamma ; not particularly . " " he be no better than anybody else that I can see , and he be begin to give himself air , " say . make no answer ; but she go up into she room and swore before a figure of the that she would be true to for ever and ever , in spite of she mother , in spite of all the world , -- in spite , should it be necessary , even of himself . time there come a discussion between and he father about money . " I hope you find you get on pretty well , " say the doctor , who think that he have be liberal . " it be a tight fit , " say , -- who be less afraid of he father than he have be when he last discuss these thing . " I have hope it would have be ample , " say the doctor . " do not think for a moment , sir , that I be complain , " say . " I know it be much more than I have a right to expect . " the doctor begin to make a inquiry within he own breast as to whether he son have a right to expect anything ; -- whether the time have not come in which he son should be earn he own bread . " I suppose , " he say , after a pause , " there be no chance of you do anything at the bar now ? " " not immediately . it be almost impossible to combine the two study together . " himself be aware of that . " but you be not to suppose that I have give the profession up . " " I hope not ,-- after all the money it have cost we . " " by no means , sir . and all that I be do now will , I trust , be of assistance to I when I shall come back to work at the law . of course it be on the card that I may go into office , -- and if so , public business will become my profession . " " and be turn out with the ! " " yes ; that be true , sir . I must run my chance . if the worst come to the worst , I hope I might be able to secure some permanent place . I should think that I can hardly fail to do so . but I trust I may never be drive to want it . I think , however , that we have settle all this before . " then Phineas assume a look of injured innocence , as though he father be drive he too hard . " and in the mean time you money have be enough ? " say the doctor , after a pause . " I have intend to ask you to advance I a hundred pound , " say . " there be expense to which I be drive on first entering parliament . " " a hundred pound . " " if it be inconvenient , sir , I can do without it . " he have not as yet pay for he gun , or for that velvet coat in which he have be shoot
shoot , or , most probably , for the knickerbocker . he know he want the hundred pound badly ; but he feel asham of himself in ask for it . if he be once in office , -- though the office be but a sorry junior lordship , -- he would repay he father instantly . " you shall have it , of course , " say the doctor ; " but do not let the necessity for ask for more hundred come oftener than you can help . " say that he would not , and then there be no further discourse about money . it need hardly be say that he tell he father nothing of that bill which he have endorse for . at last come the time which call he again to and the glory of life , -- to lobbie , and the club , and the gossip of man in office , and the chance of promotion for himself ; to the glare of the gas - lamps , the mock anger of rival debater , and the prospect of the speaker 's wig . during the idleness of the recess he have resolve at any rate upon this , -- that a month of the session should not have pass by before he have be see upon he leg in the house , -- have be see and hear . and many a time as he have wander alone , with he gun , across the bog which lie on the other side of the from , he have practise the sort of address which he would make to the House . he would be short , -- always short ; and he would eschew all action and gesticulation ; have be very urgent in he instruction to he on that head ; but he would be especially careful that no word should escape he which have not in they some purpose . he might be wrong in he purpose , but purpose there should be . he have be twit more than once at with he silence ; -- for it have be conceive by he fellow - townsman that he have be send to parliament on the special ground of he eloquence . they should twit he no more on he next return . he would speak and would carry the house with he if a human effort might prevail . so he pack up he thing , and start again for in the beginning of . " good - bye , , " he say with he sweetest smile . but on this occasion there be no kiss , and no culling of lock . " I know he can not help it , " say to herself . " it be he position . but whether it be for good or evil , I will be true to he . " " I be afraid you be unhappy , " say to she on the next morning . " no ; I be not unhappy , -- not at all . I have a deal to make I happy and proud . I do not mean to be a bit unhappy . " then she turn away and cry heartily , and cry with she for company . to have receive two letter during he recess at from two woman who admire he much , which , as they be both short , shall be submit to the reader . the first be as follow :-- , 20 , 186 --. my , I write a line to tell you that we marriage be to be hurrie on as quickly as possible . do not like to be absent from parliament ; nor will he be content to postpone the ceremony till the session be over . the day fix be the 3rd of , and we then go at once to , and intend to be back in by the opening of parliament . yours most sincerely , . we address will be no. 52 , . to this he write a answer as short , express he ardent wish that those winter hymeneal might produce nothing but happiness , and say that he would not be in town many day before he knock at the door of no. 52 , . and the second letter be as follow :-- great , , 186-- . and , be get ever so anxious about the room , and say as how he have a young equity draftsman and wife and baby as would take the whole house , and all because say a word about she port wine , which any lady of she age might say in she tantrum , and mean nothing after all . I and 's know each other for seven year , and what be a word or two as be not mean after that ? but , honoure sir , it be not about that as I write to trouble you , but to ask if I may say for certain that you will take the room again in . it be easy to let they for the month after , because of the pantomime . only say at once , because be nag I day after day . I do not want nobody 's wife and baby to have to do for , and would sooner have a parliament gent like yourself than any one else . yours umbly and respectful , . to this he reply that he would certainly come back to the room in great , should he be lucky enough to find they vacant , and he express he willingness to take they on and from the 1st of . and on the 3rd of he find himself in the old quarter , have contrive , with much conjugal adroitness , both to keep and to stave off
off the equity draftsman 's wife and baby . , however , receive very coldly , and tell he wife the same evening that as far as he could see they lodger would never turn up to be a trump in the matter of the ballot . " if he mean well , why do he go and stay with they lord down in ? I know all about it . I know a man when I see he . , who be look out to be a judge some of these day , be a deal better ; -- because he know what he be after . " immediately on he return to town , find himself summon to a political meeting at 's house in 's . " we be go to begin in earnest this time , " say to he at the club . " I be glad of that , " say . " I suppose you hear all about it down at ? " now , in truth , have hear very little of any settled plan down at . he have play a game of chess with , and have shoot a stag with , and have discuss sheep with , but have hardly hear a word about politics from any one of those influential gentleman . from he have hear much of a come ; but he communications with Monk have rather be private discussion , -- in which he have learn 's own view on certain point , -- than revelation on the intention of the party to which belong . " I hear of nothing settle , " say ; " but I suppose we be to have a . " " that be a matter of course . " " and I suppose we be not to touch the question of ballot . " " that be the difficulty , " say . " but of course we sha not touch it as long as be in the cabinet . he will never consent to the ballot as of the . " " would , or , " say , who do not choose to bring forward he greatest gun at first . " I do not know about . it be impossible to say what might bring himself to do . be a man who may go any length before he have do . , " -- for such be the name by which be ordinarily know among he friend , -- " would of course go with and the . " " and be oppose to the ballot , " say . " ah , that be the question . no doubt he have assent to the proposition of a measure without the ballot ; but if there should come a row , and man like demand it , and the mob kick up a shindy , I do not know how far would be steady . " " whatever he say , he will stick to . " " he be you leader , then ? " ask . " I do not know that I have a leader . lead we side ; and if anybody lead I , he do . but I have great faith in . " " there be one who would go for the ballot to - morrow , if it be bring forward stoutly , " say to a few minute afterwards , point to as he speak . " I do not think much of that young man , " say . and have put they head together during that last evening at , and have agree that they do not think much of . why do go down off the mountain to get he a pony ? and why do play chess with he ? and may have be right in make up they minds to think but little of , but have be quite wrong when he have say that would " go for the ballot " to - morrow . Phineas have make up he mind very strongly that he would always oppose the ballot . that he would hold the same opinion throughout he life , no one should pretend to say ; but in he present mood , and under the tuition which he have receive from , he be prepare to demonstrate , out of the and in it , that the ballot be , as a political measure , unmanly , ineffective , and enervat . Enervating have be a great word with , and have clung to it with admiration . the meeting take place at 's on the third day of the session . Phineas have of course heard of such meeting before , but have never attend one . indeed , there have be no such gathering when 's come into power early in the last session . and he man have then make they effort in turn out they opponent , and have be well pleased to rest awhile upon they oar . now , however , they must go again to work , and therefore the liberal party be collect at 's house , in order that the liberal party might be tell what it be that and he cabinet intend to do . be quite in the dark as to what would be the nature of the performance on this occasion , and entertain some idea that every gentleman present would be call upon to express individually he assent or dissent in regard to the measure propose . he walk to 's with ; but even with be asham to show he ignorance by ask question . " after all , " say , " this kind of thing mean nothing . I know as well as possible , and so do you , what will say , -- and then will say a few word
word ; and then Turnbull will make a murmur , and then we shall all assent , -- to anything or to nothing ; -- and then it will be over . " do not understand whether the assent require would or would not be a individual personal assent . when the affair be over he find that he be disappointed , and that he might almost as well have stay away from the meeting ,-- except that he have attend at 's bidding , and have give a silent adhesion to 's plan of reform for that session . have be very nearly correct in he description of what would occur . make a long speech . , the great of the day , -- the man who be suppose to represent what many call the school of politics ,-- ask half a dozen question . in answer to these make a short speech . then make another speech , and then all be over . the gist of the whole thing be , that there should be a , -- very generous in its enlargement of the franchise , -- but no ballot . express he doubt whether this would be satisfactory to the country ; but even be soft in he tone and complaisant in he manner . as there be no reporter present , -- that plan of turn private meeting at gentleman 's house into public assemblie not have be as yet adopt , -- there could be no need for energy or violence . they go to 's house to hear 's plan , -- and they hear it . two day after this Phineas be to dine with . have ask he in the lobby of the . " I do not give dinner party , " he say , " but I should like you to come and meet . " accept the invitation as a matter of course . there be many who say that be the greatest man in the nation , and that the nation could be save only by a direct obedience to 's instruction . other say that be a demagogue and at heart a rebel ; that he be un - English , false and very dangerous . be rather inclin to believe the latter statement ; and as danger and dangerous man be always more attractive than safety and safe man , he be glad to have a opportunity of meeting at dinner . in the meantime he go to call on , whom he have not see since the last evening which he spend in she company at , -- whom , when he be last speak to she , he have kiss close beneath the falls of the . he find she at home , and with she be she husband . " here be a and meeting , be it not ? " she say , get up to welcome he . he have see before , and have be stand close to he during the meeting at 's . " I be very glad to find you both together . " " but be go away this instant , " say . " have he tell you of we adventur at ? " " not a word . " " then I must tell you ; -- but not now . the dear old be so civil to we . I come to think it quite a pity that he should be in trouble . " " I must be off , " say the husband , get up . " but I shall meet you at dinner , I believe . " " do you dine at 's ? " " yes , and be ask expressly to hear make a convert of you . there be only to be we four . revoir . " then go , and find himself alone with . he hardly know how to address she , and remain silent . he have not prepare himself for the interview as he ought to have do , and feel himself to be awkward . she evidently expect he to speak , and for a few seconds sit wait for what he might say . at last she find that it be incumbent on she to begin . " be you surprise at we suddenness when you get my note ? " " a little . you have speak of waiting . " " I have never imagine that he would have be impetuous . and he seem to think that even the business of get himself marry would not justify he stay away from parliament . he be a rigid martinet in all matter of duty . " " I do not wonder that he should be in a hurry , but that you should submit . " " I tell you that I should do just what the wise people tell I . I ask papa , and he say that it would be better . so the lawyer be drive out of they minds , and the milliner out of they body , and the thing be done . " " who be there at the marriage ? " " be not there . that I know be what you mean to ask . say that he might come if he please . stipulate that he should be receive as a son . then my father speak the hardest word that ever fell from he mouth . " " what do he say ? " " I will not repeat it , -- not altogether . but he say that be not entitle to a son 's treatment . he be very sore about my money , because be so generous as to he settlement . so the breach between they be as wide as ever . " " and where be Chiltern now
now ? " say . " down in , stay at some inn from whence he hunt . he tell I that he be quite alone , -- that he never dine out , never have any one to dine with he , that he hunt five or six day a week , -- and read at night . " " that be not a bad sort of life . " " not if the reading be any good . but I can not bear that he should be so solitary . and if he break down in it , then he companion will not be fit for he . do you ever hunt ? " " oh yes , -- at home in county . all Irishmen hunt . " " I wish you would go down to he and see he . he would be delighted to have you . " think over the proposition before he answer it , and then make the reply that he have make once before . " I would do so , , -- but that I have no money for hunting in . " " Alas , alas ! " say she , smile . " how that hit one on every side ! " " I might manage it , -- for a couple of day , -- in . " " do not do what you think you ought not to do , " say . " no ; certainly . but I should like it , and if I can I will . " " he could mound you , I have no doubt . he have no other expense now , and keep a stable full of horse . I think he have seven or eight . and now tell I , ; when be you go to charm the house ? or be it you first intention to strike terror ? " he blush , -- he know that he blush as he answer . " oh , I suppose I shall make some sort of attempt before long . I can not bear the idea of be a bore . " " I think you ought to speak , . " " I do not know about that , but I certainly mean to try . there will be lot of opportunity about the new . of course you know that be go to bring it in at once . you hear all that from . " " and papa have tell I . I still see papa almost every day . you must call upon he . mind you do . " say that he certainly would . " be very lonely now , and I sometimes feel that I have be almost cruel in desert he . and I think that he have a horror of the house ,-- especially later in the year , -- always fancie that he will meet . I be so unhappy about it all , . " " why do not you brother marry ? " say , knowe nothing as yet of and . " if he be to marry well , that would bring you father round . " " yes , -- it would . " " and why should he not ? " pause before she answer ; and then she tell the whole story . " he be violently in love , and the girl he love have refuse he twice . " " be it with ? " ask , guess the truth at once , and remember what have say to he when ride in the wood . " yes ;-- with ; my father 's pet , he favourite , whom he love next to myself ,-- almost as well as myself ; whom he would really welcome as a daughter . he would gladly make she mistress of he house , and of . everything would then go smoothly . " " but she do not like ? " " I believe she love he in she heart ; but she be afraid of he . as she say herself , a girl be bound to be so careful of herself . with all she seem frolic , be very wise . " Phineas , though not conscious of anything akin to jealousy , be annoyed at the revelation make to he . since he have hear that be in love with , he do not like quite as well as he have do before . he himself have simply admire , and have take pleasure in she society ; but , though this have be all , he do not like to hear of another man want to marry she , and he be almost angry with for say that she believe love she brother . if have twice refuse , that ought to have be sufficient . it be not that be in love with himself . as he be still violently in love with , any other love be of course impossible ; but , nevertheless , there be something offensive to he in the story as it have be tell . " if it be wisdom on she part , " say he , answer 's last word , " you can not find fault with she for she decision . " " I find no fault ; -- but I think my brother would make she happy . " , when she be leave alone , at once revert to the tone in which have answer she remark about . be very ill able to conceal he thought , and wear he heart almost upon he sleeve . " can it be possible that he care for she himself ? " that be the nature of 's first question to herself upon the matter . and in ask herself that question , she think
think nothing of the disparity in rank or fortune between and . do it occur to she as at all improbable that might accept the love of he who have so lately be she own lover . but the idea grate against she wish on two side . she be most anxious that should ultimately become she brother 's wife , -- and she could not be pleased that should be able to love any woman . I must beg my reader not to be carry away by those last word into any erroneous conclusion . they must not suppose that , the lately marry bride , indulge a guilty passion for the young man who have love she . though she have probably think often of since she marriage , she thought have never be of a nature to disturb she rest . it have never occur to she even to think that she regard he with any feeling that be a offence to she husband . she would have hate herself have any such idea present itself to she mind . she pride herself on be a pure high - principled woman , who have keep so strong a guard upon herself as to be nearly free from the dangers of those rock upon which other woman make shipwreck of they happiness . she take pride in this , and would then blame herself for she own pride . but though she so blame herself , it never occur to she to think that to she there might be danger of such shipwreck . she have put away from herself the idea of love when she have first perceive that have regard she with more than friendship , and have accept 's offer with a assure conviction that by do so she be act best for she own happiness and for that of all those concerned . she have feel the romance of the position to be sweet when Phineas have stand with she at the top of the falls of the , and have tell she of the hope which he have da to indulge . and when at the bottom of the fall he have presume to take she in he arm , she have forgive he without difficulty to herself , tell herself that that would be the alpha and the omega of the romance of she life . she have not feel herself bound to tell of what have occur , -- but she have feel that he could hardly have be angry even have he be tell . and she have often think of she lover since , and of he love , -- tell herself that she too have once have a lover , never regard she husband in that light ; but she thought have not frightene she as guilty thought will do . there have come a romance which have be pleasant , and it be gone . it have be soon banish , -- but it have leave to she a sweet flavour , of which she love to taste the sweetness though she know that it be gone . and the man should be she friend , but especially she husband 's friend . it should be she care to see that he life be successful , -- and especially she husband 's care . it be a great delight to she to know that she husband like the man . and the man would marry , and the man 's wife should be she friend . all this have be very pure and very pleasant . now a idea have flit across she brain that the man be in love with some one else , -- and she do not like it ! but she do not therefore become afraid of herself , or in the least realise at once the danger of she own position . she immediate glance at the matter do not go beyond the falseness of man . if it be so , as she suspect , -- if have in truth transferr he affections to , of how little value be the love of such a man ! it do not occur to she at this moment that she also have transfer hers to , or that , if not , she have do worse . but she do remember that in the autumn this young Phoebus among man have turn he back upon she out upon the mountain that he might hide from she the agony of he heart when he learn that she be to be the wife of another man ; and that now , before the winter be over , he could not hide from she the fact that he heart be elsewhere ! and then she speculate , and count up fact , and satisfy herself that could not even have see since they twill have stood together upon the mountain . how false be man !-- how false and how weak of heart ! " and ! " say to himself , as he walk away from . " be it fair that she should be sacrifice because she be rich , and because she be so win and so fascinate that would receive even he son for the sake of receive also such a daughter - in - law ? " Phineas also like ; have see or fancie that he have see fine thing in he ; have look forward to he regeneration , hope , perhaps , that he might have some hand in the good work . but he do not recognise the propriety of sacrifice even for work so good as this . if have refuse twice , surely that ought to be sufficient . it do not occur to he that the love of such a girl as would be a great treasure -- to himself . as regard himself ,
, he be still in love ,-- hopelessly in love , with ! it be a evening and there be no house ; -- and at seven o'clock be at 's hall door . he be the first of the guest , and he find alone in the dining - room . " I be do butler , " say , who have a brace of decanter in he hand , which he proceed to put down in the neighbourhood of the fire . " but I have finish , and now we will go up - stair to receive the two great man properly . " " I beg you pardon for come too early , " say . " not a minute too early . be seven , and it be I who be too late . but , bless you , you do not think I be ashamed of be find in the act of decant my own wine ! I remember say before some committee about salary , five or six year ago now , I daresay , that it would not do for a english Minister to have he hall door open by a maid - servant . now , I be a , and I have get nobody but a maid - servant to open my hall door , and I be obliged to look after my own wine . I wonder whether it be improper ? I should not like to be the means of injure the british constitution . " " perhaps if you resign soon , and if nobody follow you example , grave evil result may be avoid . " " I sincerely hope so , for I do love the british constitution ; and I love also the respect in which member of the english cabinet be hold . now Turnbull , who will be here in a moment , hate it all ; but he be a rich man , and have more powdered footman hang about he house than ever have himself . " " he be still in business . " " oh yes ; -- and make he thirty thousand a year . here he be . how be you , ? we be talk about my maid - servant . I hope she open the door for you properly . " " certainly , -- as far as I perceive , " say , who be better at a speech than a joke . " a very respectable young woman I should say . " " there be not one more so in all , " say ; " but seem to think that I ought to have a man in livery . " " it be a matter of perfect indifference to I , " say . " I be one of those who never think of such thing . " " I either , " say . then the laird of be announce , and they all go down to dinner . be a good - look robust man about sixty , with long grey hair and a red complexion , with hard eye , a well - cut nose , and full lip . he be nearly six foot high , stood quite upright , and always wear a black swallow - tail coat , black trousers , and a black silk waistcoat . in the house , at least , he be always so dress , and at dinner table . what difference there might be in he costume when at home at few of those who see he in have the means of know . there be nothing in he face to indicate special talent . no one look at he would take he to be a fool ; but there be none of the fire of genius in he eye , nor be there in the line of he mouth any of that play of thought or fancy which be generally to be find in the face of man and woman who have make themselves great . have certainly make himself great , and could hardly have do so without force of intellect . he be one of the most popular , if not the most popular politician in the country . poor man believe in he , think that he be they most honest public friend ; and men who be not poor believe in he power , think that he counsels must surely prevail . he have obtain the ear of the and the favour of the reporter , and open he voice at no public dinner , on no public platform , without a conviction that the word speak by he would be read by thousand . the first necessity for good speaking be a large audience ; and of this advantage have make himself sure . and yet it could hardly be say that he be a great orator . he be gift with a powerful voice , with strong , and I may , perhaps , call they broad conviction , with perfect self - reliance , with almost unlimited power of endurance , with hot ambition , with no keen scruple , and with a moral skin of great thickness . nothing say against he pain he , no attack woun he , no raillery touch he in the least . there be not a sore spot about he , and probably he first thought on wake every morning tell he that he , at least , be totus tere atque rotundus . he be , of course , a thorough , -- and so be . but 's first waking thoughts be probably exactly the reverse of those of he friend . be a much hotter man in debate than ; -- but be ever doubt of himself , and never doubt of himself so much as when he have be most
most violent , and also most effective , in debate . when jeer at himself for be a and keep no attendant grander than a parlour-maid , there be a substratum of self - doubt under the joke . be certainly a great , and as such enjoy a great reputation . I do not think that high office in the State have ever be offer to he ; but thing have be say which justify he , or see to himself to justify he , in declare that in no possible circumstance would he serve the Crown . " I serve the people , " he have say , " and much as I respect the servants of the Crown , I think that my own office be the higher . " he have be greatly call to task for this speech ; and , the present premier , have ask he whether he do not recognise the so - call servants of the as the most hard - worked and truest servants of the people . the and the press have support , but to all that be quite indifferent ; and when a assertion make by he before three or four thousand person at , to the effect that he , -- he specially , -- be the friend and servant of the people , be receive with acclamation , he feel quite satisfied that he have gain he point . progressive reform in the franchise , of which manhood suffrage should be the acknowledged and not far distant end , equal electoral districts , ballot , tenant right for as well as , reduction of the stand army till there should be no standing army to reduce , utter disregard of all political movement in , a almost idolatrous admiration for all political movement in , free trade in everything except malt , and a absolute extinction of a ,-- these be among the principal article in 's political catalogue . and I think that when once he have learn the art of arrange he word as he stand upon he leg , and have so master he voice as to have obtain the ear of the , the work of he life be not difficult . have nothing to construct , he could always deal with generality . be free from responsibility , he be not call upon either to study detail or to master even great fact . it be he business to inveigh against exist evils , and perhaps there be no easier business when once the privilege of a audience have be attaine . it be he work to cut down forest - tree , and he have nothing to do with the subsequent cultivation of the land . have once tell Phineas Finn how great be the charms of that inaccuracy which be permit to the opposition . no doubt enjoy these charms to the full , though he would sooner have put a padlock on he mouth for a month than have own as much . upon the whole , be no doubt right in resolve that he would not take office , though some reticence on that subject might have be more become to he . the conversation at dinner , though it be altogether on political subject , have in it nothing of special interest as long as the girl be there to change the plate ; but when she be go , and the door be close , it gradually open out , and there come on to be a pleasant sparring match between the two great radical , -- the radical who have join himself to the governing power , and the who stand aloon . barely say a word now and then , and be almost as silent as . he have come there to hear some such discussion , and be quite willing to listen while gun of such great calibre be be fire off for he amusement . " I think be make a great step forward , " say . " I think he be , " say . " I do not believe that he would ever live to go so far . it will hardly suffice even for this year ; but still come from he , it be a great deal . it only show how far a man may be make to go , if only the proper force be apply . after all , it matter very little who be the ministers . " " that be what I have always declare , " say . " very little indeed . we do not mind whether it be , or , or , or you yourself , if you choose to get yourself make of the . " " I have no such ambition , . " " I should have think you have . if I go in for that kind of thing myself , I should like to go to the top of the ladder . I should feel that if I could do any good at all by become a , I could only do it by become first . " " you would not doubt you own fitness for such a position ? " " I doubt my fitness for the position of any , " say . " you mean that on other grounds , " say . " I mean it on every ground , " say , rise on he leg and stand with he back to the fire . " of course I be not fit to have diplomatic intercourse with man who would come to I simply with the desire of deceive I . of course I be unfit to deal with member of parliament who would flock around I because they want place . of course I be unfit to answer every man 's question so as to
to give no information to any one . " " could you not answer they so as to give information ? " say . but be so intent on he speech that it may be doubt whether he hear this interruption . he take no notice of it as he go on . " of course I be unfit to maintain the propriety of a see confidence between a Crown all - powerless and a people all - powerful . no man recognise he own unfitness for such work more clearly than I do , . but if I take in hand such work at all , I should like to be the leader , and not the le . tell we fairly , now , what be you conviction worth in 's ? " " that be a question which a man may hardly answer himself , " say . " it be a question which a man should at least answer for himself before he consent to sit there , " say , in a tone of voice which be almost angry . " and what reason have you for supposing that I have omit that duty ? " say . " simply this , -- that I can not reconcile you know opinion with the practice of you colleague . " " I will not tell you what my conviction may be worth in 's . I will not take upon myself to say that they be worth the chair on which I sit when I be there . but I will tell you what my aspiration be when I consent to fill that chair , and you shall judge of they worth . I think that they might possibly leave the batch of bread which we have to bake ,-- give to the whole batch more of the flavour of reform than it would have possess have I absent myself . I think that when I be ask to join and , the very fact of that request indicate liberal progress , and that if I refuse the request I should be decline to assist in good work . " " you could have support they , if anything be propose worthy of support , " say . " yes ; but I could not have be so effective in take care that some measure be propose worthy of support as I may possibly be now . I think a good deal about it , and I believe that my decision be right . " " I be sure you be right , " say . " there can be no juster object of ambition than a seat in the cabinet , " say . " Sir , I must dispute that , " say , turn round upon we hero . " I regard the position of we high as most respectable . " " thank you for so much , " say . but the orator go on again , regardless of the interruption :-- " the position of gentleman in inferior office , -- of gentleman who attend rather to the nod and wink of they superior in than to the interest of they constituent ,-- I do not regard as be highly respectable . " " a man can not begin at the top , " say . " we friend have begin at what you be pleased to call the top , " say . " but I will not profess to think that even he have raise himself by go into office . to be a independent representative of a really popular commercial constituency be , in my estimation , the highest object of a 's ambition . " " but why commercial , ? " say . " because the commercial constituency really do elect they own member in accordance with they own judgment , whereas the county and the small town be coerce either by individual or by a combination of aristocratic influence . " " and yet , " say , " there be not half a dozen conservative return by all the county in . " " be very much to be honoure , " say . be the first to take he departure , and follow he very quickly . Phineas get up to go at the same time , but stay at he host 's request , and sit for a while smoke a cigar . " be a wonderful man , " say . " do he not domineer too much ? " " he fault be not arrogance , so much as ignorance that there be , or should be , a difference between public and private life . in the House of Commons a man in 's position must speak with dictatorial assurance . he be always addressing , not the house only , but the country at large , and the country will not believe in he unless he believe in himself . but he forget that he be not always address the country at large . I wonder what sort of a time and the little Turnbull have of it ? " Phineas , as he go home , make up he mind that and the little Turnbulls must probably have a bad time of it . rides his horse Bonebreaker it be know that whatever might be the detail of 's bill , the ballot would not form a part of it ; and as there be a strong party in the house of Commons , and a very numerous party out of it , who be desirous that vote by ballot should be make a part of the electoral law , it be decide that a independent motion should be bring on in anticipation of 's bill . the arrangement be probably one of 's own making ; so that he might be hamper by no opposition on
on that subject by he own follower if , -- as he do not doubt , -- the motion should be lose . it be expect that the debate would not last over one night , and resolve that he would make he maiden speech on this occasion . he have very strong opinion as to the inefficacy of the ballot for any good purpose , and think that he might be able to strike out from he conviction some spark of that fire which use to be so plentiful with he at the old debating club . but even at breakfast that morne he heart begin to beat quickly at the idea of have to stand on he leg before so critical a audience . he know that it would be well that he should if possible get the subject off he mind during the day , and therefore go out among the people who certainly would not talk to he about the ballot . he sit for nearly a hour in the morning with , and do not even tell low that it be he intention to speak on that day . then he make one or two other call , and at about three go up to to look for . it be now nearly the end of , and have often see . he have not see she brother , but have learn from he sister that he have be drive up to by the frost , he be tell by the porter at 's that be in the house , and as he be pass through the hall he meet himself . he be thus drive to speak , and feel himself call upon to explain why he be there . " I be come to see , " he say . " be in the house ? " say the , turn to the servant . " yes , my lord ; he lordship arrive last night . " " you will find he upstairs , I suppose , " say the . " for myself I know nothing of he . " he speak in a angry tone , as though he resent the fact that any one should come to he house to call upon he son ; and turn he back quickly upon . but he think better of it before he reach the front door , and turn again . " by - the - bye , " say he , " what majority shall we have to - night , ? " " pretty nearly as many as you please to name , my lord , " say . " well ; -- yes ; I suppose we be tolerably safe . you ought to speak upon it . " " perhaps I may , " say , feel that he blush as he speak . " do , " say the . " do . if you see will you tell he from I that I should be glad to see he before he leave . I shall be at home till noon to - morrow . " Phineas , much astonish at the commission give to he , of course say that he would do as he be desire , and then pass on to 's apartment . he find he friend stand in the middle of the room , without coat and waistcoat , with a pair of dumb - bell in he hand . " when there be no hunting I be drive to this kind of thing , " say . " I suppose it be good exercise , " say . " and it give I something to do . when I be in I feel like a gipsy in church , till the time come for prowling out at night . I have no occupation for my day whatever , and no place to which I can take myself . I can not stand in a club window as some man do , and I should disgrase any decent club if I do stand there . I belong to the traveller , but I doubt whether the porter would let I go in . " " I think you pique yourself on be more of a outer Bohemian than you be , " say . " I pique myself on this , that whether or not , I will go nowhere that I be not want . though , -- for the matter of that , I suppose I be not want here . " then give he the message from he father . " he wish to see I to - morrow morning ? " continue . " let he send I word what it be he have to say to I . I do not choose to be insult by he , though he be my father . " " I would certainly go , if I be you . " " I doubt it very much , if all the circumstance be the same . let he tell I what he want . " " of course I can not ask he , . " " I know what he want very well . have be interfere and do no good . you know ? " " yes ; I know she , " say , much surprised . " they want she to marry I . " " and you do not wish to marry she ? " " I do not say that . but do you think that such a girl as would marry such a man as I be ? she would be much more likely to take you . by , she would ! do you know that she have three thousand a year of she own ? " " I know that she have money . " " that be about the tune of
of it . I would take she without a shilling to - morrow , if she would have I , -- because I like she . she be the only girl I ever do like . but what be the use of my like she ? they have paint I so black among they , especially my father , that no decent girl would think of marry I . " " you father can not be angry with you if you do you best to comply with he wish . " " I do not care a straw whether he be angry or not . he allow I eight hundr a year , and he know that if he stop it I should go to the the next day . I could not help myself . he can not leave a acre away from I , and yet he will not join I in raising money for the sake of pay she fortune . " " can hardly want money now . " " that detestable prig whom she have choose to marry , and whom I hate with all my heart , be richer than ever be ; but nevertheless ought to have she own money . she shall have it some day . " " I would see , if I be you . " " I will think about it . now tell I about come down to . say you will come some day in . I can mound you for a couple of day and should be delighted to have you . my horse all pull like the mischief , and rush like devils , and want a deal of riding ; but a Irishman like that . " " I do not dislike it particularly . " " I like it . I prefer to have something to do on horseback . when a man tell I that a horse be a armchair , I always tell he to put the brute into he bedroom . mind you come . the house I stay at be call the , and it be just four mile from . " swore that he would go down and ride the pull horse , and then take he leave , earnestly advise , as he go , to keep the appointment propose by he father . when the morning come , at half - past eleven , the son , who have be stand for half a hour with he back to the fire in the large gloomy dining - room , suddenly ring the bell . " tell the , " he say to the servant , " that I be here and will go to he if he wish it . " the servant come back , and say that the be wait . then strode after the man into he father 's room . " , " say the father , " I have send for you because I think it may be as well to speak to you on some business . will you sit down ? " sit down , but do not answer a word . " I feel very unhappy about you sister 's fortune , " say the . " so do I ,-- very unhappy . we can raise the money between we , and pay she to - morrow , if you please it . " " it be in opposition to my advice that she pay you debt . " " and in opposition to mine too . " " I tell she that I would not pay they , and be I to give she back to -morrow , as you say , the money that she have so use , I should be stultify myself . but I will do so on one condition . I will join with you in raise the money for you sister , on one condition . " " what be that ? " " tell I , -- indeed she have tell I often , -- that you be attach to . " " but , my lord , be unhappily not attach to I . " " I do not know how that may be . of course I can not say . I have never take the liberty of interrogat she upon the subject . " " even you , my lord , could hardly have do that . " " what do you mean by that ? I say that I never have , " say the , angrily . " I simply mean that even you could hardly have ask such a question . I have ask she , and she have refuse I . " " but girl often do that , and yet accept afterwards the man whom they have refuse . tell I that she believe that would consent if you press you suit . " " know nothing about it , my lord . " " there you be probably wrong . and be very close friend , and have no doubt discuss this matter between they . at any rate , it may be as well that you should hear what I have to say . of course I shall not interfere myself . there be no ground on which I can do so with propriety . " " none whatever , " say . the become very angry , and nearly break down in he anger . he pause for a moment , feel dispose to tell he son to go and never to see he again . but he gulp down he wrath , and go on with he speech . " my meaning , sir , be this ; -- that I have so great faith in , that I would receive she acceptance of you hand as the only proof which would be convince to I of
of amendment in you mode of life . if she be to do so , I would join with you in raising money to pay you sister , would make some further sacrifice with reference to a income for you and you wife , and -- would make you both welcome to , -- if you choose to come . " the 's voice hesitat much and become almost tremulous as he make the last proposition . and he eye have fall away from he son 's gaze , and he have bend a little over the table , and be move . but he recovere himself at once , and add , with all proper dignity , " if you have anything to say I shall be glad to hear it . " " all you offer would be nothing , my lord , if I do not like the girl . " " I should not ask you to marry a girl if you do not like she , as you call it . " " but as to , it happen that we wish jump together . I have ask she , and she have refuse I . I do not even know where to find she to ask she again . if I go to 's house the servants would not let I in . " " and whose fault be that ? " " yours partly , my lord . you have tell everybody that I be the devil , and now all the old woman believe it . " " I never tell anybody so . " " I will tell you what I will do . I will go down to 's to - day . I suppose she be at . and if I can get speech of -- " " be not at . be stay with you sister in . I see she yesterday . " " she be in ? " " I tell you that I see she yesterday . " " very well , my lord . then I will do the best I can . will tell you of the result . " the father would have give the son some advice as to the mode in which he should put forward he claim upon 's hand , but the son would not wait to hear it . choose to presume that the conference be over , he go back to the room in which he have keep he dumb - bell , and for a minute or two go to work at he favourite exercise . but he soon put the dumb -bell down , and begin to prepare himself for he work . if this thing be to be do , it might as well be do at once . he look out of he window , and see that the street be in a mess of slush . white snow be become black mud , as it will do in ; and the violence of frost be give way to the horror of thaw . all would be soft and comparatively pleasant in on the follow morning , and if everything go right he would breakfast at the . he would go down by the hunting train , and be at the inn by ten . the meet be only six mile distant , and all would be pleasant . he would do this whatever might be the result of he work to - day ; -- but in the meantime he would go and do he work . he have a cab call , and within half a hour of the time at which he have leave he father , he be at the door of he sister 's house in . the servant tell he that the lady be at lunch . " I can not eat lunch , " he say . " tell they that I be in the drawing - room . " " he have come to see you , " say , as soon as the servant have leave the room . " I hope not , " say . " do not say that . " " but I do say it . I hope he have not come to see I ; -- that be , not to see I specially . of course I can not pretend not to know what you mean . " " he may think it civil to call if he have hear that you be in town , " say , after a pause . " if it be only that , I will be civil in return ; -- as sweet as to he . if it be really only that , and if I be sure of it , I should be really glad to see he . " then they finish they lunch , and get up and lead the way to the drawing - room . " I hope you remember , " say she , gravely , " that you might be a saviour to he . " " I do not believe in girl be saviour to man . it be the man who should be the saviour to the girl . if I marry at all , I have the right to expect that protection shall be give to I , -- not that I shall have to give it . " " Violet , you be determined to misrepresent what I mean . " be walk about the room , and do not sit down when they enter . the ordinary greeting take place , and make some remark about the frost . " but it seem to be go , " she say , " and I suppose that you will soon be at work again ? " " yes ; -- I shall hunt to - morrow , "
" say . " and the next day , and the next , and the next , " say , " till about the middle of ; -- and then you period of misery will begin ! " " exactly , " say . " I have nothing but hunt that I can call a occupation . " " why do not you make one ? " say he sister . " I mean to do so , if it be possible . , would you mind leave I and alone for a few minute ? " get up , and so also do . " for what purpose ? " say the latter . " it can not be for any good purpose . " " at any rate I wish it , and I will not harm you . " be now go , but pause before she reach the door . " , will you do as I ask you ? " say the brother . then go . " it be not that I fear you would harm I , , " say . " no ;-- I know it be not . but what I say be always say awkwardly . a hour ago I do not know that you be in town , but when I be tell the news I come at once . my father tell I . " " I be so glad that you see you father . " " I have not speak to he for month before , and probably may not speak to he for month again . but there be one point , , on which he and I agree . " " I hope there will soon be many . " " it be possible , -- but I fear not probable . look here , , " -- and he look at she with all he eye , till it see to she that he be all eye , so great be the intensity of he gaze ;--" I should scorn myself be I to permit myself to come before you with a plea for you favour found on my father 's whim . my father be unreasonable , and have be very unjust to I . he have ever believe evil of I , and have believe it often when all the world know that he be wrong . I care little for be reconcile to a father who have be so cruel to I . " " he love I dearly , and be my friend . I would rather that you should not speak against he to I . " " you will understand , at least , that I be ask nothing from you because he wish it . probably have tell you that you may make thing straight by become my wife . " " she have , -- certainly , . " " it be a argument that she should never have use . it be a argument to which you should not listen for a moment . make thing straight indeed ! who can tell ? there would be very little make straight by such a marriage , if it be not that I love you . Violet , that be my plea , and my only one . I love you so well that I do believe that if you take I I should return to the old way , and become as other man be , and be in time as respectable , as stupid , -- and perhaps as ill - natured as old herself . " " my poor aunt ! " " you know she say worse thing of I than that . now , dearest , you have hear all that I have to say to you . " as he speak he come close to she , and put out he hand , -- but she do not touch it . " I have no other argument to use , -- not a word more to say . as I come here in the cab I be turn it over in my mind that I might find what best I should say . but , after all , there be nothing more to be say than that . " " the word make no difference , " she reply . " not unless they be so uttered as to force a belief . I do love you . I know no other reason but that why you should be my wife . I have no other excuse to offer for come to you again . you be the one thing in the world that to I have any charm . can you be surprise that I should be persistent in ask for it ? " he be look at she still with the same gaze , and there seem to be a power in he eye from which she could not escape . he be still stand with he right hand out , as though expect , or at least hope , that she hand might be put into he . " how be I to answer you ? " she say . " with you love , if you can give it to I . do you remember how you swore once that you would love I for ever and always ? " " you should not remind I of that . I be a child then ,-- a naughty child , " she add , smile ; " and be put to be for what I do on that day . " " be a child still . " " ah , if we but could ! " " and have you no other answer to make I ? " " of course I must answer you . you be entitle to a answer . , I be sorry
sorry that I can not give you the love for which you ask . " " never ? " " never . " " be it myself personally , or what you have hear of I , that be so hateful to you ? " " nothing be hateful to I . I have never speak of hate . I shall always feel the strongest regard for my old friend and playfellow . but there be many thing which a woman be bound to consider before she allow herself so to love a man that she can consent to become he wife . " " allow herself ! then it be a matter entirely of calculation . " " I suppose there should be some think in it , . " there be now a pause , and the man 's hand be at last allow to drop , as there come no response to the proffered grasp . he walk once or twice across the room before he speak again , and then he stop himself closely opposite to she . " I shall never try again , " he say . " it will be better so , " she reply . " there be something to I unmanly in a man be persecut a girl . just tell , will you , that it be all over ; and she may as well tell my father . good - bye . " she then tender she hand to he , but he do not take it , -- probably do not see it , and at once leave the room and the house . " and yet I believe you love he , " say to she friend in she anger , when they discuss the matter immediately on 's departure . " you have no right to say that , . " " I have a right to my belief , and I do believe it . I think you love he , and that you lack the courage to risk yourself in try to save he . " " be a woman bound to marry a man if she love he ? " " yes , she be , " reply impetuously , without think of what she be say ; " that be , if she be convinced that she also be loved . " " whatever be the man 's character ;--whatever be the circumstance ? must she do so , whatever friend may say to the contrary ? be there to be no prudence in marriage ? " " there may be a great deal too much prudence , " say . " that be true . there be certainly too much prudence if a woman marry prudently , but without love . " Violet intend by this no attack upon she friend , -- have not have present in she mind at the moment any idea of 's special prudence in marrying ; but feel it keenly , and know at once that a arrow have be shot which have wound she . " we shall get nothing , " she say , " by descende to personality with each other . " " I mean none , . " " I suppose it be always hard , " say , " for any one person to judge altogether of the mind of another . if I have say anything severe of you refusal of my brother , I retract it . I only wish that it could have be otherwise . " , when he leave he sister 's house , walk through the slush and dirt to a haunt of he in the neighbourhood of , and there he remain through the whole afternoon and evening . a certain join he , and dine with he . he tell nothing to of he sorrow , but could see that he be unhappy . " let 's have another bottle of ' cham , ' " say , when they dinner be nearly over . " ' ' be the only thing to screw one up when one be down a peg . " " you can have what you like , " say ; " but I shall have some brandy - and - water . " " the worst of brandy - and - water be , that one get tired of it before the night be over , " say . nevertheless , do go down to Peterborough the next day by the hunting train , and ride he horse Bonebreaker so well in that famous run from spring to Gidd that after the run young pile , -- of the house of , , and ,-- offer he three hundred pound for the animal . " he be not worth above fifty , " say . " but I will give you the three hundred , " say pile . " you could not ride he if you would get he , " say . " oh , could not I ! " say pile . but do not continue the conversation , contente himself with tell he friend that that red be as drunk as a lord . the debate on the take he seat in the house with a consciousness of much inward trepidation of heart on that night of the ballot debate . after leave he go down to he club and dine alone . three or four man come and speak to he ; but he could not talk to they at he ease , nor do he quite know what they be say to he . he be go to do something which he long to achieve , but the very idea of which , now that it be so near to he , be a terror to he . to be in the and not to speak would , to he
he thinking , be a disgraceful failure . indeed , he could not continue to keep he seat unless he speak . he have be put there that he might speak . he would speak . of course he would speak . have he not already be conspicuous almost as a boy orator ? and yet , at this moment he do not know whether he be eat mutton or beef , or who be stand opposite to he and talk to he , so much be he in dread of the ordeal which he have prepare for himself . as he go down to the after dinner , he almost make up he mind that it would be a good thing to leave by one of the night mail train . he feel himself to be stiff and stil as he walk , and that he clothes be uneasy to he . when he turn into he regret more keenly than ever he have do that he have seced from the keeping of . he could , he think , have speak very well in court , and would there have learn that self - confidence which now fail he so terribly . it be , however , too late to think off that . he could only go in and take he seat . he go in and take he seat , and the chamber seem to he to be mysteriously large , as though bench be crowd over bench , and gallery over galleries . he have be long enough in the to have lose the original awe inspire by the speaker and the clerk of the , by the row of , and by the unequalled importance of the place . on ordinary occasion he could saunter in and out , and whisper at he ease to a neighbour . but on this occasion he go direct to the bench on which he ordinarily sit , and begin at once to rehearse to himself he speech . he have in truth be do this all day , in spite of the effort that he have make to ry himself of all memory of the occasion . he have be collect the head of he speech while have be talk to he , and refresh he quotation in the presence of and the dumb - bell . he have tax he memory and he intellect with various task , which , as he fear , would not adjust themselves one with another . he have learn the headings of he speech ,-- so that one heading might follow the other , and nothing be forgote . and he have learn verbatim the word which he intend to utter under each heading , -- with a hope that if any one compact part should be destroy or injure in its compactness by treachery of memory , or by the course of the debate , each other compact part might be there in its entirety , ready for use ; -- or at least so many of the compact part as treachery of memory and the accident of the debate might leave to he ; so that he speech might be like a vessel , watertight in its various compartment , that would float by the buoyancy of its stern and bow , even though the hold should be waterlog . but this use of he compose words , even though he should be able to carry it through , would not complete he work ; -- for it would be he duty to answer in some sort those who have go before he , and in order to do this he must be able to insert , without any prearrangement of word or idea , little intercalatory part between those compact mass of argument with which he have be occupy himself for many laborious hour . as he look round upon the house and perceive that everything be dim before he , that all he original awe of the have return , and with it a present quaking fear that make he feel the pulsation of he own heart , he become painfully aware that the task he have prepare for himself be too great . he should , on this the occasion of he rise to he maiden leg , have either prepare for himself a short general speech , which could indeed have do little for he credit in the , but which might have serve to carry off the novelty of the thing , and have introduce he to the sound of he own voice within those wall , -- or he should have trust to what he wit and spirit would produce for he on the spur of the moment , and not have burden himself with a huge exercise of memory . during the presentation of a few petition he try to repeat to himself the first of he compact part ,-- a compact part on which , as it might certainly be bring into use let the debate have go as it might , he have expend great care . he have flatter himself that there be something of real strength in he word as he repeat they to himself in the comfortable seclusion of he own room , and he have make they so ready to he tongue that he think it to be impossible that he should forget even a intonation . now he find that he could not remember the first phrasis without unloosing and look at a small roll of paper which he hold furtively in he hand . what be the good of look at it ? he would forget it again in the next moment . he have intend to satisfy the most eager of he friend , and to astound he opponent . as it be , no one would be satisfied , -- and none
none astounde but they who have trust in he . the debate begin , and if the leisure afforde by a long and tedious speech could have serve he , he might have have leisure enough . he try at first to follow all that this advocate for the ballot might say , hope thence to acquire the impetus of strong interest ; but he soon weary of the work , and begin to long that the speech might be end , although the period of he own martyrdom would thereby be bring nearer to he . at half - past seven so many members have desert they seat , that begin to think that he might be save all further pain by a " count out . " he reckon the member present and find that they be below the mystic forty , -- first by two , then by four , by five , by seven , and at one time by eleven . it be not for he to ask the speaker to count the house , but he wonder that no one else should do so . and yet , as the idea of this termination to the night 's work come upon he , and as he think of he lose labour , he almost take courage again ,-- almost dread rather than wish for the interference of some malicious member . but there be no malicious member then present , or else it be know that Lord of the and of the would flock in during the speaker 's ponderous counting , -- and thus the slow length of the ballot - lover 's verbosity be permit to evolve itself without interruption . at eight o'clock he have complete he catalogue of illustration , and immediately rise from the bench to explain the grounds on which the government must decline to support the motion before the house . be aware that intend to speak , and be aware also that he speech would be very short . " my idea be , " he have say to , " that every man possess of the franchise should dare to have and to express a political opinion of he own ; that otherwise the franchise be not worth have ; and that man will learn that when all so dare , no evil can come from such daring . as the ballot would make any courage of that kind unnecessary , I dislike the ballot . I shall confine myself to that , and leave the illustration to younger debater . " Phineas also have be inform that Turnbull would reply to , with the purpose of crush into dust , and have prepare he speech with something of a intention of subsequently crush . he know , however , that he could not command he opportunity . there be the chapter of accident to which he must accommodate himself ; but such have be he programme for the evening . make he speech , -- and though he be short , he be very fiery and energetic . quick as lightning word of wrath and scorn flow from he , in which he paint the cowardice , the meanness , the falsehood of the ballot . " the ballot - box , " he say , " be the grave of all true political opinion . " though he speak hardly for ten minute , he seem to say more than enough , ten time enough , to slaughter the argument of the former speaker . at every hot word as it fall be drive to regret that a paragraph of he own be take away from he , and that he choicest morsel of standing ground be be cut from under he foot . when sit down , feel that have say all that he , , have intend to say . then rise slowly from the bench below the gangway . with a speaker so frequent and so famous as no hurry be necessary . he be sure to have he opportunity . the speaker 's eye be ever travel to the accustom spot . rise slowly and begin he oration very mildly . " there be nothing , " he say , " that he admire so much as the poetic imagery and the high - fly sentiment of he right honourable friend the member for ," -- sit for , -- " unless it be the stubborn fact and unanswered argument of he honourable friend who have bring forward this motion . " then proceed after he fashion to crush . he be very prosaic , very clear both in voice and language , very harsh , and very unscrupulous . he and Monk have be join together in politics for over twenty year ; -- but one would have think , from 's word , that they have be the bitterest of enemy . be taunt with he office , taunt with he desertion of the liberal party , taunt with he ambition , -- and taunt with he lack of ambition . " I once think , " say , -- " nay , not long ago I think , that he and I would have fight this battle for the people , shoulder to shoulder , and knee to knee ; -- but he have prefer that the knee next to he own shall wear a garter , and that the shoulder which support he shall be deck with a blue ribbon , -- as shoulders , I presume , be deck in those closet conference which be call cabinets . " just after this , while be still go on with a variety of illustration draw from the , step across the benche up to the place where be sit , and whisper a few word into he ear . " be prepared to answer , and
and wish to do it . I tell he that I think you should have the opportunity , if you wish it . " be not ready with a reply to Erle at the spur of the moment . " somebody tell I , " continue , " that you have say that you would like to speak to - night . " " so I do , " say . " shall I tell Bonteen that you will do it ? " the chamber seem to swim round before we hero 's eye . be still go on with he clear , loud , unpleasant voice , but there be no know how long he might go on . upon , if he should now consent , might devolve the duty , within ten minute , within three minute , of rise there before a full House to defend he great friend , , from a gross personal attack . be it fit that such a novice as he should undertake such a work as that ? be he to do so , all that speech which he have prepare , with its various self - float part , must go for nothing . the task be exactly that which , of all tasnks , he would best like to have accomplish , and to have accomplish well . but if he should fail ! and he feel that he would fail . for such work a man should have all he sense about he , -- he full courage , perfect confidence , something almost approach to contempt for listen opponent , and nothing of fear in regard to listen friend . he should be as a cock in he own farmyard , master of all the circumstance around he . but have not even as yet hear the sound of he own voice in that room . at this moment , so confused be he , that he do not know where sat , and where . all be confused , and there arise as it be a sound of water in he ear , and a feeling as of a great hell around he . " I have rather wait , " he say at last . " Bonteen have better reply . " look into he face , and then step back across the bench , tell that the opportunity be he . continue speak quite long enough to give poor Phinea time for repentance ; but repentance be of no use . he have decide against himself , and he decision could not be reverse . he would have leave the house , only it seem to he that have he do so every one would look at he . he draw he hat down over he eye , and remain in he place , hat , hat , hat , -- but hate no one so much as he hate himself . he have disgrace himself for ever and could never recover the occasion which he have lose . 's speech be in no way remarkable . , he say , have do the good service by add he wisdom and patriotism to the cabinet . the sort of argument which use to prove that a man who have gain credit as a legislator should in process of time become a member of the executive , be trite and common , and be not use by with any special force . be glib of tongue and possess that familiarity with the place which poor Phinea have lack so sorely . there be one moment , however , which be terrible to Phineas . as soon as have show the purpose for which he be on he leg , look round at , as though in reproach . he have expect that this work should fall into the hand of one who would perform it with more warmth of heart than could be expect from . when Bonteen cease , two or three other short speech be make and member fire off they little gun . Phineas have lose so great a opportunity , would not now consent to accept one that should be comparatively valueless . then there come a division . the motion be lose by a large majority , -- by any number you might choose to name , as Phineas have say to ; but in that there be no triumph to the poor wretch who have fail through fear , and who be now a coward in he own esteem . he leave the alone , carefully avoid all speech with any one . as he come out he have see in the lobby , but he have go on without pause a moment , so that he might avoid he friend . and when he be out in , where be he to go next ? he look at he watch , and find that it be just ten . he do not dare to go to he club , and it be impossible for he to go home and to bed . he be very miserable , and nothing would comfort he but sympathy . be there any one who would listen to he abuse of himself , and would then answer he with kindly apology for he own weakness ? would do it if she know how , but sympathy from Bunce would hardly avail . there be but one person in the world to whom he could tell he own humiliation with any hope of comfort , and that person be . Sympathy from any man would have be distasteful to he . he have think for a moment of flinge himself at 's foot and tell all he weakness ; -- but he could not have endure pity even from . it be not to be endure from any man . he think that would
would be at home , and probably alone . he know , at any rate , that he might be allow to knock at she door , even at that hour . he have leave in the , and there he would probably remain for the next hour . there be no man more constant than in see the work of the day , -- or of the night , -- to its end . so walk up , and from thence into place , and knock at 's door . " yes ; be at home ; and alone . " he be show up into the drawing - room , and there he find wait for she husband . " so the great debate be over , " she say , with as much of irony as she know how to throw into the epithet . " yes ; it be over . " " and what have they do , -- those leviathan of the people ? " then tell she what be the majority . " be there anything the matter with you , ? " she say , look at he suddenly . " be you not well ? " " yes ; I be very well . " " will you not sit down ? there be something wrong , I know . what be it ? " " I have simply be the greatest idiot , the greatest coward , the most awkward ass that ever liv ! " " what do you mean ? " " I do not know why I should come to tell you of it at this hour at night , but I have come that I might tell you . probably because there be no one else in the whole world who would not laugh at I . " " at any rate , I shall not laugh at you , " say . " but you will despise I . " " that I be sure I shall not do . " " you can not help it . I despise myself . for year I have place before myself the ambition of speak in the of ; -- for year I have be think whether there would ever come to I a opportunity of make myself hear in that assembly , which I consider to be the first in the world . to -day the opportunity have be offer to I , -- and , though the motion be nothing , the opportunity be great . the subject be one on which I be thoroughly prepared . the manner in which I be summon be most flatter to I . I be especially call on to perform a task which be most congenial to my feeling ; -- and I decline because I be afraid . " " you have think too much about it , my friend , " say . " too much or too little , what do it matter ? " reply , in despair . " there be the fact . I could not do it . do you remember the story of in the ' fair of ; '-- how he heart refuse to give he blood enough to fight ? he have be suck with the milk of a timid creature , and , though he could die , there be none of the strength of manhood in he . it be about the same thing with I , I take it . " " I do not think you be at all like , " say . " I be equally disgrace , and I must perish after the same fashion . I shall apply for the Chiltern hundred in a day or two . " " you will do nothing of the kind , " say , get up from she chair and come towards he . " you shall not leave this room till you have promise I that you will do nothing of the kind . I do not know as yet what have occur to - night ; but I do know that that modesty which have keep you silent be more often a grace than a disgrace . " this be the kind of sympathy which he want , she draw she chair nearer to he , and then he explain to she as accurately as he could what have take place in the house on this evening , -- how he have prepare he speech , how he have feel that he preparation be vain , how he perceive from the course of the debate that if he speak at all he speech must be very different from what he have first intend ; how he have decline to take upon himself a task which seem to require so close a knowledge of the way of the and of the temper of the man , as the defence of such a man as . in accuse himself he , unconsciously , excuse himself , and he excuse , in 's ear , be more valid than he accusation . " and you would give it all up for that ? " she say . " yes ; I think I ought . " " I have very little doubt but that you be right in allow to undertake such a task . I should simply explain to Monk that you feel too keen a interest in he welfare to stand up as a untried member in he defence . it be not , I think , the work for a man who be not at home in the House . I be sure will feel this , and I be quite certain that will think that you have be right . " " I do not care what may think . " " why do you say that , ? that be
be not courteous . " " simply because I care so much what 's wife may think . you opinion be all in all to I , -- only that I know you be too kind to I . " " he would not be too kind to you . he be never too kind to any one . he be justice itself . " Phinea , as he hear the tone of she voice , could not but feel that there be in 's word something of a accusation against she husband . " I hate justice , " say . " I know that justice would condemn I . but love and friendship know nothing of justice . the value of love be that it overlook fault , and forgive even crime . " " I , at any rate , " say , " will forgive the crime of you silence in the house . my strong belief in you success will not be in the least affect by what you tell I of you failure to - night . you must await another opportunity ; and , if possible , you should be less anxious as to you own performance . there be . " as speak the last word , there be a sound of a carriage stop in the street , and the front door be immediately open . " she be stay here , but have be dine with she uncle , . " then enter the room , roll up in pretty white fur , and silk cloak , and lace shawl . " here be , come to tell we of the debate about the ballot . " " I do not care twopence about the ballot , " say , as she put out she hand to . " be we go to have a new iron fleet built ? that be the question . " " have come out strong to - night , " say . " there be no political question of any importance except the question of the iron fleet , " say . " I be quite sure of that , and so , if can tell I nothing about the iron fleet , I will go to bed . " " will tell you everything when he come home , " say . " oh , ! never tell one anything . I doubt whether think that any woman know the meaning of the british constitution . " " do you know what it mean , ? " ask . " to be sure I do . it be liberty to growl about the iron fleet , or the ballot , or the tax , or the peer , or the bishop , -- or anything else , except the house of Commons . that be the british constitution . good - night , . " " what a beautiful creature she be ! " say . " yes , indeed , " say . " and full of wit and grace and pleasantness . I do not wonder at you brother 's choice . " it will be remember that this be say on the day before have make he offer for the third time . " poor ! he do not know as yet that she be in town . " after that go , not wish to await the return of . he have feel that have come into the room just in time to remedy a great difficulty . he do not wish to speak of he love to a married woman , -- to the wife of the man who call he friend , -- to a woman who he feel sure would have rebuk he . but he could hardly have restrain himself have not be there . but as he go home he think more of than he do of ; and I think that the voice of have do almost as much towards comforte he as have the kindness of the other . at any rate , he have be comforte . " do be punctual " on the very morning after he failure in the of , when be read in the _Telegraph _, -- he take the not from choice but for economy , -- the word of that debate which he have hear and in which he should have take a part , a most unwelcome visit be pay to he . it be near eleven , and the breakfast thing be still on the table . he be at this time on a committee of the House with reference to the use of pot pea in the army and navy , at which he have sit once , -- at a preliminary meeting , -- and in reference to which he have already resolve that as he have fail so frightfully in debate , he would certainly do he duty to the utmost in the more easy but infinitely more tedious work of the committee room . the meet at twelve , and he intend to walk down to the , and then to the house . he have just complete he reading of the debate and of the leader in the on the subject . he have tell himself how little the writer of the article know about , how little about , and how little about the people , -- such be he own idea as to the qualification of the writer of that lead article , -- and be about to start . but arrest he by tell he that there be a man below who want to see he . " what sort of a man , ? " " he be not a gentleman , sir . " " do he give he name ? " " he do not , sir ; but I know it be
be about money . I know the way of they so well . I have see this one 's face before somewhere . " " you have better show he up , " say . he know well the business on which the man be come . the man want money for that bill which have send afloat , and which Phineas have endorse . Phinea have never as yet fall so deeply into trouble of money as to make it necessary that he need refuse himself to any caller on that score , and he do not choose to do so now . nevertheless he must heartily wish that he have leave he lodging for the club before the man have come . this be not the first he have hear of the bill be overdue and unpaid . the bill have be bring to he note a month since , and then he have simply tell the youth who bring it that he would see and have the matter settle . he have speak to he friend , and have simply assure he that all should be make right in two day , -- or , at furthest , by the end of a week . since that time he have observ that he friend have be somewhat shy of speak to he when no other be with they . Phinea would not have allude to the bill have he and be alone together ; but he have be quick enough to guess from he friend 's manner that the matter be not settle . now , no doubt , serious trouble be about to commence . the visitor be a little man with grey hair and a white cravat , some sixty year of age , dress in black , with a very decent hat , -- which , on enter the room , he at once put down on the nearest chair , -- with reference to whom , any judge on the subject would have concur at first sight in the decision pronounce by , though none but a judge very well use to sift the causis of he own conclusion could have give the reason for that early decision . " he be not a gentleman , " have say . and the man certainly be not a gentleman . the old man in the white cravat be very neatly dress , and carry himself without any of that humility which betray one class of uncertified aspirant to gentility , or of that assume arrogance which be at once fatal to another class . but , nevertheless , have see at a glance that he be not a gentleman , -- have seen , moreover , that such a man could have come only upon one mission . she be right there too . this visitor have come about money . " about this bill , , " say the visitor , proceed to take out of he breast coat - pocket a rather large leathern case , as he advanc up towards the fire . " my name be , . if I may venture so far , I will take a chair . " " certainly , , " say , get up and point to a seat . " Thankye , , thankye . we shall be more comfortable do business sit , not we ? " Whereupon the horrid little man draw himself close in to the fire , and spread out he leathern case upon he knee , begin to turn over one suspicious bit of paper after another , as though he be uncertain in what part of he portfolio lay this identical bit which he be seek . he seem to be quite at home , and to feel that there be no ground whatever for hurry in such comfortable quarter . Phineas hate he at once , -- with a hatred altogether unconnected with the difficulty which he friend have bring upon he . " here it be , " say at last . " oh , dear I , dear I ! the third of , and here we be in ! I do not think it be so bad as this ;-- I do not indeed . this be very bad ,-- very bad ! and for parliament gent , too , who should be more punctual than anybody , because of the privilege . should not they now , ? " " all man should be punctual , I suppose , " say . " of course they should ; of course they should . I always say to my gent , ' be punctual , and I will do anything for you . ' but , perhaps , , you can hand I a cheque for this amount , and then you and I will begin square . " " indeed I cannot , . " " not hand I a cheque for it ! " " upon my word , no . " " that be very bad ;-- very bad indeed . then I suppose I must take the half , and renew for the remainder , though I do not like it ;-- I do not indeed . " " I can pay no part of that bill , . " " pay no part of it ! " and , in order that he might the better express he surprise , arrest he hand in the very act of pok he host 's fire . " if you will allow I , I will manage the fire , " say , put out he hand for the poker . but be fond of poking fire , and would not surrender the poker . " pay no part of it ! " he say again , hold the poker away from in he left hand . " do not say
say that , . pray do not say that . do not drive I to be severe . I do not like to be severe with my gent . I will do anything , , if you will only be punctual . " " the fact be , , I have never have one penny of consideration for that bill , and -- " " oh , ! oh , ! " and then have he will of the fire . " I never have one penny of consideration for that bill , " continue . " of course , I do not deny my responsibility . " " no , ; you can not deny that . here it be ;-- ; -- and everybody know you , because you be a parliament gent . " " I do not deny it . but I have no reason to suppose that I should be call upon for the money when I accommodate my friend , , and I have not get it . that be the long and the short of it . I must see he and take care that arrangement be make . " " arrangement ! " " yes , arrangement for settle the bill . " " he have not get the money , . you know that as well as I do . " " I know nothing about it , . " " oh yes , ; you know ; you know . " " I tell you I know nothing about it , " say , wax angry . " as to , he be the pleasantest gent that ever liv . be not he now ? I have know ' he these ten year . I do not suppose that for ten year I have be without he name in my pocket . but , bless you , , there be a end to everything . I should not have look at this bit of paper if it have not be for you signature . of course not . you be just begin , and it be natural you should want a little help . you will find I always ready , if you will only be punctual . " " I tell you again , sir , that I never have a shilling out of that for myself , and do not want any such help . " here smile sweetly . " I give my name to my friend simply to oblige he . " " I like you irish gent because you do hang together so close , " say . " simply to oblige he , " continue . " as I say before , I know that I be responsible ; but , as I say before also , I have not the means of take up that bill . I will see , and let you know what we propose to do . " then get up from he seat and take he hat . it be full time that he should go down to he committee . but do not get up from he seat . " I be afraid I must ask you to leave I now , , as I have business down at the house . " " business at the never press , , " say . " that be the best of parliament . I have know parliament gent this thirty year and more . would you believe it -- I have have a 's name in that portfolio ; that I have ; and a 's ; that I have ; -- and a Archbishop 's too . I know what parliament be , . come , come ; do not put I off with parliament . " there he sit before the fire with he pouch open before he , and have no power of move he . could Phineas have pay he the money which be manifestly due to he on the bill , the man would of course have go ; but fail in that , could not turn he out . there be a black cloud on the young member 's brow , and great anger at he heart ,-- against rather than against the man who be sit there before he . " , " he say , " it be really imperative that I should go . I be pledge to a appointment at the at twelve , and it want now only a quarter . I regret that you interview with I should be so unsatisfactory , but I can only promise you that I will see . " " and when shall I call again , ? " " perhaps I have better write to you , " say . " oh dear , no , " say . " I should much prefer to look in . look in be always best . we can get to understand one another in that way . let I see . I daresay you be not particular . suppose I say morning . " " really , I could not see you on morning , . " " parliament gent be not generally particular ,--'speciaily not among the , " plead . " I be always engage on , " say . " suppose we say , -- or . morning at eleven . and do be punctual , . at morning I will come , and then no doubt I shall find you ready . " Whereupon slowly put up he bill within he portfolio , and then , before Phineas know where he be , have warmly shaken that poor dismaye member of parliament by the hand . " only do be punctual , , " he say , as he make he way down the stair . it be now twelve , and Phineas rush off to a cab .
. he be in such a fervour of rage and misery that he could hardly think of he position , or what he have better do , till he get into the committee room ; and when there he could think of nothing else . he intend to go deeply into the question of potted pea , hold a equal balance between the assailed government office on the one hand , and the advocate of the pott pea on the other . the potter of the pea , who want to sell they article to the , declare that a extensive , -- perhaps we may say , a unlimited , -- use of the article would save the whole army and navy from the scourge of scurvy , dyspepsia , and rheumatism , would be the best safeguard against typhus and other fevers , and would be a invaluable aid in all other malady to which soldier and sailor be peculiarly subject . the pea in question be grow on a large scale in , and they growth have be foster with the special object of do good to the british army and navy . the pea be so cheap that there would be a great save in money , -- and it really have seem to many that the official of the and the Admiralty have be actuate by some fiendish desire to deprive they man of salutary fresh vegetable , simply because they be of foreign growth . but the official of the and the declare that the pott pea in question be hardly fit for swine . the motion for the committee have be make by a gentleman of the opposition , and have be put upon it as a independent member . he have resolve to give it all he mind , and , as far as he be concerned , to reach a just decision , in which there should be no favour show to the government side . new broom be proverbial for thorough work , and in this committee work be as yet a new broom . but , unfortunately , on this day he mind be so harass that he could hardly understand what be go on . it do not , perhaps , much signify , as the witness examine be altogether agricultural . they only prove the production of pea in , -- a fact as to which have no doubt . the proof be naturally slow , as the evidence be give in German , and have to be translate into . and the work of the day be much imped by a certain member who unfortunately speak German , who seem to be fond of speak before he breth of the committee , and who be curiious as to agriculture in generally . the chairman do not understand german , and there be a difficulty in check this gentleman , and in make he understand that he question be not relevant to the issue . Phineas could not keep he mind during the whole afternoon from the subject of he misfortune . what should he do if this horrid man come to he once or twice a week ? he certainly do owe the man the money . he must admit that to himself . the man no doubt be a dishonest knave who have discount the bill probably at fifty per cent ; but , nevertheless , have make himself legally responsible for the amount . the privilege of the prohibit he from arrest . he think of that very often , but the thought only make he the more unhappy . would it not be say , and might it not be say truly , that he have incur this responsibility , -- a responsibility which he be altogether unequal to answer , -- because he be so protect ? he do feel that a certain consciousness of he privilege have be present to he when he have put he name across the paper , and there have be dishonesty in that very consciousness . and of what service would he privilege be to he , if this man could harass every hour of he life ? the man be to be with he again in a day or two , and when the appointment have be propose , he , , have not da to negative it . and how be he to escape ? as for pay the bill , that with he be altogether impossible . the man have tell he , -- and he have believe the man , -- that payment by be out of the question . and yet be the son of a peer , whereas he be only the son of a country doctor ! of course must make some effort , -- some great effort , -- and have the thing settle . Alas , alas ! he know enough of the world already to feel that the hope be vain . he go down from the committee room into the house , and he dine at the house , and remain there until eight or nine at night ; but do not come . he then go to the , but he be not there . both at the club and in the many man speak to he about the debate of the previous night , express surprise that he have not speak , -- make he more and more wretch . he see , but be walk arm in arm with he colleague , , and could do no more than just speak to they . he think that 's nod of recognition be very cold . that might be fancy , but it certainly be a fact that only nod to he . he would tell the truth , and then , if choose to quarrel with he , he at any rate would
would take no step to renew they friendship . from the he go to the , a smaller club to which belong , -- and of which much wish to become a member , -- and to which he know that he friend resort when he wish to enjoy himself thoroughly , and to be at ease in he inn . man at the could do as they please . there be no politics there , no fashion , no stiffness , and no rule , -- so man say ; but that be hardly true . everybody call everybody by he name , and member smoke all over the house . they who do not belong to the think it a upon ; and they who do , believe it to be among the most pleasant . Phinea call at the Shakspeare , and be tell by the porter that be up - stair . he be show into the stranger room , and in five minute he friend come down to he . " I want you to come down to the Reform with I , " say . " by jingo , my dear fellow , I be in the middle of a rubber of whist . " " there have be a man with I about that bill . " " what ;-- ? " " yes , , " say . " do not mind he , " say . " that be nonsense . how be I to help mind he ? I must mind he . he be come to I again on morning . " " do not see he . " " how can I help see he ? " " make they say you be not at home . " " he have make a appointment . he have tell I that he will never leave I alone . he will be the death of I if this be not settled . " " it shall be settle , my dear fellow . I will see about it . I will see about it and write you a line . you must excuse I now , because those fellow be wait . I will have it all arrange . " again as go home he thoroughly wish that he have not seced from . at the middle of come up from to , coerce into do so , as declare , in thorough opposition to all she own taste , by the known wish of she friend and relative . she friend and relatives , so insinuate , be unanimous in wishing that should remain at , and therefore , -- that wish have be indiscreetly express , -- she have put herself to great inconvenience , and have come to in . " Gustavus will go mad , " say to . the Gustavus in question be the of the present generation , 's be the peer 's mother . " why do not take a house himself ? " ask . " do not you know , my dear , " answer , " how much we people think of money ? we do not like be vex and drive mad , but even that be better than keep up two household . " as regard , the injury arise from 's early migration be very great , for she be thus compelle to move from to 's house in . " as you be so fond of be in , and I have make up we minds to come up before , " have write to she . " I shall go to she now , " Violet have say to she friend , " because I have not quite make up my mind as to what I will do for the future . " " , and be you own mistress . " " I mean to be my own mistress without marry , though I do not see my way quite clearly as yet . I think I shall set up a little house of my own , and let the world say what it please . I suppose they could not make I out to be a lunatic . " " I should not wonder if they be to try , " say . " they could not prevent I in any other way . but I be in the dark as yet , and so I shall be obedient and go to my aunt . " go to , and be introduce to . he have be often in , and have see Violet frequently . give periodical dinner ,-- once a week , -- to which everybody go who could get a invitation ; and have be a guest more than once . indeed , in spite of he misery he have take to dine out a good deal , and be popular as a eater of dinner . he could talk when want , and do not talk too much , be pleasant in manners and appearance , and have already achieve a certain recognise position in life . of those who know he intimately , not one in twenty be aware from whence he come , what be he parentage , or what he means of living . he be a member of parliament , a friend of 's , be intimate with , though a do not as a rule herd with other , and be the right sort of person to have at you house . some people say he be a cousin of 's , and other declare that he be 's earliest friend . there he be , however , with a position gai , and even ask he to she house . have evening . people go to she house , and stand about the room and on the stair , talk to each other for
for half a hour , and go away . in these day there be no crowding , but still there be always enough of people there to show that be successful . why people should have go to 's I can not explain ; -- but there be house to which people go without any reason . receive a little card ask he to go , and he always go . " I think you like my friend , , " say to , after the first of these evening . " yes , I do . I like he decidedly . " " so do I . I should hardly have think that you would have take a fancy to he . " " I hardly know what you call take a fancy , " say . " I be not quite sure I like to be tell that I have take a fancy for a young man . " " I mean no offence , my dear . " " of course you do not But , to speak truth , I think I have rather take a fancy to he . there be just enough on he , but not too much . I do not mean materially , -- in regard to he inch ; but as to he mental belonging . I hate a stupid man who can not talk to I , and I hate a clever man who talk I down . I do not like a man who be too lazy to make any effort to shine ; but I particularly dislike the man who be always strive for effect . I abominate a humble man , but yet I love to perceive that a man acknowledge the superiority of my sex , and youth , and all that kind of thing . " " you want to be flatter without plain flattery . " " of course I do . a man who would tell I that I be pretty , unless he be over seventy , ink to be kick out of the room . but a man who can not show I that he think I so without say a word about it , be a lout . now in all those matter , you friend , , seem to know what he be about . in other word , he make himself pleasant , and , therefore , one be glad to see he . " " I suppose you do not mean to fall in love with he ? " " not that I know of , my dear . but when I do , I will be sure to give you notice . " I fear that there be more of earnestness in 's last question than have suppose . she have declare to herself over and over again that she have never be in love with . she have acknowledge to herself , before have ask she hand in marriage , that there have be danger , -- that she could have learn to love the man if such love would not have be ruinous to she , -- that the romance of such a passion would have be pleasant to she . she have go farther than this , and have say to herself that she would have give way to that romance , and would have be ready to accept such love if offer to she , have she not put it out of she own power to marry a poor man by she generosity to she brother . then she have thrust the thing aside , and have clearly understood , -- she think that she have clearly understood , -- that life for she must be a matter of business . be it not the case with nine out of every ten among mankind , with nine hundred and ninety - nine out of every thousand , that life must be a matter of business and not of romance ? of course she could not marry , know , as she do , that neither of they have a shilling . of all man in the world she esteem the most , and when these thought be pass through she mind , she be well aware that he would ask she to be he wife . have she not resolve that she would accept the offer , she would not have go to . have put aside all romance as unfitted to she life , she could , she think , do she duty as 's wife . she would teach herself to love he . Nay ,-- she have teach herself to love he . she be at any rate so sure of she own heart that she would never give she husband cause to rue the confidence he place in she . and yet there be something sore within she when she think that be fond of . it be 's second evening , and come to the house at about eleven o'clock . at this time he have encounter a second and a third interview with , and have already fail in obtain any word of comfort from about the bill . it be clear enough now that feel that they be both make safe by they privilege , and that should be treat as you treat the organ - grinders . they be a nuisance and must be endure . but the nuisance be not so great but what you can live in comfort , -- if only you be not too sore as to the annoyance . " my dear fellow , " have say to he , " I have have almost live in my room . he use to drink nearly a pint of sherry a day for I . all I look to be that I do not live there at the same time
time . if you wish it , I will send in the sherry . " this be very bad , and try to quarrel with he friend ; but he find that it be difficult to quarrel with . but though on this side be very miserable , on another side he have obtain great comfort . and he be better friend than ever . " as to what say about I in the house , " have say , laugh ; " he and I understand each other perfectly . I should like to see you on you leg , but it be just as well , perhaps , that you have defer it . we shall have the real question on immediately after , and then you will have plenty of opportunity . " Phineas have explain how he have attempt , how he have fail , and how he have suffer ; -- and have be generous in he sympathy . " I know all about it , " say he , " and have go through it all myself . the more respect you feel for the , the more satisfaction you will have in address it when you have master this difficulty . " the first person who speak to at 's be , 's sister . be a warm woman as regard money , and as she be moreover a most discreet spinster , she be make welcome by , in spite of the well - know iniquity of she male relative . " , " say she , " how would 'ye do ? I want to say a word to ye . just come here into the corner . " Phineas , not know how to escape , do retreat into the corner with . " tell I now , ; -- have ye be lend money to ? " " no ; I have lent he no money , " say , much astonished by the question . " do not . that be my advice to ye . do not . on any other matter Laurence be the best creature in the world , -- but he be bad to lend money to . you be not in any hobble with he , then ? " " well ; -- nothing to speak off . what make you ask ? " " then you be in a hobble ? dear , dear ! I never see such a man as ;-- never . good - bye . I would not do it again , if I be you ; -- that be all . " then come out of the corner and make she way down - stair . Phineas immediately afterwards come across . " I do not know , " say she , " that you and the divine be such close ally . " " we be the dearest friend in the world , but she have take my breath away now . " " may a body be tell how she have do that ? " ask . " well , no ; I be afraid not , even though the body be . it be a profound secret ; -- really a secret concern a third person , and she begin about it just as though she be speak about the weather ! " " how charme ! I do so like she . you have not hear , have you , that propose to she the other day ? " " no ! " " but he do ; -- at least , so she tell everybody . she say she would take he if he would promise to get she brother 's salary double . " " do she tell you ? " " no ; not I . and of course I do not believe a word of it . I suppose make up the story . be you go out of town next week , ? " the week next to this be Easter- week . " I hear you be go into . " " from ? " " yes ;-- from . " " I intend to spend three day with at . it be a old promise . I be go to ride he horse , -- that be , if I be able to ride they . " " take care what you be about , ; -- they say he horse be so dangerous ! " " I be rather good at falling , I flatter myself . " " I know that ride anything he can sit , so long as it be some animal that nobody else will ride . it be always so with he . he be so odd ; be he not ? " Phinea know , of course , that have more than once ask to be he wife , -- and he believe that she , from she intimacy with , must know that he know it . he have also hear express a very strong wish that , in spite of these refusal , might even yet become she brother 's wife . and also know that be become , in he own estimation , the most charming woman of he acquaintance . how be he to talk to she about ? " he be odd , " say ; " but he be a excellent fellow , -- whom he father altogether misunderstand . " " exactly , -- just so ; I be so glad to hear you say that , -- you who have never have the misfortune to have anything to do with a bad set . why do not you tell ? would listen to you . " " to I ? " " yes ; -- of course he would , -- for you be just the link that be want . you
you be 's intimate friend , and you be also the friend of big - wig and . " " would put I down at once if I speak to he on such a subject . " " I be sure he would not . you be too big to be put down , and no man can really dislike to hear he son well speak of by those who be well speak of themselves . will not you try , ? " say that he would think of it , -- that he would try if any fit opportunity could be find . " of course you know how intimate I have be with the , " say ; " that be to I a sister , and that use to be almost a brother . " " why do not you speak to ; -- you who be he favourite ? " " there be reason , . besides , how can any girl come forward and say that she know the disposition of any man ? you can live with , and see what he be make of , and know he thought , and learn what be good in he , and also what be bad . after all , how be any girl really to know anything of a man 's life ? " " if I can do anything , , I will , " say . " and then we shall all of we be so grateful to you , " say , with she sweetest smile . Phineas , retreat from this conversation , stand for a while alone , think of it . have she speak thus of because she do love he or because she do not ? and the sweet commendation which have fall from she lip upon he , -- he , , -- be they compatible with anything like a grow partiality for himself , or be they incompatible with any such feeling ? have he most reason to be comforte or to be discomfit by what have take place ? it seem hardly possible to he imagination that should love such a nobody as he . and yet he have have fair evidence that one standing as high in the world as would fain have love he could she have follow the dictate of she heart . he have tremble when he have first resolve to declare he passion to ,-- fear that she would scorn he as be presumptuous . but there have be no cause for such fear as that . he have declare he love , and she have not think he to be presumptuous . that now be age ago , -- eight month since ; and have become a married woman . since he have become so warmly alive to the charms of he have determine , with stern propriety , that a passion for a married woman be disgraceful . such love be in itself a sin , even though it be accompany by the severest forbearance and the most rigid propriety of conduct . no ;-- have do wisely to check the grow feeling of partiality which she have admit ; and now that she be marry , he would be as wise as she . it be clear to him that , as regard he own heart , the way be open to he for a new enterprise . but what if he be to fail again , and be tell by , when he declare he love , that she have just engage herself to ! " what be you and talk about so eagerly ? " say to he , with a smile that , in its approach to laughter , almost betraye its mistress . " we be talk about you brother . " " you be go to he , be you not ? " " yes ; I leave on night ; -- but only for a day or two . " " have he any chance there , do you think ? " " what , with ? " " yes ; -- with . sometimes I think she love he . " " how can I say ? in such a matter you can judge better than I can do . one woman with reference to another can draw the line between love and friendship . she certainly like . " " oh , I believe she love he . I do indeed . but she fear he . she do not quite understand how much there be of tenderness with that assume ferocity . and be so strange , so unwise , so impolitic , that though he love she better than all the world beside , he will not sacrifice even a turn of a word to win she . when he ask she to marry he , he almost fly at she throat , as a angry debtor who apply for instant payment . tell he , , never to give it over ; -- and teach he that he should be soft with she . tell he , also , that in she heart she like he . one woman , as you say , know another woman ; and I be certain he would win she if he would only be gentle with she . " then , again , before they parte , tell he that this marriage be the dearest wish of she heart , and that there would be no end to she gratitude if Phinea could do anything to promote it . all which again make we hero unhappy . in , though he be a most scrupulously attentive member of parliament , be a man very punctual to hour and rule in he own house , -- and like that he wife should be as punctual as himself . , who in
in marry he have firmly resolve that she would do she duty to he in all way , even though the way might sometimes be painful , -- and have be perhaps more punctilious in this respect than she might have be have she love he heartily , -- be not perhaps quite so fond of accurate regularity as she husband ; and thus , by this time , certain habit of he have become rather bond than habits to she . he always have prayer at nine , and breakfast at a quarter past nine , let the hour on the night before have be as late as they might before the time for rest have come . after breakfast he would open he letter in he study , but he like she to be with he , and desire to discuss with she every application he get from a constituent . he have he private secretary in a room apart , but he think that everything should be filter to he private secretary through he wife . he be very anxious that she herself should superintend the account of they own private expenditure , and have take some trouble to teach she a excellent mode of book - keeping . he have recommend to she a certain course of reading , -- which be pleasant enough ; lady like to receive such recommendation ; but , have draw out the course , seem to expect that he wife should read the book he have name , and , worse still , that she should read they in the time he have allocate for the work . this , I think , be tyranny . then the become very wearisome to . go to church twice , she have learnt , would be a part of she duty ; and though in she father 's household attendance at church have never be very strict , she have make up she mind to this cheerfully . but expect also that he and she should always dine together on , that there should be no guest , and that there should be no evening company . after all , the demand be not very severe , but yet she find that it operate injuriously upon she comfort . the be very wearisome to she , and make she feel that she lord and master be -- she lord and master . she make a effort or two to escape , but the effort be all in vain . he never speak a cross word to she . he never give a stern command . but yet he have he way . " I will not say that read a novel on a be a sin , " he say ; " but we must at any rate admit that it be a matter on which man disagree , that many of the best of man be against such occupation on , and that to abstain be to be on the safe side . " so the novel be put away , and afternoon with the long evening become rather a stumbling - block to . those two hour , moreover , with she husband in the morning become very wearisome to she . at first she have declare that it would be she greatest ambition to help she husband in he work , and she have read all the letter from the and , ask to be make gauger and landing - waiter , with a assume interest . but the work pal upon she very quickly . she quick intellect discover soon that there be nothing in it which she really do . it be all form and verbiage , and pretence at business . she husband go through it all with the utmost patience , read every word , give order as to every detail , and conscientiously do that which he conceive he have undertaken to do . but want to meddle with high politics , to discuss reform bill , to assist in put up and put down my that . why should she waste she time in do that which the lad in the next room , who be call a private secretary , could do as well ? still she would obey . let the task be as hard as it might , she would obey . if he counsell she to do this or that , she would follow he counsel , -- because she owe he so much . if she have accept the half of all he wealth without love he , she owed he the more on that account . but she know , -- she could not but know , -- that she intellect be brighter than he ; and might it not be possible for she to lead he ? then she make effort to lead she husband , and find that he be as stiff - necke as a ox . be not , perhaps , a clever man ; but he be a man who know he own way , and who intend to keep it . " I have get a headache , , " she say to he one after luncheon . " I think I will not go to church this afternoon . " " it be not serious , I hope . " " oh dear no . do not you know how one feel sometimes that one have get a head ? and when that be the case one 's armchair be the best place . " " I be not sure of that , " say . " if I go to church I should not attend , " say . " the fresh air would do you more good than anything else , and we could walk across the park . " " thank you ;-- I will not go out
out again to - day . " this she say with something almost of crossness in she manner , and go to the afternoon service by himself . when she be leave alone begin to think of she position . she be not more than four or five month married , and she be become very tired of she life . be it not also true that she be become tired of she husband ? she have twice tell Phineas Finn that of all man in the world she esteem the most . she do not esteem he less now . she know no point or particle in which he do not do he duty with accuracy . but no person can live happily with another , -- not even with a brother or a sister or a friend , -- simply upon esteem . all the virtue in the calendar , though they exist on each side , will not make a man and woman happy together , unless there be sympathy . be begin to find out that there be a lack of sympathy between herself and she husband . she think of this till she be tired of think of it , and then , wish to divert she mind , she take up the book that be lie nearest to she hand . it be a volume of a new novel which she have be read on the previous day , and now , without much think about it , she go on with she reading . there come to she , no doubt , some dim , half - form idea that , as she be free from go to church by the plea of a headache , she be also absolve by the same plea from other hindrance . a child , when it be ill , have butter toast and a picture - book instead of bread - and - milk and lesson . in this way , conceive herself to be entitle to she novel . while she be read it , there come a knock at the door , and be show upstairs . have give no order against visitor , but have simply say that visit be not to he taste . , however , be 's cousin , and people must be very strict if they can not see they cousin on . soon lose she headache altogether in the animation of discuss the chance of the new with the 's private secretary ; and have leave she chair , and be stand by the table with the novel in she hand , protest this and deny that , express infinite confidence in , and violently denounce , when she husband return from church and come up into the drawing - room . have forget she headache altogether , and have in she composition none of that thoughtfulness of hypocrisy which would have teach she to moderate she political feeling at she husband 's return . " I do declare , " she say , " that if oppose the government measure now , because he can not have he own way in everything , I will never again put my trust in any man who call himself a popular leader . " " you never should , " say . " that be all very well for you , , who be a aristocratic Whig of the old official school , and who call yourself a simply because be a a hundred year ago . my heart 's in it . " " heart should never have anything to do with politics ; should it ? " say , turn round to . do not wish to discuss the matter on a , nor yet do he wish to say before Erle that he think it wrong to do so . and he be desirous of treat he wife in some way as though she be a invalid , -- that she thereby might be , as it be , punish ; but he do not wish to do this in such a way that should be aware of the punishment . " have better not disturb herself about it now , " he say . " how be a person to help be disturb ? " say , laugh . " well , well ; we will not mind all that now , " say , turn away . then he take up the novel which have just lay down from she hand , and , have look at it , carry it aside , and place it on a book - shelf which be remote from they . watch he as he do this , and the whole course of she husband 's thought on the subject be open to she at once . she regrett the novel , and she regret also the political discussion . afterwards go away , and the husband and wife be alone together . " I be glad that you head be so much better , " say he . he do not intend to be severe , but he speak with a gravity of manner which almost amount to severity . " yes ; it be , " she say , " 's come in cheer I up . " " I be sorry that you should have want cheering . " " do not you know what i mean , ? " " no ; I do not think that I do , exactly . " " I suppose you head be stronger . you do not get that feeling of dazed , helpless imbecility of brain , which hardly amount to headache , but which yet -- be almost as bad . " " Imbecility of brain may be worse than headache , but I do not think it can produce it . " " well , well
well ; -- I do not know how to explain it . " " Headache come , I think , always from the stomach , even when produce by nervous affections . but imbecility of the brain -- " " oh , , I be so sorry that I use the word . " " I see that it do not prevent you reading , " he say , after a pause . " not such read as that . I be up to nothing better . " then there be another pause . " I will not deny that it may be a prejudice , " he say , " but I confess that the use of novel in my own house on be a pain to I . my mother 's idea on the subject be very strict , and I can not think that it be bad for a son to hang on to the teaching of he mother . " this he say in the most serious tone which he could command . " I do not know why I take it up , " say . " simply , I believe , because it be there . I will avoid do so for the future . " " do , my dear , " say the husband . " I shall be oblige and grateful if you will remember what I have say . " then he leave she , and she sit alone , first in the dusk and then in the dark , for two hour , do nothing . be this to be the life which she have procure for herself by marry of ? if it be harsh and unendurable in , what would it be in the country ? the leave by a night mail train on , and find himself at the about half a hour after midnight . be up and wait for he , and supper be on the table . the be a english inn of the old stamp , which have now , in these latter year of railway travelling , cease to have a road business , -- for there be no traveller on the road , and but little post -- but have acquire a new trade as a for hunter and hunt man . the landlord let out horse and keep hunt stable , and the house be generally fill from the beginning of till the middle of . then it become a desert in the summer , and no guest be see there , till the pink coat flock down again into the shire . " how many day do you mean to give we ? " say , as he help he friend to a devilled leg of turkey . " I must go back on , " say . " that mean night . I will tell you what we will do . we have the to - morrow . we will get into 's country on , and will be only twelve mile off on . we shall be rather short of horse . " " pray do not let I put you out . I can hire something here , I suppose ? " " you will not put I out at all . there will be three between we each day , and we will run we luck . the horse have go on to for to - morrow . be rather a way off , -- at ; but we will manage it . if the worst come to the worst , we can get back to by rail . on we shall have everything very comfortable . they be out beyond and will draw home we way . I have plan it all out . I have a trap with a fast stepper , and if we start to - morrow at half - past nine , we shall be in plenty of time . you shall ride , and if she do not carry you , you may shoot she . " " be she one of the pull one ? " " she be heavy in hand if you be heavy at she , but leave she mouth alone and she will go like flow water . you would better not ride more in a crowd than you can help . now what will you drink ? " they sit up half the night smoke and talk , and learn more about then than ever he have learn before . there be brandy and water before they , but neither of they drank . , indeed , have a pint of beer by he side from which he sip occasionally . " I have take to beer , " he say , " as be the best drink go . when a man hunt six day a week he can afford to drink beer . I be on a allowance , -- three pint a day . that be not too much . " " and you drink nothing else ? " " nothing when I be alone ,-- except a little cherry - brandy when I be out . I never care for drink ; -- never in my life . I do like excitement , and have be less careful than I ought to have be as to what it have come from . I could give up drink to - morrow , without a struggle , -- if it be worth my while to make up my mind to do it . and it be the same with gambling . I never do gamble now , because I have get no money ; but I own I like it better than anything in the world . while you be at it , there be life in it . " " you should take to politics , . " " and
and I would have do so , but my father would not help I . never mind , we will not talk about he . how do get on with she husband ? " " very happily , I should say . " " I do not believe it , " say . " she temper be too much like mine to allow she to be happy with such a log of wood as . it be such man as he who drive I out of the pale of decent life . if that be decency , I would sooner be indecent . you mark my word . they will come to grief . she will never be able to stand it . " " I should think she have she own way in everything , " say . " no , no . though he be a prig , he be a man ; and she will not find it easy to drive he . " " but she may bend he . " " not a inch ; -- that be if I understand he character . I suppose you see a good deal of they ? " " yes , -- pretty well . I be not there so often as I use to be in the . " " you get sick of it , I suppose . I should . do you see my father often ? " " only occasionally . he be always very civil when I do see he . " " he be the very pink of civility when he please , but the most unjust man I ever meet . " " I should not have think that . " " yes , he be , " say the 's son , " and all from lack of judgment to discern the truth . he make up he mind to a thing on insufficient proof , and then nothing will turn he . he think well of you ,-- would probably believe you word on any indifferent subject without thought of a doubt ; but if you be to tell he that I do not get drunk every night of my life and spend most of my time in thrashing policeman , he would not believe you . he would smile incredulously and make you a little bow . I can see he do it . " " you be too hard on he , . " " he have be too hard on I , I know . be still in ? " " no ; she be with . " " that old grandmother of evil have come to town , -- have she ? poor Violet ! when we be yoing together we use to have such fun about that old woman . " " the old woman be a ally of mine now , " say . " you make ally everywhere . you know of course ? " " oh yes . I know she . " " do not you think she very charme ? " say . " Exceedingly charme . " " I have ask that girl to marry I three time , and I shall never ask she again . there be a point beyond which a man should not go . there be many reason why it would be a good marriage . in the first place , she money would be serviceable . then it would heal matter in we family , for my father be as prejudiced in she favour as he be against I . and I love she dearly . I have love she all my life , -- since I use to buy cake for she . but I shall never ask she again . " " I would if I be you , " say ,-- hardly know what it might be best for he to say . " no ; I never will . but I will tell you what . I shall get into some desperate scrape about she . of course she will marry , and that soon . then I shall make a fool of myself . when I hear that she be engage I shall go and quarrel with the man , and kick he , -- or get kick . all the world will turn against I , and I shall be call a wild beast . " " a dog in the manger be what you should be call . " " exactly ; -- but how be a man to help it ? if you love a girl , could you see another man take she ? " remembe of course that he have lately come through this ordeal . " it be as though he be to come and put he hand upon I , and want my own heart out of I . though I have no property in she at all , no right to she ,-- though she never give I a word of encouragement , it be as though she be the most private thing in the world to I . I should be half mad , and in my madness I could not master the idea that I be be rob . I should resent it as a personal interference . " " I suppose it will come to that if you give she up yourself , " say . " it be no question of give up . of course I can not make she marry I . light another cigar , old fellow . " Phinea , as he lit the other cigar , remember that he owe a certain duty in this matter to . she have commission he to persuade she brother that he suit with would not be hopeless , if he could only restrain himself in he mode of conduct it . be dispose to
to do he duty , although he feel it to be very hard that he should be call upon to be eloquent against he own interest . he have be think for the last quarter of a hour how he must bear himself if it might turn out that he should be the man whom be resolve to kick . he look at he friend and host , and become aware that a kicking - match with such a one would not be pleasant pastime . nevertheless , he would be happy enough to be subject to 's wrath for such a reason . he would do he duty by ; and then , when that have be adequately do , he would , if occasion serve , fight a battle for himself . " you be too sudden with she , , " he say , after a pause . " what do you mean by too sudden ? " say , almost angrily . " you frighten she by be so impetuous . you rush at she as though you want to conquer she by a single blow . " " so I do . " " you should be more gentle with she . you should give she time to find out whether she like you or not . " " she have know I all she life , and have find that out long ago . not but what you be right . I know you be right . if I be you , and have you skill in pleasing , I should drop soft word into she ear till I have catch she . but I have no gift in that way . I be as awkward as a pig at what be call flirting . and I have a accursed pride which stand in my own light . if she be in this house this moment , and if I know she be to be have for asking , I do not think I could bring myself to ask again . but we will go to bed . it be half - past two , and we must be off at half - past nine , if we be to be at gate at eleven . " Phineas , as he go up - stair , assure himself that he have do he duty . if there ever should come to be anything between he and , might quarrel with he , -- might probably attempt that kick encounter to which allusion have be make , -- but nobody could justly say that he have not behave honourably to he friend . on the next morning there be a bustle and a scurry , as there always be on such occasion , and the two man get off about ten minute after time . but drive hard , and they reach the meet before the master have move off . they have a fair day 's sport with the Cottesmore ; and , though he find that do require a good deal of riding , go through he day 's work with credit . he have be ride since he be a child , as be the custom with all boy in , and have a 's natural aptitude for jumping . when they get back to the he feel pleased with the day and rather proud of himself . " it be not fast , you know , " say , " and I do not call that a stiff country . besides , be very handy when you have get she out of the crowd . you shall ride to - morrow at , and you will find that better fun . " " ? have not I hear you say he rush like mischief ? " " well , he do rush . but , by ! you want a horse to rush in that country . when you have to go right through four or five foot of stiff green wood , like a bullet through a target , you want a little force , or you be apt to be leave up a tree . " " and what do you ride ? " " a brute I never put my leg on yet . he be send down to here , out of , because they could not get anybody to ride he there . they say he go with he head up in the air , and will not look at a fence that be not as high as he breast . but I think he will do here . I never see a better make beast , or one with more power . do you look at he shoulders . he be to be have for seventy pound , and these be the sort of horse I like to buy . " again they dine alone , and explain to Phineas that he rarely associate with the man of either of the hunt in which he ride . " there be a set of fellow down here who be poison to I , and there be another set , and I be poison to they . everybody be very civil , as you see , but I have no associate . and gradually I be get to have a reputation as though I be the himself . I think I shall come out next year dress entirely in black . " " be you not wrong to give way to that kind of thing ? " " what the deuce be I to do ? I can not make civil little speeches . when once a man get a reputation as a ogre , it be the most difficult thing in the world to drop it . I could have a score of man here every day if I like it , -- my title would do
do that for I ; -- but they would be man I should loathe , and I should be sure to tell they so , even though I do not mean it . , and the new horse , and another , go on at twelve to - day . you must expect hard work to - morrow , as I daresay we sha not be home before eight . " the next day 's meet be in , not far from , and they start early . , to tell the truth of he , be rather afraid of , and look forward to the probability of a accident . he have neither wife nor child , and nobody have a better right to risk he neck . " we will put a gag on 'im , " say the groom , " and you will ride 'e in a ring ,-- so that you may well - nigh break he jaw ; but he be a rum un , sir . " " I will do my best , " say . " he will take all that , " say the groom . " just let he have he own way at everything , " say , as they move away from the meet to ; " and if you will only sit on he back , he will carry you through as safe as a church . " Phineas could not help think that the counsel of the master and of the groom be very different . " my idea be , " continue , " that in hunt you should always avoid a crowd . I do not think a horse be worth riding that will go in a crowd . it be just like yachting , -- you should have plenty of sea -room . if you be to pull you horse up at every fence till somebody else be over , I think you would better come out on a donkey . " and so they go away to . there be over two hundred man out , and begin to think that it might not be so easy to get out of the crowd . a crowd in a fast run no doubt quickly become small by degree and beautifully less ; but it be very difficult , especially for a stranger , to free himself from the rush at the first start . 's horse plunge about so violently , as they stand on a little hill - side look down upon the cover , that he be oblige to take he to a distance , and follow he . " if he break down wind , " say , " we can not be better than we be here . if he go up wind , he must turn before long , and we shall be all right . " as he speak a old hound open true and sharp , -- a old hound whom all the pack believe , -- and in a moment there be no doubt that the fox have be find . " there be not above eight or nine acre in it , " say , " and he can not hang long . do you ever see such a uneasy brute as this in you life ? but I feel certain he will go well when he get away . " be too much occupy with he own horse to think much of that on which be mount . , the very moment that he hear the old hound 's note , stretch out he head , and put he mouth upon the bit , and begin to tremble in every muscle . " he be a great deal more anxious for it than you and I be , " say . " I see they have give you that gag . but do not you ride he on it till he want it . give he lot of room , and he will go in the snaffle . " all which caution make Phineas think that any insurance office would charge very dear on he life at the present moment . the fox take two ring of the gorse , and then he go , -- up wind . " it be not a vixen , I will swear , " say . " a vixen in cub never go away like that yet . now then , , my boy , keep to the right . " and , with the horse out of , go away across the brow of the hill , leave the hound to the left , and select , as he point of exit into the next field , a stiff rail , which , have there be a accident , must have put a very wide margin of ground between the rider and he horse . " go hard at you fence , and then you will fall clear , " he have say to . I do not think , however , that he would have ride at the rail as he do , but that there be no help for he . " the brute begin in he own way , and carry on after in the same fashion all through , " he say afterwards . Phineas take the fence a little lower down , and what it be at which he ride he never know . sail over it , whatever it be , and he soon find himself by he friend 's side . the ruck of the man be lower down than we two heroe , and there be other far away to the left , and other , again , who have be at the end of the gorse , and be now behind . we friend be not near the hound , not within two field of they
they , but the hound be below they , and therefore could be see . " do not be in a hurry , and they will be round upon we , " say . " how the deuce be one to help be in a hurry ? " say , who be do he very best to ride with the snaffle , but have already begin to feel that car nothing for that weak instrument . " by , I should like to change with you , " say . the horse be go along with he head very low , boring as he gallop , but throw he neck up at he fence , just when he ought to have keep himself steady . after this , though keep near throughout the run , they be not again near enough to exchange word ; and , indeed , they have but little breath for such purpose . ride still a little in advance , and , know he friend 's partiality for solitude when take he fence , keep a little to he left . he begin to find that know pretty well what he be about . as for not use the gag rein , that be impossible . when a horse put out what strength he have against a man 's arm , a man must put out what strength he have against the horse 's mouth . but be cunn , and have have a gag rein on before . he contract he lip here , and bend out he jaw there , till he have settle it to he mind , and then go away after he own fashion . he seem to have a passion for smashe through big , high - grow ox - fence , and by degree he rider come to feel that if there be nothing worse come , the fun be not bad . the fox run up wind for a couple of mile or so , as have prophesy , and then turn , -- not to the right , as would best have serve he and , but to the left , -- so that they be force to make they way through the ruck of horse before they could place themselves again . Phinea find himself cross a road , in and out of it , before he know where he be , and for a while he lose sight of . but in truth he be lead now , whereas have lead before . the two horse have be together all the morning , and on the previous day , be willing enough to remain in company , if they be allow to do so . they both cross the road , not very far from each other , go in and out amidst a crowd of horse , and before long be again place well , now have the hunt on they right , whereas hitherto it have be on they left . they go over large pasture fields , and begin to think that as long as would be able to go through the thick grow - up hedge , all would be right . now and again he come to a cut fence , a fence that have be cut and laid , and these be not so pleasant . Force be not sufficient for they , and they admit of a mistake . but the horse , though he would rush at they unpleasantly , take they when they come without touch they . it might be all right yet ,-- unless the beast should tire with he ; and then , think , a misfortune might probably occur . he remember , as he fly over one such impediment , that he ride a stone heavier than he friend . at the end of forty - five minute also might become aware of the fact . the hound be run well in sight to they right , and begin to feel some of that pride which a man indulge when he become aware that he have take he place comfortably , have leave the squad behind , and be go well . there be man nearer the hound than he be , but he be near enough even for ambition . there have already be enough of the run to make he sure that it would be a " good thing " , and enough to make he aware also that probably it might be too good . when a run be over , man be very apt to regret the termination , who a minute or two before be anxiously long that the hound might pull down they game . to finish well be everything in hunting . to have lead for over a hour be nothing , let the pace and country have be what they might , if you fall away during the last half mile . therefore it be that those behind hope that the fox may make this or that cover , while the forward man long to see he turn over in every field . to ride to hound be very glorious ; but to have ridden to hound be more glorious still . they have now cross another road , and a larger one , and have get into a somewhat closer country . the field be not so big , and the fence be not so high . get a moment to look about he , and see ride without he cap . he be very red in the face , and he eye seem to glare , and he be tugge at he horse with all he might . but the animal seem still to go with perfect command of strength , and have too much work on he own hand to think of offer quixotic assistance to any one else .
. he see some one , a farmer , as he think , speak to as they ride close together ; but only shook he head and pull at he horse . there be brook in those part . the river form itself thereabout , or some of its tributary do so ; and these tributary , though small as rivers , be considerable to man on one side who be call by the exigency of the occasion to place themselves quickly on the other . know nothing of these brook ; but have go gallantly over two , and now that there come a third in the way , it be to be hope that he might go gallantly over that also . Phineas , at any rate , have no power to decide otherwise . as long as the brute would go straight with he he could sit he ; but he have long give up the idea of have a will of he own . indeed , till he be within twenty yard of the brook , he do not see that it be larger than the other . he look around , and there be Chiltern close to he , still fight with he horse ; -- but the farmer have turn away . he think that nod to he , as much as to tell he to go on . on he go at any rate . the brook , when he come to it , seem to be a huge black hole , yawn beneath he . the bank be quite steep , and just where he be to take off there be a ugly stump . it be too late to think of anything . he stike he knee against he saddle , -- and in a moment be on the other side . the brute , who have take off a yard before the stump , know well the danger of strike it with he foot , come down with a grunt , and do , I think , begin to feel the weight of that extra stone . Phinea , as soon as he be safe , look back , and there be 's horse in the very act of he spring , -- higher up the rivulet , where it be even broader . at that distance Phinea could see that be wild with rage against the beast . but whether he wish to take the leap or wish to avoid it , there be no choice leave to he . the animal rush at the brook , and in a moment the horse and horseman be lose to sight . it be well then that that extra stone should tell , as it enable to arrest he horse and to come back to he friend . the horse have chest the further bank , and of course have fall back into the stream . when Phineas get down he find that be wedge in between the horse and the bank , which be better , at any rate , than be under the horse in the water . " all right , old fellow , " he say , with a smile , when he see . " you go on ; it be too good to lose . " but he be very pale , and seem to be quite helpless where he lay . the horse do not move , -- and never do move again . he have smashed he shoulder to piece against a stump on the bank , and be afterwards shot on that very spot . when Phineas get down he find that there be but little water where the horse lay . the depth of the stream have be on the side from which they have take off , and the thick black muld lay within a foot of the surface , close to the bank against which be prop . " that be the worst one i ever be on , " say ; " but I think he be gruell now . " " be you hurt ? " " well ; -- I fancy there be something amiss . I can not move my arm ; and I catch my breath . my leg be all right if I could get away from this accursed brute . " " I tell you so , " say the farmer , come and look down upon they from the bank . " I tell you so , but you would not be say . " then he too get down , and between they both they extricate from he position , and get he on to the bank . " that un be a dead un , " say the farmer , point to the horse . " so much the better , " say he lordship . " give we a drop of sherry , . " he have break he collar - bone and three of he rib . they get a farmer 's trap from and take he into . when there , he insist on be take on through to the bull before he would have he bone set , -- pick up , however , a surgeon at . remain with he for a couple of day , lose he run with the and a day at the potted pea , and become very fond of he patient as he sit by he bedside . " that be a good run , though , be not it ? " say as take he leave . " and , by , , you ride so well , that you shall have he as often as you will come down . I do not know how it be , but you irish fellow always ride . " 's the get back to , a day after he time ,
, he find that there be already a great political commotion in the metropolis . he have know that on and there be to be a gathering of the people in favour of the ballot , and that on there be to be a procession with a petition which be to receive from the hand of the people on . it have be at first intend that should receive the petition at the door of on the ; but he have be request by the to put aside this intention , and he have comply with the request make to he . be to move the second reading of he Reform on that day , the preliminary step have be take without any special notice ; but the bill of course include no clause in favour of the ballot ; and this petition be the consequence of that omission . have predict evil consequence , both in the and out of it , and be now do the best in he power to bring about the verification of he own prophecy . , who reach he lodging late on the , find that the town have be in a state of ferment for three day , that on the forty or fifty thousand person have be collect at , and that the police have be force to interfere , -- and that worse be expect on the . though have yield to the government as to receive the petition , the crowd be resolve that they would see the petition carry into the house . it be argue that the government would have do better to have refrain from interfering as to the previously intend arrangement . it would have be easier to deal with a procession than with a mob of man gather together without any semblance of form . have be ask to postpone the second reading of he bill ; but the request have come from he opponent , and he would not yield to it . he say that it would be a bad expedient to close parliament from fear of the people . Phinea find at the on the evening that member of the of be request to enter on the by the door usually use by the per , and to make they way thence to they own House . he find that he landlord , , have be out with the people during the entire three day ; -- and , with a flood of tear , beg Phineas to interfere as to the . " he be that headstrong that he will be take if anybody be take ; and they say that all Westminster be to be line with soldier . " Phinea on the morning do have some conversation with he landlord ; but he first work on reach be to see 's friend , and tell they of the accident . the pot pea sit on the , and he ought to have be there . he absence , however , be unavoidable , as he could not have leave he friend 's bed - side so soon after the accident . on the he have write to , and on the evening he go first to and then to . " of course he will kill himself some day , " say the , -- with a tear , however , in each eye . " I hope not , my lord . he be a magnificent horseman ; but accident of course will happen . " " how many of he bone be there not break , I wonder ? " say the father . " it be useless to talk , of course . you think he be not in danger ? " " certainly not . " " I should fear that he would be so liable to inflammation . " " the doctor say that there be none . he have be take a enormous deal of exercise , " say , " and drink no wine . all that be in he favour . " " what do he drink , then ? " ask the . " nothing . I rather think , my lord , you be mistake a little about he habits . I do not fancy he ever drink unless he be provoke to do it . " " provoke ! could anything provoke you to make a brute of yourself ? but I be glad that he be in no danger . if you hear of he , let I know how he go on . " be of course full of concern . " I want to go down to he , " she say , " but think that there be no occasion . " " be there any ;-- I mean in regard to danger . he be very solitary there . " " you must go to he again . will not let I go unless I can say that there be danger . he seem to think that because have have accident before , it be nothing . of course I can not leave without he leave . " " you brother make very little of it , you know . " " ah ; -- he would make little of anything . but if I be ill he would be in by the first train . " " would let you go if you ask he . " " but he advise I not to go . he say my duty do not require it , unless be in danger . do not you know , , how hard it be for a wife not to take advice when it be so give ? " this she say , within six month of she marriage , to the man who have be she husband 's rival ! ask she whether have hear the
the news , and learn that she be still ignorant of it . " I get you letter only this morning , and I have not see she , " say . " indeed , I be so angry with she that I hardly wish to see she . " be 's night , and go from to . there he see , and find that she have hear of the accident . " I be so glad to see you , , " she say . " do tell I ; -- be it much ? " " Much in inconvenience , certainly ; but not much in danger . " " I think be so unkind not to send I word ! I only hear it just now . do you see it ? " " I be close to he , and help he up . the horse jump into a river with he , and crush he up against the bank . " " how lucky that you should be there ! have you jump the river ? " " yes ;-- almost unintentionally , for my horse be rush so that I could not hold he . be ride a brute that no one should have ride . no one will again . " " do he destroy himself ? " " he have to be kill afterwards . he break he shoulder . " " how very lucky that you should have be near he , -- and , again , how lucky that you should not have be hurt yourself ! " " it be not likely that we should both come to grief at the same fence . " " but it might have be you . and you think there be no danger ? " " none whatever , -- if I may believe the doctor . he hunting be done for this year , and he will be very desolate . I shall go down again to he in a few day , and try to bring he up to town . " " do ;--do . if he be lay up in he father 's house , he father must see he . " Phineas have not look at the matter in that light ; but he think that might probably be right . Early on the next morning he see , and use all he eloquence to keep that respectable member of society at home ; -- but in vain . " what good do you expect to do , ? " he say , with perhaps some little tone of authority in he voice . " to carry my point , " say . " and what be you point ? " " my present point be the ballot , as a part of the government measure . " " and you expect to carry that by go out into the street with all the rough of , and put yourself in direct opposition to the authority of the magistrate ? do you really believe that the ballot will become the law of the land any sooner because you incur this danger and inconvenience ? " " look here , ; I do not believe the sea will become any fuller because the Piddle run into it out of the field ; but I do believe that the water from all the country be what make the ocean . I shall help ; and it be my duty to help . " " it be you duty as a respectable citizen , with a wife and family , to stay at home . " " if everybody with a wife and family be to say so , there would be no there but rough , and then where should we be ? what would the government people say to we then ? if every man with a wife and family be to show hisself in the street to - night , we should have the ballot before parliament break up , and if none of th'ey do not do it , we shall never have the ballot . be not that so ? " , who intend to be honest , be not prepare to dispute the assertion on the spur of the moment . " if that be so , " say , triumphantly , " a man 's duty be clear enough . he ought to go , though he have two wife and family . " and he go . the petition be to be present at six o'clock , but the crowd , who collect to see it carry into , begin to form itself by noon . it be say afterwards that many of the house in the neighbourhood of and the bridge be fill with soldier ; but if so , the man do not show themselves . in the course of the evening three or four company of the in 's do show themselves , and have some rough work to do , for many of the people take themselves away from by that route . the police , who be very numerous in , have a hard time of it all the afternoon , and it be say afterwards that it would have be much better to have allow the petition to have be bring up by the procession on . a procession , let it be who it will that proceed , have in it , of its own nature something of order . but now there be no order . the petition , which be say to fill fifteen cab , -- though the absolute sheet of signature be carry into the by four man , -- be be drag about half the day and it certainly would have be impossible for a member to have make he way into the through between the hour of four and
and six . to effect a entrance at all they be oblige to go round at the back of the , as all the spaces round 's and 's monument be fill with the crowd . parliament be quite impassable at five of clock , and there be no traffic across the bridge from that hour till after eight . as the evening go on , the mob extend itself to and the front of the , and before the night be over all the hoarding round the new government office have be pull down . the window also of certain obnoxious member of parliament be break , when those obnoxious member live within reach . one gentleman who unfortunately hold a house in , and who be say to have say that the ballot be the resort of coward , far very badly ; -- for he window be not only break , but he furniture and mirror be destroy by the stone that be throw . , I say , be much blame . but after all , it may be a doubt whether the procession on might not have end worse . be hear to say afterwards that the number of people collect would have be much greater . move the second reading of he bill , and make he speech . he make he speech with the knowledge that the house of parliament be surround by a mob , and I think that the fact add to its efficacy . it certainly give he a appropriate opportunity for a display which be not difficult . he voice falter on two or three occasion , and falter through real feeling ; but this sort of feeling , though it be real , be at the command of orator on certain occasion , and do they yeoman 's service . be a old man , nearly wear out in the service of he country , who be know to have be true and honest , and to have love he country well , -- though there be of course they who declare that he hand have be too weak for power , and that he service have be natch ; -- and on this evening he virtue be remember . once when he voice fail he the whole house get up and cheer . the nature of a 's speech on such a occasion will be understand by most of my reader without further indication . the bill itself have be read before , and it be understand that no objection would be make to the extent of the change provide in it by the liberal side of the house . the opposition come from liberal member be to be confine to the subject of the ballot . and even as yet it be not know whether and he follower would vote against the second reading , or whether they would take what be give , and declare they intention of obtain the remainder on a separate motion . the opposition of a large party of be a matter of certainty ; but to this party do not conceive himself bound to offer so large a amount of argument as he would have give have there be at the moment no crowd in . and he probably feel that that crowd would assist he with he old Tory enemy . when , in the last word of he speech , he declare that under no circumstance would he disfigure the close of he political career by voting for the ballot , -- not though the people , on whose behalf he have be fight battle all he life , should be there in any number to coerce he , -- there come another round of applause from the opposition benche , and begin to fear that some young horse in he team might get loose from they trace . with great dignity have keep aloon from and from 's tactic ; but he be not the less alive to the fact that , with he mob and he big petition , might be of considerable assistance to he in this present duel between himself and . I think be in the habit of look at these contests as duel between himself and the leader on the other side of the , -- in which assistance from any quarter might be accept if offer . 's speech do not occupy much over a hour , and at half - past seven get up to reply . it be presume that he would do so , and not a member leave he place , though that time of the day be a interesting time , and though be accustom to be long . there soon come to be but little ground for doubt what would be the nature of 's vote on the second reading . " how may I dare , " say he , " to accept so small a measure of reform as this with such a message from the country as be now convey to I through the presence of fifty thousand of my countryman , who be at this moment demand they measure of reform just beyond the frail wall of this chamber ? the right honourable gentleman have tell we that he will never be intimidate by a concourse of people . I do not know that there be any need that he should speak of intimidation . no one have accuse the right honourable gentleman of political cowardice . but , as he have so say , I will follow in he footstep . neither will I be intimidate by the large majority which this house present the other night against the wish of the people . I will support no great measure of reform which do not include the ballot among its clause . " and so throw down the gauntlet . speak
speak for two hour , and then the debate be adjourn till the . the adjournment be move by a independent member , who , as be know , would support the government , and at once receive 's assent . there be no great hurry with the bill , and it be feel that it would be well to let the ferment subside . enough have be do for glory when move the second reading , and quite enough in the way of debate , -- with such a audience almost within hearing , -- when 's speech have be make . then the empty itself at once . the elderly , cautious member make they exit through the per 's door . the younger man get out into the crowd through , and be push about among the rough for a hour or so . , who make he way through the hall with , find 's carriage wait at the entrance with a dozen policeman round it . " I hope he will not get home to dinner before midnight , " say . " he understand all about it , " say . " he have a good meal at three , before he leave home , and you would find sandwich and sherry in plenty if you be to search he carriage . he know how to remedy the cost of mob popularity . " at that time poor be be hustle about in the crowd in the vicinity of 's carriage . and make they way out , and by degree work a passage for themselves into . have be somewhat behind they in come down the hall , and have not be without a sense of enjoyment in the ovation which be be give to he . there can be no doubt that he be wrong in what he be do . that affair of the carriage be altogether wrong , and do much harm for many a day afterwards . when he get outside the door , where be the twelve policeman guard he carriage , a great number of he admirer endeavoure to shake hand with he . among they be the devoted Bunce . but the policeman seem to think that be to be guard , even from the affection of he friend , and be as careful that he should be usher into he carriage untouched , as though he have be the favourite object of political aversion for the moment . himself , when he begin to perceive that man be crowd close upon the gate , and to hear the noise , and to feel , as it be , the breath of the mob , step on quickly into he carriage . he say a word or two in a loud voice . " thank you , my friend . I trust you may obtain all you just demand . " but he do not pause to speak . indeed , he could hardly have do so , as the policeman be manifestly in a hurry . the carriage be get away at a snail 's pace ; -- but there remain in the spot where the carriage have stand the making of a very pretty stroot row . have strive hard to shake hand with he hero , -- and some other reformer as ardent and as decent as himself . the police be very determinate that there should be no such interruption to they programme for get off the scene . , who have he own idea as to he right to shake hand with any gentleman at who might choose to shake hand with he , become uneasy under the impediment that be place in he way , and express himself warmly as to he civil rights . now a policeman in a political row be , I believe , the most forbearing of man . so long as he meet with no special political opposition , ordinary ill - usage do not even put he out of temper . he be pay for rough work among rough , and take he rub gallantly . but he feel himself to be a instrument for the moment of despotic power as oppose to civil rights , and he will not stand what he call " jaw . " trip up a policeman in such a scramble , and he will take it in good spirit ; but mention the word " , " and he will lock you up if he can . as a rule , he instinct be right ; for the man who talk about " " in a political crowd will generally do more harm than can be effect by the tripping up of any constable . but these instinct may be the means of individual injustice . I think they be so when be arrest and keep a fast prisoner . he wife have show she knowledge of he character when she declare that he would be " take " if any one be " take . " be take into custody with some three or four other like himself , -- decent man , who mean no harm , but who think that as man they be bound to show they political opinion , perhaps at the expense of a little martyrdom , -- and be carry into a temporary stronghold , which have be provide for the necessity of the police , under the clock - tower . " keep I , at you peril ! " say , indignantly . " we mean it , " say the sergeant who have he in custody . " I have do no hag porth to break the law , " say . " you be break the law when you be upset my man , as I see you , " say the sergeant . " I have upset
upset nobody , " say . " very well , " rejoin the sergeant ; " you can say it all before the magistrate , to - morrow . " " and be I to be lock up all night ? " say . " I be afraid you will , " reply the sergeant . , who be not by nature a very talkative man , say no more ; but he swore in he heart that there should be vengeance . between eleven and twelve he be take to the regular police - station , and from thence he be enable to send word to he wife . " Bunce have be take , " say she , with something of the tragic queen , and something also of the injured wife in the tone of she voice , as soon as let himself in with the latchkey between twelve and one . and then , mingle with , and at last dominant over , those severer tone , come the voice of the loving woman whose belove one be in trouble . " I know how it would be , . do not I ? and what must we do ? I do not suppose he would have a bit to eat from the moment he go out ; -- and as for a drop of beer , he never think of it , except what I put down for he at he meal . they nasty police always take the best . that be why I be so afeard . " say all that he could to comfort she , and promise to go to the police -office early in the morning and look after . no serious evil would , he think , probably come of it ; but still Bunce have be wrong to go . " but you might have be take yourself , " argue , " just as well as he . " then Phineas explain that he have go forth in the execution of a public duty . " you might have be take , all the same , " say , " for I be sure do not do nothing amiss . " " the " on the follow morning , which be , be early at the police -office at look after the interest of he landlord ; but there have be a considerable number of man take up during the row , and we friend could hardly procure that attention for 's case to which he think the decency of he client and he own position as a member of parliament be entitle . the man who have be take up be take in batch before the magistrate ; but as the soldier in the park have be maltreate , and a considerable injury have be do in the neighbourhood of , there be a good deal of strong feeling against the mob , and the magistrate be dispose to be severe . if decent man choose to go out among such companion , and thereby get into trouble , decent man must take the consequence . during the and a very strong feeling grow up against . the story of the carriage be tell , and he be declare to be a turbulent demagogue , only desirous of get popularity . and together with this feeling there arise a general verdict of " serve they right " against all who have come into contact with the police in the great Turnbull row ; and thus it come to pass that have not be liberate up to the morning . on the be in hysteric , and declare she conviction that would be imprison for life . poor Phinea have a unquiet time with she on the morning of that day . in every ecstasy of she grief she throw herself into he arm , either metaphorically or materially , accord to the excess of she agony at the moment , and express repeatedly a assure conviction that all she child would die of starvation , and that she herself would be pick up under the arch of one of the bridge . , who be soft - hear , do what he could to comfort she , and allow himself to be work up to strong parliamentary anger against the magistrate and police . " when they think that they have public opinion on they side , there be nothing in the way or arbitrary excess which be too great for they . " this he say to , who anger he and increase the warmth of he feeling by declare that a little close confinement would be good for the Bunce of the day . " if we do not keep the mob down , the mob will keep we down , " say the private secretary . Phineas have no opportunity of answer this , but declare to himself that be no more a liberal at heart than be . " he be bear on that side of the question , and have be receive Whig wage all he life . that be the history of he politics ! " on the afternoon go to 's in , intend to say a word or two about , and mean also to induce , if possible , the to take part with he against the magistrate ,-- have a hope also , in which he be not disappoint , that he might find with she father . he have come to understand that be not to be visit at she own house on . so much indeed she have tell he in so many word . but he have come to understand also , without any plain tell , that she rebel in heart against this tyranny , -- and that she would escape from it when escape be possible . she have now come to
to talk to she father about she brother , and have bring with she . they have walk together across the park after church , and intend to walk back again . do not like to have any carriage out on a , and to this arrangement he wife make no objection . Phineas have receive a letter from the surgeon , and be able to report favourably of . " the man say that he have better not be move for a month , " say . " but that mean nothing . they always say that . " " will it not be best for he to remain where he be ? " say the . " he have not a soul to speak to , " say . " I wish I be with he , " say he sister . " that be , of course , out of the question , " say the . " they know he at that inn , and it really seem to I best that he should stay there . I do not think he would be so much at he ease here . " " it must be dreadful for a man to be confine to he room without a creature near he , except the servants , " say . the frown , but say nothing further . they all perceive that as soon as he have learn that there be no real danger as to he son 's life , he be determined that this accident should not work he up to any show of tenderness . " I do so hope he will come up to , " continue , who be not afraid of the , and be determine not to be put down . " you do not know what you be talk about , my dear , " say . after this Phinea find it very difficult to extract any sympathy from the on behalf of the man who have be lock up . he be moody and cross , and could not be induce to talk on the great subject of the day . declare that she do not care how many Bunce be lock up ; nor for how long , -- add , however , a wish that himself have be among the number of the prisoner . be somewhat softer than this , and consent to express pity in the case of Bunce himself ; but perceive that the pity be awarded to he and not to the sufferer . the feeling against be at the present moment so strong among all the upper class , that and he breth might have be keep in durance for a week without commiseration from they . " it be very hard certainly on a man like , " say . " why do not stay at home and mind he business ? " say the . Phineas spend the remainder of that day alone , and come to a resolution that on the come occasion he certainly would speak in the house . the debate would be resume on the , and he would rise to he leg on the very first moment that it become possible for he to do so . and he would do nothing towards prepare a speech ;-- nothing whatever . on this occasion he would trust entirely to such word as might come to he at the moment ; -- ay , and to such thought . he have before burden he memory with preparation , and the very weight of the burden have be too much for he mind . he have fear to trust himself to speak , because he have feel that he be not capable of perform the double labour of say he lesson by heart , and of face the for the first time . there should be nothing now for he to remember . he thought be full of he subject . he would support 's bill with all he eloquence , but he would implore , and the , and the government generally , to abstain from animosity against the populace of , because they desire one special boon which do not think that it be he duty to give they . he hope that idea and word would come to he . idea and word have be free enough with he in the old day of the debating society . if they fail he now , he must give the thing up , and go back to . on the morning be for two hour at the police - court in , and at about one on that day be liberate . when he be brotch up before the magistrate , speak he mind very freely as to the usage he have receive , and declare he intention of bring a action against the sergeant who have detain he . the magistrate , of course , take the part of the police , and declare that , from the evidence of two man who be examine , have certainly use such violence in the crowd as have justifi he arrest . " I use no violence , " say . " accord to you own show , you endeavoure to make you way up to 's carriage , " say the magistrate . " I be close to the carriage before the police even see I , " say . " but you try to force you way round to the door . " " I use no force till a man have I by the collar to push I back ; and I be not violent , not then . I tell he I be do what I have a right to do , -- and it be that as make he hang on to I . " " you be not do what you have
have a right to do . you be assist to create a riot , " say the magistrate , with that indignation which a magistrate should always know how to affect . Phineas , however , be allow to give evidence as to he landlord 's character , and then be liberate . but before he go he again swore that that should not be the last of it , and he tell the magistrate that he have be ill - use . when liberate , he be join by a dozen sympathising friend , who escort he home , and among they be one or two literary gentleman , employ on those excellent penny papers , the 's banner_ and the _Ballot - box . it be they intention that 's case should not be allow to sleep . one of these gentleman make a distinct offer to of unbounded popularity during life and of immortality afterwards , if he , as a member of parliament , would take up 's case with vigour . Phineas , not quite understand the nature of the offer , and not as yet know the profession of the gentleman , give some general reply . " you come out strong , , and we will see that you be properly report . I be on the _Banner , sir , and I will answer for that . " , who have be somewhat eager in express he sympathy with , and have not give very close attention to the gentleman who be address he , be still in the dark . the nature of the , which the gentleman be on , do not at once come home to he . " something ought to be do , certainly , " say . " we shall take it up strong , " say the gentleman , " and we shall be happy to have you among we . you will find , , that in public life there be nothing like have a horgan to back you . what be the most you can do in the ' Ouse ? nothing , if you be not report . you be speak to the country ; -- be not you ? and you can not do that without a horgan , . you come among we on the _Banner , . you can not do better . " then Phineas understand the nature of the offer make to he . as they parte , the literary gentleman give we hero he card . " . " so much be print . then , on the corner of the card be write , " _Banner_ , 137 , . " be a young man , under thirty , not remarkable for clean linen , and who always talk of the " ' . " but he be a well - know and not undistinguished member of a powerful class of man . he have be a reporter , and as such know the " ' Ouse " well , and be a writer for the press . and , though he talk of " ' Ouse " and " horgan " , he write good with great rapidity , and be possessed of that special sort of political fervour which show itself in a man 's work rather than in he conduct . it be 's taste to be a advanced reformer , and in all he operation on behalf of the 's he be a reformer very much advanced . no man could do a article on the people 's indefeasible rights with more pronounced vigour than . but it have never occur to he as yet that he ought to care for anything else than the fight , -- than the advantage of have a good subject on which to write slash article . be a energetic but not a thoughtful man ; but in he thought on politics , as far as they go with he , he regard the wrongs of the people as be of infinitely greater value than they rights . it be not that he be insincere in all that he be daily say ; -- but simply that he never think about it . very early in life he have fall among " people 's friend , " and a opening on the liberal press have come in he way . to be a " people 's friend " suite the turn of he ambition , and he be a " people 's friend . " it be he business to abuse government , and to express on all occasion a opinion that as a matter of course the ruling power be the " people 's enemy . " have the ruling power cease to be the " people 's enemy , " 's ground would have be take from under he foot . but such a catastrophe be out of the question . that excellent old arrangement that have go on since demagogue be first invent be in full vigour . there be the rule power and there be the people , -- devil on one side and angel on the other , -- and as long as a people 's friend have a pen in he hand all be right . Phineas , when he leave the indignant Bunce to go among he friend , walk to the house think a good deal of what have say to he . the pot pea be again on , and he have intend to be in the committee room by twelve punctually : but he have be unable to leave in the lurch , and it be now past one . indeed , he have , from one unfortunate circumstance after another , fail hithertoo in give to the potted pea that resolute attention which the subject demand . on the present occasion he mind be full
full of and the 's _. after all , be there not something in 's proposition ? he , , have come into parliament as it be under the wing of a government pack , and he friendship , which have be very successful , have be make with , and with the friend of . he have make up he mind to be , and to look for he profession in that line . he have be specially fortify in this resolution by he dislike to the ballot , -- which dislike have be the result of 's teaching . have Turnbull become he friend instead , it may well be that he would have like the ballot . on such subject man must think long , and be sure that they have think in earnest , before they be justified in say that they opinion be the result of they own thought . but now he begin to reflect how far this ministerial profession would suit he . would it be much to be a of the Treasury , subject to the dominion of ? such lordship and such subjection would be the result of success . he tell himself that he be at heart a true . would it not be better for he to abandon the idea of office trammel , and go among they on the 's ? a glow of enthusiasm come over he as he think of it . but what would Violet say to the 's and ? and he would have like the _banner_ better have not talk about the ' Ouse . from the committee room , in which , alas ! he take no active part in reference to the pott pea , he go down to the , and be present when the debate be resume . not unnaturally , one speaker after another make some allusion to the row in the street , and the work which have fall to the lot of the magistrate . have declare that he would vote against the second reading of 's bill , and have explain that he would do so because he could consent to no Reform which do not include the ballot as one of its measure . the debate fashio itself after this speech of 's , and turn again very much upon the ballot , -- although it have be think that the late debate have settle that question . one or two of 's follower declare that they also would vote against the bill , -- of course , as not go far enough ; and one or two gentleman from the Conservative bench extend a spoken welcome to these new colleague . then get up and address the House for a hour , struggle hard to bring back the real subject , and to make the understand that the ballot , whether good or bad , have be knock on the head , and that member have no right at the present moment to consider anything but the expediency or inexpediency of so much Reform as present to they in the present bill . be determined to speak , and to speak on this evening if he could catch the speaker 's eye . again the scene before he be go round before he ; again thing become dim , and again he feel he blood beat hard at he heart . but thing be not so bad with he as they have be before , because he have nothing to remember . he hardly know , indeed , what he intend to say . he have a idea that he be desirous of joining in earnest support of the measure , with a vehement protest against the injustice which have be do to the people in general , and to in particular . he have firmly resolve that no fear of lose favour with the government should induce he to hold he tongue as to the cruelty . than so he would certainly " go among they " at the office . he start up , wildly , when have complete he speech ; but the speaker 's eye , not unnaturally , have travel to the other side of the , and there be a Tory of the old school upon he leg ,-- , the member for , one of the gallant few who da to vote against 's bill for repeal the in 1846 . speak with a slow , ponderous , unimpressive , but very audible voice , for some twenty minute , disdain to make reference to and he politics , but plead against any Reform , with all the old argument . do not hear a word that he say ; -- do not attempt to hear . he be keen in he resolution to make another attempt at the speaker 's eye , and at the present moment be think of that , and of that only . he do not even give himself a moment 's reflection as to what he own speech should be . he would dash at it and take he chance , resolve that at least he would not fail in courage . twice he be on he leg before have finish he slow harangue , and twice he be compelle to reseat himself , -- think that he have subject himself to ridicule . at last the member for sit down , and be conscious that he have lose a moment or two in present himself again to the speaker . he hold he ground , however , though he see that he have various rival for the right of speech . he hold he ground , and be instantly aware that he have gain he point . there be a slight pause , and as some other urgent member do not reseat himself , hear the president of that august
august assembly call upon himself to address the House . the thing be now to be do . there he be with the house of Commons at he foot , -- a crowd house , bound to be he auditor as long as he should think fit to address they , and reporter by ten and twenty in the gallery ready and eager to let the country know what the young member for would say in this he maiden speech . have sundry gift , a powerful and pleasant voice , which he have learn to modulate , a handsome presence , and a certain natural mixture of modesty and self - reliance , which would certainly protect he from the fault of arrogance and pomposity , and which , perhaps , might carry he through the peril of he new position . and he have also the great advantage of friend in the who be anxious that he should do well . but he have not that gift of slow blood which on the former occasion would have enable he to remember he prepare speech , and which would now have place all he own resource within he own reach . he begin with the expression of a opinion that every true reformer ought to accept 's bill , even if it be accept only as a instalment , -- but before he have get through these sentence , he become painfully conscious that he be repeat he own word . he be cheer almost from the outset , and yet he know as he go on that he be fail . he have certain argument at he finger ' end , -- point with which he be , in truth , so familiar that he need hardly have trouble himself to arrange they for special use , -- and he forget even these . he find that he be go on with one platitude after another a to the benefit of reform , in a manner that would have sham he six or seven year ago at a debating club . he press on , fear that word would fail he altogether if he pause ; -- but he do in truth speak very much too fast , knock he word together so that no reporter could properly catch they . but he have nothing to say for the bill except what hundred have say before , and hundred would say again . still he be cheer , and still he go on ; and as he become more and more conscious of he failure there grow upon he the idea , -- the dangerous hope , that he might still save himself from ignominy by the eloquence of he invective against the police . he try it , and succeed thoroughly in make the understand that he be very angry , -- but he succeed in nothing else . he could not catch the word to express the thought of he mind . he could not explain he idea that the people out of the have as much right to express they opinion in favour of the ballot as member in the have to express theirs against it ; and that animosity have be show to the people by the authority because they have so express they opinion . then he attempt to tell the story of in a light and airy way , fail , and sit down in the middle of it . again he be cheer by all around he , -- cheer as a new member be usually cheer , -- and in the midst of the cheer would have blow out he brain have there be a pistol there ready for such a operation . that hour with he be very bad . he do not know how to get up and go away , or how to keep he place . for some time he sit with he hat off , forgetful of he privilege of wear it ; and then put it on hurriedly , as though the fact of he not wear it must have be observe by everybody . at last , at about two , the debate be adjourn , and then as he be slowly leave the house , think how he might creep away without companionship , take he by the arm . " be you go to walk ? " say . " yes " , say ; " I shall walk . " " then we may go together as far as . come along . " Phineas have no means of escape , and leave the house hang on 's arm , without a word . do speak till they be out in . " it be not much amiss , " say ; " but you will do better than that yet . " " , " say , " I have make a ass of myself so thoroughly , that there will at any rate be this good result , that I shall never make a ass of myself again after the same fashion . " " ah !-- I think you have some such feeling as that , and therefore I be determined to speak to you . you may be sure , , that I do not care to flatter you , and I think you ought to know that , as far as I be able , I will tell you the truth . you speech , which be certainly nothing great , be about on a par with other maiden speech in the of . you have do yourself neither good nor harm . be it desirable that you should . my advice to you now be , never to avoid speak on any subject that interest you , but never to speak for above three minute till you find yourself as much at home on you
you leg as you be when sitte . but do not suppose that you have make a ass of yourself , -- that be , in any special degree . now , good - night . " hear two account of she friend 's speech , -- and both from man who have be present . she husband be in he place , in accordance with he constant practice , and have be seat , perhaps unfortunately , in the peer 's gallery . " and you think it be a failure ? " say to she husband . " it certainly be not a success . there be nothing particular about it . there be a good deal of it you could hardly hear . " after that she get the morning newspaper , and turn with great interest to the report . have be , as it be , adopt by she as she own political offspring , -- or at any rate as she political godchild . she have make promise on he behalf to various personage of high political standing , -- to she father , to , to the of , and even to himself . she have thoroughly intend that should be a political success from the first ; and since she marriage , she have , I think , be more intent upon it than before . perhaps there be a feeling on she part that have wrong he in one way , she would repay he in another . she have become so eager for he success , -- for a while scorn to conceal she feel , -- that she husband have unconsciously begin to entertain a dislike to she eagerness . we know how quickly woman arrive at a understanding of the feeling of those with whom they live ; and now , on that very occasion , perceive that she husband do not take in good part she anxiety on behalf of she friend . she see that it be so as she turn over the newspaper look for the report of the speech . it be give in six line , and at the end of it there be a intimation ,-- express in the shape of advice , -- that the young orator have better speak more slowly if he wish to be efficacious either with the or with the country . " he seem to have be cheer a good deal , " say . " all member be cheer at they first speech , " say . " I have no doubt he will do well yet , " say . " very likely , " say . then he turn to he newspaper , and do not take he eye off it as long as he wife remain with he . later in the day see she father , and be with she at the time . say something which indicate that he have hear the debate on the previous evening , and instantly begin to ask he about Phineas . " the less say the better , " be the 's reply . " do you mean that it be so bad as that ? " ask . " it be not very bad at first ;-- though indeed nobody could say it be very good . but he get himself into a mess about the police and the magistrate before he have do , and nothing but the kindly feeling always show to a first effort save he from be coughe down . " have not a word more to say about Phineas to she father ; but , womanlike , she resolve that she would not abandon he . how many first failure in the world have be the precursor of ultimate success ! " will lose he bill , " say the , sorrowfully . " there do not seem to be a doubt about that . " " and what will you all do ? " ask . " we must go to the country , I suppose , " say the . " what be the use ? you can not have a more liberal house than you have now , " say . " we may have one less liberal , -- or rather less radical , -- with fewer man to support . I do not see what else we can do . they say that there be no less than twenty - seven man on we side of the who will either vote with against we , or will decline to vote at all . " " every one of they ought to lose he seat , " say . " but what can we do ? how be the 's government to be carry on ? " we all know the sad earnestness which impress itself on the 's brow as he ask these momentous question . " I do not suppose that can form a . " " with as whipper - in , perhaps he might , " say . " and will lose he seat ? " ask . " most probably , " say the . " he only get it by a accident . " " you must find he a seat somewhere in , " say . " that might be difficult , " say the , who then leave the room . the two woman remain together for some quarter of a hour before they speak again . then say something about she brother . " if there be a dissolution , I hope will stand for . " be a borough close to , in which , as regard its political interest , be suppose to have considerable influence . to this Violet say nothing . " it be quite time , " continue , " that old should give way . he have have the seat
seat for twenty - five year , and have never do anything , and he seldom go to the now . " " he be not you uncle , be he ? " " no ; he be 's cousin ; but he be ever so much older than papa ;-- nearly eighty , I believe . " " would not that be just the place for ? " say . then become very serious . " Oswald would of course have a better right to it than anybody else . " " but would go into parliament ? I have hear he declare that he would not . " " if we could get papa to ask he , I think he would change he mind , " say . there be again silence for a few moment , after which Violet return to the original subject of they conversation . " it would be a thousand pity that should be turn out into the cold . do not you think so ? " " I , for one , should be very sorry . " " so should I , -- and the more so from what say about he not speak well last night . I do not think that it be very much of a accomplishment for a gentleman to speak well . , I suppose , speak well ; and they say that that horrid man , , can talk by the hour together . I do not think that it show a man to be clever at all . but I believe would do it , if he set he mind to it , and I shall think it a great shame if they turn he out . " " it would depend very much , I suppose , on . " " I do not know anything about , " say ; " but I be quite sure that he might have , if we manage it properly . of course should have it if he want it , but I do not think he will stand in 's way . " " I be afraid it be out of the question , " say , gravely . " think so much about the borough . " the reader will remember that both and he daughter be thorough reformer ! the use of a little borough of he own , however , be a convenience to a great peer . " those difficult thing have always to be talk of for a long while , and then they become easy , " say . " I believe if you be to propose to to give all he property to the and emigrate to , he would begin to consider it seriously after a time . " " I shall not try , at any rate . " " because you do not want to go to ; -- but you might try about for poor . " " , " say , after a moment 's pause ; -- and she speak sharply ; " Violet , I believe you be in love with . " " that be just like you , . " " I never make such a accusation against you before , or against anybody else that I can remember . but I do begin to believe that you be in love with . " " why should not I be in love with he , if I like ? " " I say nothing about that ; -- only he have not get a penny . " " but I have , my dear . " " and I doubt whether you have any reason for suppose that he be in love with you . " " that would be my affair , my dear . " " then you be in love with he ? " " that be my affair also . " shrug she shoulders . " of course it be ; and if you tell I to hold my tongue , of course I will do so . if you ask I whether I think it a good match , of course I must say I do not . " " I do not tell you to hold you tongue , and I do not ask you what you think about the match . you be quite welcome to talk as much about I as you please ; -- but as to , you have no business to think anything . " " I should not talk to anybody but yourself . " " I be grow to be quite indifferent as to what people say . ask I the other day whether I be go to throw myself away on . " " no ! " " indeed she do . " " and what do you answer ? " " I tell she that it be not quite settle ; but that as I have only spoken to he once during the last two year , and then for not more than half a minute , and as I be not sure whether I know he by sight , and as I have reason to suppose he do not know my name , there might , perhaps , be a delay of a week or two before the thing come off . then she flounce out of the room . " " but what make she ask about ? " " somebody have be hoax she . I be begin to think that do it for she private amusement . if so , I shall think more highly of my dear cousin than I have hithertoo do . but , , as you have make a similar accusation against I , and as I can not get out of it with you as I do with my aunt , I must ask you
you to hear my protestation . I be not in love with . heaven help I ; -- as far as I can tell , I be not in love with any one , and never shall be . " look pleased . " do you know , " continue , " that I think I could be in love with , if I could be in love with anybody ? " then look displease . " in the first place , he be a gentleman , " continue . " then he be a man of spirit . and then he have not too much spirit ;-- not that kind of spirit which make some man think that they be the finest thing go . he manners be perfect ;-- not Chesterfieldian , and yet never offensive . he never browbeat any one , and never toadie any one . he know how to live easily with man of all rank , without any appearance of claim a special status for himself . if he be make of to - morrow , I believe he would settle down into the place of the first subject in the land without arrogance , and without false shame . " " you be he eulogist with a vengeance . " " I be he eulogist ; but I be not in love with he . if he be to ask I to be he wife to - morrow , I should be distress , and should refuse he . if he be to marry my dearest friend in the world , I should tell he to kiss I and be my brother . as to ,-- those be my sentiments . " " what you say be very odd . " " why odd ? " " simply because mine be the same . " " be they the same ? I once think , , that you do love he ; -- that you mean to be he wife . " sit for a while without make any reply to this . she sit with she elbow on the table and with she face lean on she hand , -- think how far it would tend to she comfort if she speak in true confidence . Violet during the time never take she eye from she friend 's face , but remain silent as though wait for a answer . she have be very explicit as to she feeling . would be equally explicit ? she be too clever to forget that such plainness of speech would be , must be more difficult to Lady than to herself . be a married woman ; but she feel that she friend would have be wrong to search for secret , unless she be ready to tell she own . it be probably some such feeling which make speak at last . " so I do , nearly -- " say ; " very nearly . you tell I just now that you have money , and could therefore do as you please . I have no money , and could not do as I please . " " and you tell I also that I have no reason for think that he care for I . " " do I ? well ;--I suppose you have no reason . he do care for I . he do love I . " " he tell you so ? " " yes ; -- he tell I so . " " and how do you answer he ? " " I have that very morning become engage to . that be my answer . " " and what do he say when you tell he ? " " I do not know . I can not remember . but he behave very well . " " and now , -- if he be to love I , you would grudge I he love ? " " not for that reason , -- not if I know myself . oh no ! I would not be so selfish as that . " " for what reason then ? " " because I look upon it as write in heaven that you be to be 's wife . " " 's writings then be false , " say , get up and walk away . in the meantime be very wretched at home . when he reach he lodging after leave the house , -- after he short conversation with , -- he try to comfort himself with what that gentleman have say to he . for a while , while he be walk , there have be some comfort in 's word . have much experience , and doubtless knew what he be say , -- and there might yet be hope . but all this hope fade away when be in he own room . there come upon he , as he look round they , a idea that he have no business to be in parliament , that he be a impostor , that he be go about the world under false pretence , and that he would never set himself aright , even unto himself , till he have go through some terrible act of humiliation . he have be a cheat even to of the , in accept a invitation to come among they . he have be a cheat to , in that he have induce she to think that he be fit to live with she . he be a cheat to , in assume that he be capable of make himself agreeable to she . he be a cheat to when ride he horse , and pretend to be a proper associate for a man of fortune . why , -- what be he income ? what he birth ? what he proper position ? and now he have
have get the reward which all cheat deserve . then he go to bed , and as he lay there , he think of . have he plight he troth to , and then work like a slave under 's auspices , -- he would not have be a cheat . it seem to he that he have hardly be asleep when the girl come into he room in the morning . " , " say she , " there be that gentleman there . " " what gentleman ? " " the old gentleman . " then know that be in he sitting - room , and that he would not leave it till he have see the owner of the room . Nay , -- be pretty sure that would come into the bedroom , if he be keep long waiting . " the old gentleman , " say in he wrath ; -- and the maid - servant hear he say so . in about twenty minute he go out into the sitting - room , with he slipper on and in he dressing - gown . suffer under the circumstance of such a emergency , how be any man to go through the work of dressing and wash with proper exactness ? as to the prayer which he say on that morning , I think that no question should be ask . he come out with a black cloud on he brow , and with he mind half make up to out of the room . , when he see he , move he ching round within he white cravat , as be a custom with he , and put he thumb and forefinger on he lip , and then shook he head . " very bad , ; very bad indeed ; very bad , be not it ? " " you come here in this way at all time in the day be very bad , " say . " and where would you have I go ? would you like to see I down in the lobby of the ? " " to tell you the truth , , I do not want to see you anywhere . " " ah ; yes ; I daresay ! and that be what you call honest , be a parliament gent ! you have my money , and then you tell I you do not want to see I any more ! " " I have not have you money , " say . " but let I tell you , " continue , " that I want to see you ; -- and shall go on see you till the money be pay . " " I have not have any of you money , " say . again twitch he ching about on the top of he cravat and smile . " , " say he , show the bill , " be that you name ? " " yes , it be . " " then I want my money . " " I have no money to give you . " " do be punctual now . why be not you punctual ? I would do anything for you if you be punctual . I would indeed . " , as he say this , sit down in the chair which have be place for we hero 's breakfast , and cut a slice off the loaf , begin to butter it with great composure . " , " say , " I can not ask you to breakfast here . I be engage . " " I will just take a bit of bread and butter all the same , " say . " where do you get you butter ? now I could tell you a woman who would give it you cheaper and a deal better than this . this be all lard . shall I send she to you ? " " no , " say . there be no tea ready , and therefore empty the milk into a cup and drank it . " after this , " say , " I must beg , , that you will never come to my room any more . I shall not be at home to you . " " the lobby of the be the same thing to I , " say . " they know I there well . I wish you would be punctual , and then we would be the best of friend . " after that , have finish he bread and butter , take he leave . the be carry the debate on the bill be prolonge during the whole of that week . , who love he seat in the cabinet and the glory of be a , better even than he love he borough , have take a gloomy estimate when he speak of twenty - seven defaulter , and of the bill as certainly lose . who be better able than he to make estimate , -- the Bonteens and Fitzgibbons on each side of the , and above all , the Ratlers and Robys , produce list from day to day which vari now by three name in one direction , then by two in another , and which fluctuate at last by unit only . they all concur in declaring that it would be a very near division . a great effort be make to close the debate on the , but it fail , and the full tide of speech be carry on till the follow . on that morning Phineas hear declare at the club that , as far as he judgment go , the division at that moment be a fair subject for a bet . " there be two man doubtful in the , " say , " and if one vote on
on one side and one on the other , or if neither vote at all , it will be a tie . " , however , the whip on the other side , be quite sure that one at least of these gentleman would go into he lobby , and that the other would not go into 's lobby . I be inclin to think that the town be generally inclin to put more confidence in the accuracy of than in that of ; and among betting man there certainly be a point give by those who back the conservatives . the odd , however , be lose , for on the division the number in the two lobby be equal , and the speaker give he casting vote in favour of the government . the bill be read a second time , and be lost , as a matter of course , in reference to any subsequent action . declare that even could not go on with nothing but the speaker 's vote to support he . have no doubt feel that he could not go on with he bill from the moment in which have declare he opposition ; but he could not with propriety withdraw it in deference to 's opinion . during the week Phineas have have he hand sufficiently full . twice he have go to the pott pea inquiry ; but he have be at the office of the 's more often than that . Bunce have be very resolute in he determination to bring a action against the police for false imprisonment , even though he spend every shilling of he savings in do so . and when he wife , in the presence of , beg that bygone might be bygone , remind he that spilt milk could not be recover , he call she a mean - spirited woman . then weep a flood of tear , and tell she favourite lodger that for she all comfort in this world be over . " Drat the reformer , I say . and I wish there be no parliament ; so I do . what be the use of all the voting , when it mean nothing but dry bread and cross word ? " Phinea by no means encourage he landlord in he litigious spirit , advise he rather to keep he money in he pocket , and leave the fighting of the battle to the column of the _Banner _, -- which would fight it , at any rate , with economy . but , though he delighte in the , and show a unfortunate readiness to sit at the foot of , would have he action at law ; -- in which resolution do , I fear , encourage he behind the back of he better friend , . go with to 's chamber , -- for have in some way become acquainted with the law - stationer 's journeyman , -- and there some very good advice be give . " have you ask yourself what be you object , ? " say . declare he have ask himself that question , and have answer it . he object be redress . " in the shape of compensation to yourself , " suggest . no ; would not admit that he personally require any compensation . the redress want be punishment to the man . " be it for vengeance ? " ask . no ; it be not for vengeance , declare . " it ought not to be , " continue ; " because , though you think that the man exceed in he duty , you must feel that he be do so through no personal ill - will to yourself . " " what I want be , to have the fellow keep in they proper place , " say . " exactly ; -- and therefore these thing , when they occur , be mention in the press and in parliament , -- and the attention of a of be call to they . thank , we do not have very much of that kind of thing in . " " maybe we shall have more if we do not look to it , " say stoutly . " we always be look to it , " say ; --" look to it very carefully . but I do not think anything be to be do in that way by indictment against a single man , whose conduct have be already approve by the magistrate . if you want notoriety , , and do not mind what you pay for it ; or have get anybody else to pay for it ; then indeed -- " " there be not nobody to pay for it , " say , wax angry . " then I certainly should not pay for it myself if I be you , " say . but be not to be counsel out of he intention . when he be out in the square with Phineas he express great anger against . " he do not know what patriotism mean , " say the law scrivener . " and then he talk to I about notoriety ! it have always be the same way with 'em . if a man show a spark of public feeling , it be all hambition . I do not want no notoriety . I want to earn my bread peaceable , and to be let alone when I be about my own business . I pay rate for the police to look after rogue , not to haul folk about and lock th'ey up for day and night , who be do what they have a legal right to do . " after that , go to he attorney , to the great detriment of the business at the stationer 's shop , and
and visit the office of the 's banner_ . there he write a lead article about 's case , for which he be in due time to be pay a guinea . after all , the 's might do more for he in this way than ever would be do by parliament . , however , and another gentleman at the _banner_ office , much older than , who announce himself as the actual editor , be anxious that should ry himself of he heterodox political resolution about the ballot . it be not that they car much about he own opinion ; and when attempt to argue with the editor on the merit of the ballot , the editor put he down very shortly . " we go in for it , , " he say . if would go in for it too , the editor seem to think that might make himself very useful at the _banner_ . Phineas stoutly maintain that this be impossible , -- and be therefore drive to confine he article in the service of the people to those open subject on which he opinion agree with those of the 's . this be he second article , and the editor seem to think that , backward as he be about the ballot , he be too useful a aid to be throw aside . a member of parliament be not now all that he be once , but still there be a prestige in the letter affix to he name which make he loom larger in the eyes of the world than other man . get into parliament , if it be but for the borough of , and the 's banner all round will be glad of you assistance , as will also company limited and unlimited to a very marvellous extent . write he article and promise to look in again , and so they go on . continue to assure he that a " horgan " be indispensable to he , and begin to accommodate he ear to the sound which have at first be so disagreeable . he find that he acquaintance , , have idea of he own as to get into the ' Ouse at some future time . " I always look upon the ' Ouse as my oyster , and ' ere be my sword , " say , brandish a old quill pen . " and I feel that if once there I could get along . I do indeed . what be it a man want ? it be only pluck , -- that he should not fink because a ' undred other man be look at he . " then ask he whether he have any idea of a constituency , to which reply that he have no absolutely for intention . many borough , however , would doubtless be set free from aristocratic influence by the redistribution of seat which must take place , as declare , at any rate in the next session . then he name the borough of ; and , think of , think of the , think of , and think of , walk away disgust . would it not be better that the quiet town , cluster close round the wall of , should remain as it be , than that it should be pollute by the presence of ? on the last day of the debate , at a few moments before four o'clock , encounter another terrible misfortune . he have be at the potted pea since twelve , and have on this occasion tar two or three commissariat officer very tightly with question respect cabbage and potatoe , and have ask whether the officer on board a certain ship do not always eat preserve asparagus while the man have not even a bean . I fear that he have be put up to this business by , and that he make himself nasty . there be , however , so much nastiness of the kind go , that he little effort make no great difference . the conservative member of the committee , on whose side of the the inquiry have originate , do not scruple to lay all manner of charge to officer whom , be they themselves in power , they would be bound to support and would support with all they energie . about a quarter before four the member of the have dismiss they last witness for the day , be desirous of not lose they chance of seat on so important a occasion , and hurrie down into the lobby ,-- so that they might enter the house before prayer . Phineas here be button - hole by , who say something to he as to the approach division . they be stand in front of the door of the , almost in the middle of the lobby , with a crowd of member around they , -- on a spot which , as frequenter know , be hallow ground , and must not be trode by strangers . he be in the act of answer , when he be touch on the arm , and on turn round , see . " about that little bill , , " say the horrible man , turn he ching round over he white cravat . " they always tell I at you lodging that you be not at home . " by this time a policeman be explain to with gentle violence that he must not stand there , -- that he must go aside into one of the corner . " I know all that , " say , retreate . " of course I do . but what be a man to do when a gent will not see he at home ? " stand aside in he corner quietly , give the policeman no occasion
occasion for further action against he ; but in retreat he speak loud , and there be a lull of voice around , and twenty member at least have hear what have be say . Finn no doubt have he privilege , but be determined that the privilege should avail he as little as possible . it be very hard . the real offender , the of the , the peer 's son , with a thousand a year pay by the country be not treat with this cruel persecution . Phinea have in truth never take a farthing from any one but he father ; and though doubtless he owe something at this moment , he have no creditor of he own that be even angry with he . as the world go he be a clear man , -- but for this debt of he friend . he leave in the lobby , and hurrie into the house , blush up to the eyes . he look for in he place , but the of the Treasury be not as yet there . Doubtless he would be there for the division , and resolve that he would speak a bit of he mind before he let he friend out of he sight . there be some great speech make on that evening . deliver a oration of which man say that it would be know in as long as there be any word remain of eloquence . in it he taunt Turnbull with be a recreant to the people , of whom he call himself so often the champion . but be not in the least move . know well enough that be not to be move by any word ; -- but the word be not the less tell to the and to the country . , who hear it , say that forget himself in that speech , forget he party , forget he strategy , forget he long - draw scheme ,-- even he love of applause , and think only of he cause . reply to he with equal genius , and with equal skill , -- if not with equal heart . have ask for the approbation of all present and of all future reformer . deny he both , -- the one because he would not succeed , and the other because he would not have deserve success . then make he reply , get up at about three o'clock , and utter a prayer , -- a futile prayer , -- that this he last work on behalf of he countryman might be successful . he bill be read a second time , as I have say before , in obedience to the cast vote of the speaker , -- but a majority such as that be tantamount to a defeat . there be , of course , on that night no declaration as to what ministers would do . without a meeting of the cabinet , and without some further consideration , though each might know that the bill would be withdraw , they could not say in what way they would act . but late as be the hour , there be many word on the subject before member be in they bed . and leave the together , and perhaps no two gentleman in it have in former session be more in the habit of walking home arm -in - arm and discuss what each have heard and what each have say in that assembly . Latterly these two man have go strangely asunder in they path ,-- very strangely for man who have for year walk so closely together . and this separation have be mark by violent word speak against each other , -- by violent word , at least , speak against he in office by the one who have never contaminate he hand by the 's shilling . and yet , on such a occasion as this , they be able to walk away from the arm -in - arm , and do not fly at each other 's throat by the way . " singular enough , be it not , " say , " that the thing should have be so close ? " " very odd , " say ; " but man have say that it would be so all the week . " " be very fine , " say . " very fine , indeed . I never have hear anything like it before . " " be very powerful too , " say . " yes ; -- no doubt . the occasion be great , and he answer to the spur . but 's be the speech of the debate . " " well ; -- yes ; perhaps it be , " say , who be think of he own flight the other night , and who among he special friend have be much praise for what he have then do . but of course he make no allusion to he own doings , -- or to those of . in this way they converse for some twenty minute , till they part ; but neither of they interrogate the other as to what either might be call upon to do in consequence of the division which have just be effect . they might still be intimate friend , but the day of confidence between they be pass . Phinea have see enter the , -- which he do quite late in the night , so as to be in time for the division . no doubt he have dine in the house , and have be all the evening in the library , -- or in the smoking - room . when be on he leg make he reply , have saunter in , not choose to wait till he might be ring up by
by the bell at the last moment . be near he as they pass by the teller , near he in the lobby , and near he again as they all pass back into the house . but at the last moment he think that he would miss he prey . in the crowd as they leave the house he fail to get he hand upon he friend 's shoulder . but he hurry down the member ' passage , and just at the gate lead out into he overtake walk arm - in - arm with . " Laurence , " he say , take hold of he countryman 's arm with a decided grasp , " I want to speak to you for a moment , if you please . " " speak away , " say . then , look up into he face , kknow very well that he have be -- what the world call , dining . Phinea remember at the moment that have be close to he when the odious money - lender have touch he arm and make he inquiry about that " little bill . " he much wish to make understand that the debt be not he own , -- that he be not in the hand of usurer in reference to he own concern . but there be a feeling within he that he still , -- even still , -- owed something to he friendship to . " just give I you arm , and come on with I for a minute , " say . " Erle will excuse we . " " oh , blaze ! " say , " what be it you be after ? I be not good at private conference at three in the morning . we be all out , and be not that enough for ye ? " " I have be dreadfully annoyed to - night , " say , " and I wish to speak to you about it . " " , , my boy , and there be a good many of we be annoyed ; -- eh , ? " Phineas perceive clearly that though have be dining , there be as much of cunning in all this as of wine , and he be determined not to submit to such unlimited ill - usage . " my annoyance come from you friend , , who have the impudence to address I in the lobby of the house . " " and serve you right , too , , my boy . why the do you sport you oak to he ? he have tell I all about it . there be not such a patient little fellow as anywhere , if you will only let he have he own way . he will look in , as he call it , three time a week for a whole season , and do nothing further . of course he do not like to be lock out . " " be that the gentleman with whom the police interfere in the lobby ? " inquire . " a confound bill discounter to whom we friend here have introduce I , -- for he own purpose , " say . " a very gentleman - like fellow , " say . " know he , I daresay . look here , , my boy , take my advice . ask he to breakfast , and let he understand that the house will always be open to he . " after this and get into a cab together , and be drive away . a meeting and now will the assist I while I s a altogether new song ? on the the meet at the 's official residence in , and I will attempt to describe what , accord to the bewilder brain of a poor fictionist , be say or might have be say , what be do or might have be do , on so august a occasion . the poor fictionist very frequently find himself to have be wrong in he description of thing in general , and be tell so , roughly by the critic , and tenderly by the friend of he bosom . he be move to tell of thing of which he omit to learn the nature before he tell of they -- as should be do by a strictly honest fictionist . he catch salmon in ; or shoot he partridge in . he dahlias bloom in , and he bird se in the autumn . he open the opera - house before , and make parliament sit on a evening . and then those terrible mesh of the Law ! how be a fictionist , in these excited day , to create the need biting interest without legal difficulty ; and how again be he to steer he little bark clear of so many rock , -- when the rock and the shoal have be purposely arrange to make the taking of a pilot on board a necessity ? as to those law mesh , a benevolent pilot will , indeed , now and again give a poor fictionist a help hand , -- not use , however , generally , with much discretion . but from whom be any assistance to come in the august matter of a cabinet assembly ? there can be no such assistance . no man can tell atch but they who will tell nothing . but then , again , there be this safety , that let the story be ever so mistold , -- let the fiction be ever so far remove from the truth , no crintic short of a himself can convict the narrator of error . it be a large dingy room , cover with a carpet , and contain a dark polish mahogany dinner - table , on
on very heavy carve leg , which a old messenger be prepare at two o'clock in the day for the use of she 's . the table would have be large enough for fourteen guest , and along the side further from the fire , there be place some six heavy chair , good comfortable chair , stuff at the back as well as the seat , -- but on the side nearer to the fire the chair be place irregularly ; and there be four armchair , -- two on one side and two on the other . there be four window to the room , which look on to 's , and the curtain of the window be dark and heavy , -- as become the gravity of the purpose to which that chamber be appropriate . in old day it have be the dining - room of one after another . to it have be the abode of he own familiar prandial Penates , and have be dull there among he dull friend for long year after year . the of the present day find it more convenient to live in private home , and , indeed , not unfrequently carry they cabinet with they . but , under 's rule , the meeting be generally hold in the old room at the official residence . do the a messenger move each armchair , now a little this way and now a little that , and then look at they as though something of the tendency of the come meeting might depend on the comfort of its leading member . if should find himself to be quite comfortable , so that he could hear what be say without a struggle to he ear , and see he colleague 's face clearly , and feel the fire without burn he shin , it might be possible that he would not insist upon resigning . if this be so , how important be the work now confide to the hand of that a messenger ! when he anxious eye have glance round the room some half a dozen time , when he have touch each curtain , laid he hand upon every chair , and dust certain papers which lay upon a side - table , -- and which have be lie there for two year , and at which no one ever look or would look , -- he gently creep away and ensconce himself in a easy chair not far from the door of the chamber . for it might be necessary to stop the attempt of a rash intruder on those secret counsel . very shortly there be hear the ring of various voice in the passage , -- the voice of man speak pleasantly , the voice of man with whom it see , from they tone , that thing be do well in the world . and then a cluster of four or five gentleman enter the room . at first sight they seem to be as ordinary gentlemen as you shall meet anywhere about on a afternoon . there be nothing about they outward appearance of the august wiggery of statecraft , nothing of the ponderous dignity of ministerial position . that little man in the square - cut coat , -- we may almost call it a shooting - coat , -- swing a umbrella and wear no glove , be no less a person than the , -- , -- who make a hundred thousand pound as , and be suppose to be the best lawyer of he age . he be fifty , but he look to be hardly over forty , and one might take he to be , from he appearance , -- perhaps a clerk in the , well - to - do , and popular among he brother - clerk . immediately with he be , also a lawyer by profession , though he have never practise . he have be in the for nearly thirty year , and be now at the . he be a stout , healthy , grey - haired gentleman , who certainly do not wear the car of office on he face . perhaps , however , no minister get more bullied than he by the press , and man say that he will be very willing to give up to some political enemy the control of the police , and the onerous duty of judging in all criminal appeal . behind these come we friend , young Cantrip from the colony next door , than whom no smarter young peer now do honou to we hereditary legislature , and , the Chancellor of the of . why have always be place in 's nobody ever know . as of the he have nothing to do , -- and were there anything , he would not do it . he rarely speak in the house , and then do not speak well . he be a handsome man , or would be but for a assumption of grandeur in the carriage of he eyes , give to he face a character of pomposity which he himself well deserve . he be in the when young , and have be in parliament since he cease to be young . it must be suppose that have find something in he , for he have be include in three successive liberal cabinet . he have probably the virtue of be true to , and of be duly submissive to one whom he recognise as he superior . within two minute afterwards the follow , with . the , as all the world know , be the of , the very front and head of the aristocratic old Whigs of the country , -- a man who have be thrice speak of as , and who really might have fill the office have he not
not know himself to be unfit for it . the have be consult as to the making of cabinets for the last five - and - thirty year , and be even now not a old man in appearance ;-- a fussy , popular , clever , conscientious man , whose digestion have be too good to make politics a burden to he , but who have think seriously about he country , and be one who will be sure to leave memoir behind he . he be bear in the semi-purple of ministerial influence , and man say of he that he be honester than he uncle , who be Canning 's friend , but not so great a man as he grandfather , with whom once quarrell , and whom love . , himself the heir to a dukedom , be the young of the , of whom some statesman think much as the rise star of the age . if industry , rectitude of purpose , and a certain clearness of intellect may prevail , , as he be familiarly call , may become a great . then come by himself ; -- the of the , with the whole weight of a new iron -clad fleet upon he shoulders . he have undertake the Herculean task of cleanse the dockyard , -- and with it the lesser work of keep afloat a navy that may be esteem by he countryman to be the best in the world . and he think that he will do both , if only will not resign ; -- a industrious , honest , self - deny nobleman , who work without ceasing from morn to night , and who hope to rise in time to high thing , -- to the translating of Homer , perhaps , and the wearing of the Garter . close behind he there be a ruck of , with the much - honoure grey - hair old in the midst of they . there be , the Foreign , say to be the greatest orator in , on whose shoulders it be think that the mantle of would fall , -- to be wear , however , quite otherwise than have wear it . for be a man with no feeling for the past , void of historical association , hardly with memory ,-- live altogether for the future which he be anxious to fashion anew out of the vigour of he own brain . whereas , with , even he love of reform be a inherited passion for a old - world . and there be with they , the brother of a peer , at , a great scholar and a polish gentleman , very proud of he position as a , but conscious that he have hardly earn it by political work . and be with they , the of , -- of all work lord the most jaunty , the most pleasant , and the most popular , very good at take chair at dinner , and make become speeches at the shortest notice , a man apparently very free and open in he way of life , -- but cautious enough in truth as to every step , know well how hard it be to climb and how easy to fall . enter the room lean on 's arm , and when he make he way up among the armchair upon the rug before the fire , the other cluster around he with cheering look and kindly question . then come the , we old friend , last , -- and I would say least , but that the word of no councillor could go for less in such a assemblage than will those of , the of the of . be soon seat in one of the armchair , while lean against the table close at he elbow . stand upright at the corner of the chimney - piece furthest from , and at that nearest to he . the take the armchair close at 's left hand . be , as I have say , lean against the table , but the , who be next to he , sit upon it . and occupy chair on the further side of the table , near to 's end , and place himself at the head of the table , thus join they as it be into a body . the stand before the screen he from the fire , and the Chancellor of the , after wait for a few minute as though in doubt , take one of the vacant armchair . the young lord from the stand a little behind the shoulders of he great friend from the ; and the , after move about for a while uneasily , take a chair behind the Chancellor of the . one armchair be thus leave vacant , but there be no other comer . " it be not so bad as I think it would be , " say the , speak aloud , but nevertheless address himself specially to he chief . " it be bad enough , " say Mildmay , laugh . " bad enough indeed , " say , without any laughter . " and such a good bill lose , " say . " the worst of these failure be , that the same identical bill can never be bring in again . " " so that if the lost bill be best , the bill that will not be lose can only be second best , " say the . " I certainly do think that after the debate before we should not have come to shipwreck about the ballot , " say . " it be brew for we all along , " say , who then with a gesture of he hand and a pressure of he lip withheld word
word which he be nearly uttering , and which would not , probably , have be complimentary to . as it be , he turn half round and say something to which be not audible to any one else in the room . it be worthy of note , however , that 's name be not once mention aloud at that meeting . " I be afraid it be brew all along , " say gravely . " well , gentlemen , we must take it as we get it , " say , still smile . " and now we must consider what we shall do at once . " then he pause as though expect that counsel would come to he first from one colleague and then from another . but no such counsel come , and probably do not in the least expect that it would come . " we can not stay where we be , of course , " say the . the be privileged to say as much as that . but though every man in the room know that it must be so , no one but the would have say it , before have speak plainly himself . " no , " say ; " I suppose that we can hardly stay where we be . probably none of we wish it , gentlemen . " then he look round upon he colleague , and there come a sort of a assent , though there be no spoken word . the sound from be louder than that from the other ; -- but yet from he it be no more than a attesting grunt . " we have two thing to consider , " continue , -- and though he speak in a very low voice , every word be hear by all present , -- " two thing chiefly , that be ; the work of the country and the Queen 's comfort . I propose to see she this afternoon at five , -- that be , in something less than two hour ' time , and I hope to be able to tell the house by seven what have take place between she Majesty and I . my friend , he , will do as much in the house of Lords . if you agree with I , gentlemen , I will explain to the Queen that it be not for the welfare of the country that we should retain we place , and I will place you resignation and my own in she Majesty 's hand . " " you will advise she to send for , " say . " certainly ; -- there will be no other course open to I . " " or to she , " say . to this remark from the rising of the day , no word of reply be make ; but of those present in the room three or four of the most experienced servants of the feel that have be imprudent . the , who have . ever be afraid of , tell afterwards that such a observation should not have be make ; and ponder upon it uneasily , and ask what he think about it . " change so much , and with the time the feeling of man , " say . but I doubt whether quite understand he . there be silence in the room for a moment or two after have speak , and then again address he friend . " of course it may be possible that my may foresee difficulty , or may find difficulty which will oblige he , either at once , or after a attempt have be make , to decline the task which she Majesty will probably commit to he . all of we , no doubt , know that the arrangement of a government be not the most easy task in the world ; and that it be not make the more easy by a absence of a majority in the of . " " he would dissolve , I presume , " say the . " I should say so , " continue . " but it may not improbably come to pass that she Majesty will feel herself oblige to send again for some one or two of we , that we may tender to she the advice which we owe to she ;-- for I , for instance , or for my friend the . in such a matter she would be much guide probably by what might have suggest to she . should this be so , and should I be consult , my present feeling be that we should resume we office so that the necessary business of the session should be complete , and that we should then dissolve parliament , and thus ascertain the opinion of the country . in such case , however , we should of course meet again . " " I quite think that the course propose by will be the best , " say the , who have no doubt already discuss the matter with he friend the in private . no one else say a word either of argument or disagreement , and the be break up . the old messenger , who have be asleep in he chair , stand up and bow as the walk by he , and then go in and rearrange the chair . " he have as much idea of give up as you or I have , " say to he friend , as they walk arm - in - arm together from the across 's towards the club . " I be not sure that he be not right , " say . " do you mean for himself or for the country ? " ask . " for he future fame . they who
who have abdicate and have clung to they abdication have always lose by it . be bring back again , and be feel to have be foolish . the peach of retired minister of which we hear so often have generally be cultivate in a constrain seclusion ; -- or at least the world so believe . " they be talk probably of , as to whom some of he colleague have think it probable , knowe that he would now resign , that he would have to - day declare he intention of lay aside for ever the care of office . walk home alone , and as he go there be something of a feeling of disappointment at heart , which make he ask himself whether might not have be right in rebuk he for join the government . but this , I think , be in no way due to 's resignation , but rather to a conviction on 's part that that he have contribute but little to he country 's welfare by sit in 's . 's after the holding of that of which the author have da to attempt a slight sketch in the last chapter , there be various visit make to the , first by , and then by , afterwards by and the together , and then again by ; and there be various explanation make to parliament in each house , and rival be very courteous to each other , promise assistance ; -- and at the end of it the old man hold they seat . the only change make be effect by the retirement of , who be raise to the peerage , and by the selection of -- to fill he place in the cabinet . during the late debate have make one of those speech , few and far between , by which he have create for himself a reputation ; but , nevertheless , all man express they great surprise , and no one could quite understand why have be make a . " it be impossible to say whether he be pleased or not , " say , speak of he to Phineas . " I be pleased , of course . " " he ambition must be gratify , " say . " it would be , if he have any , " say . " I do not believe in a man lack ambition . " " it be hard to say . there be man who by no means wear they heart upon they sleeve , and my husband be one of they . he tell I that it would be unbecoming in he to refuse , and that be all he say to I about it . " the old man hold they seat , but they do so as it be only upon further trial . take the course which he have indicate to he colleague at the cabinet meeting . before all the explanation and journeying be complete , be over , and the much - need Whitsuntide holiday be come on . but little of the routine work of the session have be do ; and , as tell the more than once , the country would suffer be the to dissolve parliament at this period of the year . the old ministers would go on with the business of the country , with he follower have decline to take affair into they hand ; and at the close of the session , which should be make as short as possible , writs should be issue for new election . this be 's programme , and it be one of which no one da to complain very loudly . , indeed , do speak a word of caution . he tell that he have lose he bill , good in other respects , because he have refuse to introduce the ballot into he measure . let he promise to be wiser for the future , and to obey the manifested wish of the country , and then all would be well with he . in answer to this , declare that to the best of he power of read the country , he countryman have manifest no such wish ; and that if they do so , if by the fresh election it should be show that the ballot be in truth desire , he would at once leave the execution of they wish to abler and younger hand . express himself perfectly satisfied with the 's answer , and say that the come election would show whether he or be right . many man , and among they some of he colleague , think that have be imprudent . " no man ought ever to pledge himself to anything , " say to the ; -- " that be , to anythe unnecessary . " the , who be very true to , make no reply to this , but even he think that he old friend have be betraye into a promise too rapidly . but the pledge be give , and some people already begin to make much of it . there appear leader after leader in the 's banner_ urge the constituency to take advantage of the 's word , and to show clearly at the husting that they desire the ballot . " you have better come over to we , ; you have indeed , " say . " now be the time to do it , and show yourself a people 's friend . you will have to do it sooner or later , -- whether or no . come to we and we will be you horgan . " but in those day be something less in love with than he have be at the time of the great debate , for he be become more and more closely connect
connect with people who in they way of living and mode of expression be very unlike . this advice be give to he about the end of , and at that time be live with he in the lodging in great . have temporarily vacate she room on the first floor , and the with the broken bone have condescende to occupy they . " I do not know that I like have a , " have say to he wife . " it will soon come to you not like anybody decent anywhere , " have reply ; " but I sha not ask any question about it . when you be waste so much time and money at you dirty law proceedings , it be well that somebody should earn something at home . " there have be many discussion about the bringing of up to , in all of which Phineas have be concerned . have think that he son have better remain down at the ; and although he say that the room be at he son 's disposal should choose to come to , still he say it in such a way that , who go down to , could not tell he friend that he would be make welcome in . " I think I shall leave those digging altogether , " say to he . " my father annoy I by everything he say and do , and I annoy he by say and do nothing . " then there come a invitation to he from and . would he come to ? press this very much , though in truth have hardly do more than give a cold assent . but would not hear of it . " there be some reason for my go to my father 's house , " say he , " though he and I be not the best friend in the world ; but there can be no reason for my go to the house of a man I dislike so much as I do . " the matter be settle in the manner tell above . 's room be prepare for he at 's house , and go down to and bring he up . " I have sell , " he say , -- " to a young fellow whose neck will certainly be the sacrifice if he attempt to ride he . I would have give he to you , , only you would not have know what to do with he . " when he come up to be still in bandage , though , as the surgeon say , he bone seem to have be make to be break and set again ; and he bandage of course be a sufficient excuse for he visit the house neither of he father nor he brother - in - law . but go to he frequently , and thus become acquainted with we hero 's home and with . and there be message take from to the man in bandage , some of which lose nothing in the carrying . once try to make think that it would be right , or rather not wrong , that they two should go together to 's room . " and would you have I tell my aunt , or would you have I not tell she ? " ask . " I would have you do just as you please , " answer . " so I shall , " reply , " but I will do nothing that I should be asham to tell any one . you brother profess to be in love with I . " " he be in love with you , " say . " even you do not pretend to doubt he faith . " " very well . in those circumstance a girl should not go to a man 's room unless she mean to consider herself as engage to he , even with he sister ; -- not though he have break every bone in he skin . I know what I may do , , and I know what I may not ; and I will not be lead either by you or by my aunt . " " may I give he you love ? " " no ; -- because you will give it in a wrong spirit . he know well enough that I wish he well ; -- but you may tell he that from I , if you please . he have from I all those wish which one friend owe to another . " but there be other message send from through which she word with more show of affection , -- perhaps as much for the discomfort of as for the consolation of . " tell he to take care of himself , " say , " and bid he not to have any more of those wild brute that be not fit for any to ride . tell he that I say so . it be a great thing to be brave ; but what be the use of be foolhardy ? " the session be to be close at the end of , to the great dismay of tradesman and of young lady who have not be entirely successful in the early season . but before the old parliament be close , and the writ for the new election be despatch , there occur a incident which be of very much importance to . near the end of , when the remaining day of the session be number by three or four , he have be dine at 's house in in company with . but have not be there . at this time he see not unfrequently , and there be always a word say about . the father would ask how the son occupy himself
himself , and would hope ,-- though hitherto he have hope in vain , -- that he would induce the to come and see . could never be bring to that ; but it be sufficiently evident that he would have do so , have he not be afraid to descmend so far from the altitude of he paternal wrath . on this evening , at about eleven , and leave the house together , and walk from the through into . here they way parte , but Phineas cross the road with , as he be make some reply to a second invitation to . Phineas , consider what have be say before on the subject , think that the invitation come late , and that it be not warmly word . he have , therefore , decline it , and be in the act of decline it , when he cross the road with . in walking down from the he have see two man stand in the shadow a few yard up a mew or small alley that be there , but have think nothing of they . it be just that period of the year when there be hardly any of the darkness of night ; but at this moment there be symptom of come rain , and heavy drop begin to fall ; and there be big cloud come and go before the young moon . have say that he would get a cab , but he have see none as he cross , and have put up he umbrella as he make he way towards . Phineas as he leave he distinctly perceive the same two figure on the other side of , and then turn into the shadow of a butcher 's porch , he see they cross the street in the wake of . it be now raine in , and the few passenger who be out be scudd away quickly , this way and that . it hardly occur to to think that any danger be imminent to from the man , but it do occur to he that he might as well take some notice of the matter . know that would make he way down , that be he usual route from towards he own home , and know also that he himself could again come across 's track by go down to the corner of , and thence by into . without much thought , therefore , he go out of he own course down to the corner of the , hurrie he step till he be run , and then run along , think as he go of some special word that he might say to as a excuse , should he again come across he late companion . he reach the corner of before that gentleman could have be there unless he also have run ; but just in time to see he as he be come on , -- and also to see in the dark glimmering of the slight uncertain moonlight that the two man be behind he . he retreate a step backward in the corner , resolve that when come up , they two would go on together ; for now it be clear that be follow . but do not reach the corner . when he be within two door of it , one of the man have follow he up quickly , and have throw something round he throat from behind he . Phineas understand well now that he friend be in the act of be garrot , and that he instant assistance be need . he rush forward , and as the second ruffian have be close upon the footstep of the first , there be almost instantaneously a concourse of the four man . but there be no fight . the man who have already nearly succeed in put on to he back , make no attempt to seize he prey when he find that so unwelcome a addition have join the party , but instantly turn to fly . he companion be turn also , but be too quick for he , and have seize on to he collar , hold to he with all he power . " Dash it all , " say the man , " do not yer see as how I be a - hurrie up to help the gen'leman myself ? " Phinea , however , have not see this , and hold on gallantly , and in a couple of minute the first ruffian be back again upon the spot in the custody of a policeman . " you have do it uncommon neat , sir , " say the policeman , compliment upon he performance . " if the gen'leman be not no the worst for it , it will have be a very pretty evening 's amusement . " be now lean against the railing , and hithertoo have be unable to declare whether he be really injured or not , and it be not till a second policeman come up that the hero of the night be at liberty to attend closely to he friend . , when he be able to speak , declare that for a minute or two he have think that he neck have be break ; and he be not quite convinced till he find himself in he own house , that nothing more serious have really happen to he than certain bruise round he throat . the policeman be for a while anxious that at any rate Phinea should go with he to the police - office ; but at last consent to take the address of the two gentleman . when he find that be a member of parliament , and that he be designate as , he respect for the garrotter become more great , and he begin to feel
feel that the night be indeed a night of great importance . he express unbounded admiration at 's success in he own line , and make repeat promise that the man should be forthcome on the morrow . could a cab be get ? of course a cab could be get . a cab be get , and within a quarter of a hour of the making of the attack , the two member of parliament be on they way to . there be hardly a word speak in the cab , for be in pain . when , however , they reach the door in , want to go , and leave he friend with the servants , but this the would not allow . " of course you must see my wife , " he say . so they go up - stair into the drawing - room , and then upon the stair , by the light of the house , Phineas could perceive that he companion 's face be bruise and black with dirt , and that he cravat be gone . " I have be garrot , " say the to he wife . " what ? " " simply that ; -- or should have be , if he have not be there . how he come there , only know . " the wife 's anxiety , and then she gratitude , need hardly be describe , -- nor the astonishment of the husband , which by no means decrease on reflection , at the opportune re-appearance in the nick of time of the man whom three minute before the attack he have leave in the act of go in the opposite direction . " I have see the man , and think it best to run round by the corner of , " say . " may bless you , " say . " amen , " say the . " I think he be bear to be my friend , " say . the say nothing more that night . he be never give to much talking , and the little accident which have just occur to he do not tend to make word easy to he . but he press we hero 's hand , and say that of course Phineas would come to they on the morrow . remark that he first business must be to go to the police -office , but he promise that he would come down to place immediately afterwards . then also press he hand , and look --; she look , I think , as though she think that would only have do right have he repeat the offence which he have commit under the waterfall of . " Garrot ! " say , when tell he the story before they go to be that night . he have be smoke , sipp brandy - and - water , and wait for 's return . " garrot ! " " the fellow be in the act of do it . " " and you stop he ? " " yes ;-- I get there just in time . be not it lucky ? " " you ought to be garrot yourself . I should have lent the man a hand have I be there . " " how can you say anything so horrible ? but you be drink too much , old fellow , and I shall lock the bottle up . " " if there be no one in drank more than I do , the wine merchant would have a bad time of it . and so the new have be garrot in the street . of course I be sorry for poor 's sake . " " luckily he be not much the worse for it ;-- only a little bruise . " " I wonder whether it be on the card he should be improve by it ;-- worse , except in the way of be strangle , he could not be . however , as he be my brother - in - law , I be oblige to you for rescue he . come , I will go to bed . I must say , if he be to be garrot I should like to have be there to see it . " that be the manner in which receive the tiding of the terrible accident which have occur to he near relative . for by three o'clock in the day after the little accident which be tell in the last chapter , all the world know that , the new , have be garrot , or half garrot , and that that child of , , have drop upon the scene out of heaven at the exact moment of time , have take the two garrotter prisoner , and save the 's neck and valuable , -- if not he life . " , " say , when he come to hear this , " that fellow will marry a heiress , and be for yet . " a good deal be say about it to Phineas at the club , but a word or two that be say to he by be worth all the rest . " why , what a you be ! but you succour man in distress instead of maiden . " " that be my bad luck , " say . " the other will come no doubt in time , " reply ; " and then you will get you reward . " he know that such word from a girl mean nothing ,-- especially from such a girl as ; but nevertheless they be very pleasant to he . " of course you will come to we at Loughlinter when parliament be up ? " say the same day . " I do not know really . you see
see I must go over to about my re-election . " " what have that to do with it ? you be only make out excuse . we go down on the first of , and the english election will not begin till the middle of the month . it will be before the man of Loughshane be ready for you . " " to tell you the truth , , " say , " I doubt whether the man of , -- or rather the man of , will have anything more to say to I . " " what man do you mean ? " " . he be in a passion with he brother before , and I get the advantage of it . since that he have pay he brother 's debt for the fifteenth time , and of course be ready to fight any battle for the forgiven prodigal . thing be not as they be , and my father tell I that he think I shall be beat . " " that be bad news . " " it be what I have a right to expect . " every word of information that have come to about since have decide upon a dissolution , have go towards make he feel at first that there be a great doubt as to he re-election , and at last that there be almost a certainty against he . and as these tiding reach he they make he very unhappy . since he have be in parliament he have very frequently regret that he have leave the shade of the of for the glare of ; and he have more than once make up he mind that he would desert the glare and return to the shade . but now , when the moment come in which such desertion seem to be compulsory on he , when there would be no longer a choice , the seat in parliament be dearer to he than ever . if he have go of he own free will , -- so he tell himself , -- there would have be something of nobility in such go . would have respecte he , and even . low might have take he back to the friendship of she severe bosom . but he would go back now as a cur with he tail between he leg , -- kick out , as it be , from parliament . return to 's soile with failure , have accomplish nothing , have break down on the only occasion on which he have da to show himself on he leg , not have open a single useful book during the two year in which he have sit in parliament , burdene with 's debt , and not quite free from debt of he own , how could he start himself in any way by which he might even hope to win success ? he must , he tell himself , give up all thought of practising in and betake himself to . he could not dare to face he friend in as a young briefless barrister . on this evening , the evening subsequend to that on which have be attack , the be sit in committee of ways and means , and there come on a discussion as to a certain vote for the army . it have be know that there would be such discussion ; and have hear from a word or two now and again about the potted pea , have recommend he to be ready with a few remark if he wish to support the government in the matter of that vote . Phineas do so wish , have learn quite enough in the committee room up - stair to make he believe that a large importation of the pott pea from would not be for the advantage of the army or navy , -- or for that of the country at large . have make he suggestion without the slightest allusion to the former failure , -- just as though Phineas be a practise speaker accustom to be on he leg three or four time a week . " if I find a chance , I will , " say , take the advice just as it be give . after prayer , a word be say in the as to the ill - fortune which have befall the new . have ask whether violent hand have not be laid in the dead of night on the sacred throat , -- the throat that should have be sacr , -- of the new of the of ; and have expressed regret that the , -- which be , he fear , in other respects somewhat infirm ,-- should now have be further weaken by this injury to that new bulwark with which it have endeavoure to support itself . the , answer he old rival in the same strain , say that the calamity might have be very severe , both to the country and to the cabinet ; but that fortunately for the community at large , a gallant young member of that house , -- and he be proud to say a supporter of the government , -- have appear upon the spot at the nick of time ;-- " as a god out of a machine , " say , interrupt he ;-- " by no means as a out of a machine , " continue , " but as a real help in a very real trouble , and succeed not only in save my right honourable friend , the of the , but in arrest the two malefactor who attempt to rob he in the street . " then there be a cry of " name ; " and of course name the member for . it so happen that be not in the house
house , but he hear it all when he come down to attend the committee of ways and means . then come on the discussion about provision in the army , the subject be moo by one of 's close ally . the gentleman on the other side of the who have move for the , be silent on the occasion , have feel that the result of that committee have not be exactly what he have expect . the evidence respecte such of the pott peas as have be use in this country be not very favourable to they . but , nevertheless , the rebound from that committee , -- the very fact that such a committee have be make to sit , -- give ground for a hostile attack . to attack be so easy , when a complete refutation barely suffice to save the attack , -- do not suffice to save he from future dim memory of something have be wrong , -- and bring down no disgrace whatsoever on the promoter of the false charge . the promoter of the false charge simply express he gratification at finding that he have be misl by erroneous information . it be not customary for he to express gratification at the fact , that out of all the mud which he have throw , some will probably stick ! Phineas , when the time come , do get on he leg , and speak perhaps two or three dozen word . the do so seem to come to he quite naturally . he have think very little about it beforehand , -- have resolve not to think of it . and indeed the occasion be one of no great importance . the speaker be not in the chair , and the House be thin , and he intend to make no speech ,-- merely to say something which he have to say . till he have finish he hardly remember that he be do that , in attempting to do which he have before fail so egregiously . it be not till he sit down that he begin to ask himself whether the scene be swim before he eye as it have do on former occasion ; as it have do even when he have so much as thought of make a speech . now he be astonish at the easiness of the thing , and as he leave the tell himself that he have overcome the difficulty just when the victory could be of no avail to he . have he be more eager , more constant in he purpose , he might at any rate have show the world that he be fit for the place which he have presume to take before he be cast out of it . on the next morning he receive a letter from he father . have see , have be send for to relieve he lordship in a fit of the gout , and have be inform by the Earl that he mean to fight the borough to the last man ; --have he say to the last shilling he would have speak with perhaps more accuracy . " you see , doctor , you son have have it for two year , as you may say for nothing , and I think he ought to give way . he can not expect that he be to go on there as though it be he own . " and then he lordship , upon whom this touch of the gout have come somewhat sharply , express himself with considerable animation . the old doctor behave with much spirit . " I tell the , " he say , " that I could not undertake to say what you might do ; but that as you have come forward at first with my sanction , I could not withdraw it now . he ask I if I should support you with money ; I say that I should to a moderate extent . ' by ----,' say the , 'a moderate extent will go a very little way , I can tell you . ' since that he have have with he ; so , I suppose , I shall not see he any more . you can do as you please now ; but , from what I hear , I fear you will have no chance . " then with much bitterness of spirit resolve that he would not interfere with at . he would go at once to the and explain he reason to and other there who would be interested . but he first go to . here he be show up into 's room . be up and seat in a arm -chair by a open window look over into the 's garden ; but he be in he dressing - gown , and be to be regard as a invalid . and indeed as he could not turn he neck , or think that he could not do so , he be not very fit to go out about he work . let we hope that the affair of the of do not suffer materially by he absence . we may take it for grant that with a man so sedulous as to all he duty there be no arrear of work when the accident take place . he put out he hand to , and say some word in a whisper , -- some word or two among which catch the sound of " pott pea , " -- and then continue to look out of the window . there be man who be utterly prostrate by any bodily ailment , and it seem that be one of they . , who be full of he own bad news , have intend to tell he sad story at once . but he perceive
perceive that the neck of the of the be too stiff to allow of he take any interest in external matter , and so he refrain . " what do the doctor say about it ? " say , perceive that just for the present there could be only one possible subject for remark . be begin to describe in a long whisper what the doctor do think about it , when come into the room . of course they begin at first to talk about . it would not have be kind to he not to have do so . and make much of the injury , as it behove a wife to do in such circumstance for the sake both of the sufferer and of the hero . she declare she conviction that have be a moment later she husband 's neck would have be irredeemably break . " I do not think they ever do kill the people , " say . " at any rate they do not mean to do so . " " I think they do , " say . " I fancy not , " say , eager in the cause of truth . " I think this man be very clumsy , " whisper . " perhaps he be a beginner , " say , " and that may make a difference . if so , I be afraid we have interfere with he education . " then , by degrees , the conversation get away to other thing , and ask he after . " I have make up my mind to give it up , " say he , smile as he speak . " I be afraid there be but a bad chance , " say , smile also . " my father have behave so well ! " say . " he have write to say he will find the money , if I determine to contest the borough . I mean to write to he by to - night 's post to decline the offer . I have no right to spend the money , and I should not succeed if I do spend it . of course it make I a little down in the mouth . " and then he smile again . " I have get a plan of my own , " say . " what plan ? " " or rather it be not mine , but papa 's . be go to give up , and papa want you to come and try you luck there . " " ! " " it be not quite a certainty , you know , but I suppose it be as near a certainty as anything leave . " and this come from a strong ! " , I could not accept such a favour from you father . " then nod he head very slightly and whisper , " yes , yes . " " I could not think of it , " say . " I have no right to such a favour . " " that be a matter entirely for 's consideration , " say , with a affectation of solemnity in she voice . " I think it have always be feel that any politician may accept such a offer as that when it be make to he , but that no politician should ask for it . my father feel that he have to do the best he can with he influence in the borough , and therefore he come to you . " " it be not that , " say , somewhat rudely . " of course private feeling have they weight , " say . " it be not probable that papa would have go to a perfect stranger . and perhaps , , I may own that and I would both be very sorry that you should not be in the house , and that that feel on we part have have some weight with my father . " " of course you will stand ? " whisper , still look straight out of the window , as though the slightest attempt to turn he neck would be fraught with danger to himself and the Duchy . " have desire I to ask you to call upon he , " say . " I do not suppose there be very much to be say , as each of you know so well the other 's way of thinking . but you have better see he to - day or to - morrow . " of course be persuade before he leave 's room . indeed , when he come to think of it , there appear to he to be no valid reason why he should not sit for . the favour be of a kind that have prevail from time out of mind in , between the most respectable of the great land magnate , and young rise liberal politician . , , and have all be place in parliament by similar influence . of course he , , desire earnestly , -- longe in he very heart of heart , -- to extinguish all such Parliamentary influence , to root out for ever the last vestige of close borough nomination ; but while the thing remain it be better that the thing should contribute to the liberal than to the conservative strength of the , -- and if to the liberal , how be this to be achieve but by the acceptance of such influence by some liberal candidate ? and if it be right that it should be accept by any liberal candidate , -- then , why not by he ? the logic of this argument seem to he to be perfect . he feel something like a sting of reproach as he tell himself that in truth this great
great offer be make to he , not on account of the excellence of he politics , but because he have be instrumental in saive 's son - in - law from the violence of garrotter . but he crush these qualm of conscience as be over-scrupulous , and , as he tell himself , not practical . you must take the world as you find it , with a struggle to be something more honest than those around you . Phinea , as he preach to himself this sermon , declare to himself that they who attempt more than this fly too high in the cloud to be of service to man and woman upon earth . as he do not see that day he postpone write to he father for twenty - four hour . on the follow morning he find the at home in , have first discuss the matter fully with . " do not scruple about I , " say ; " you be quite welcome to the borough for I . " " but if I do not stand , would you do so ? there be so many reason which ought to induce you to accept a seat in parliament ! " " whether that be true or not , , I shall not accept my father 's interest at , unless it be offer to I in a way in which it never will be offer . you know I well enough to be sure that I shall not change my mind . will he . and , therefore , you may go down to with a pure conscience as far as I be concerned . " Phineas have he interview with the , and in ten minute everything be settled . on he way to there have come across he mind the idea of a grand effort of friendship . what if he could persuade the father so to conduct himself towards he son , that the son should consent to be a member for the borough ? and he do say a word or two to this effect , set forth that would condescmend to become a legislator , if only he father would condescmend to acknowledge he son 's fitness for such work without any comment on the son 's past life . but the simply waive the subject away with he hand . he could be as obstinate as he son . have be the between they on this subject , and have fail . he would not now consent to employ another mercury . very little ,-- hardly a word indeed , -- be say between the and about politics . Phineas be to be the Saulsby candidate at for the next election , and be to come to Saulsby with the from ,-- either with the or somewhat in advance of they . " I do not say that there will be no opposition , " say the , " but I expect none . " he be very courteous , -- nay , he be kind , feel doubtless that he family owe a great debt of gratitude to the young man with whom he be converse ; but , nevertheless , there be not absent on he part a touch of that high condescension which , perhaps , might be think to become the , the , and the great borough patron . , who be sensitive , feel this and wince . he have never quite like , and could not bring himself to do so now in spite of the kindness which the be show he . but he be very happy when he sit down to write to he father from the club . he father have tell he that the money should be forthcome for the election at , if he resolve to stand , but that the chance of success would be very slight ,-- indeed that , in he opinion , there would be no chance of success . nevertheless , he father have evidently believe , when write , that Phineas would not abandon he seat without a useless and expensive contest . he now thank he father with many expression of gratitude , -- declare he conviction that he father be right about , and then , in the most modest language that he could use , go on to say that he have find another borough open to he in . he be go to stand for , with the assistance of , and think that the election would probably not cost he above a couple of hundred pound at the outside . then he write a very pretty note to , thank he for he former kindness , and tell the irish Earl that it be not he intention to interfere with the borough of at the next election . a few day after this be very much surprised at a visit that be make to he at he lodging . , after that scene in the lobby of the , call again in , -- and be admit . " you have better let he sit in you armchair for half a hour or so , " have say ; and almost believe that it would be better . the man be a terrible nuisance to he , and he be begin to think that he have better undertake to pay the debt by degree . it be , he know , quite on the card that should have he arrest while at . since that scene in the lobby have be with he twice , and there have be a preliminary conversation as to real payment . want a hundred pound down , and another bill for two hundred and twenty at three month ' date . " think of my time and trouble in come here , " have urge when Phineas
Phineas have object to these term . " think of my time and trouble , and do be punctual , . " Phineas have offer he ten pound a quarter , the payment to be mark on the back of the bill , a tender which have not seem to regard as strong evidence of punctuality . he have not be angry , but have simply express he intention of call again ,-- give Phineas to understand that business would probably take he to the west of in the autumn . if only business might not take he down either to or to ! but the strange visitor who come to in the midst of these trouble put a end to they all . the strange visitor be . " you will be very much surprised at my come to you chamber , no doubt , " she say , as she sit down in the chair which Phineas place for she . Phineas could only say that he be very proud to be so highly honoured , and that he hope she be well . " pretty well , I thank you . I have just come about a little business , , and I hope you will excuse I . " " I be quite sure that there be no need for excuse , " say . " Laurence , when he hear about it , will say that I have be a impertinent old fool ; but I never care what say , either this way of that . I have be to that , , and I have pay he the money . " " no ! " say . " but I have , . I happen to hear what occur that night at the door of the of . " " who tell you , ? " " never mind who tell I . I hear it . I know before that you have be foolish enough to help about money , and so I put two and two together . it be not the first time I have have to do with . so I send to he , and I have buy the bill . there it be . " and produce the document which bear the name of across the front of it . " and do you pay he two hundred and fifty pound for it ? " " not quite . I have a very hard tussle , and get it at last for two hundred and twenty pound . " " and do you do it yourself ? " " all myself . if I have employ a lawyer I should have have to pay two hundred and forty pound and five pound for cost . and now , , I hope you will not have any more money engagement with my brother . " say that he think he might promise that he would have no more . " because , if you do , I sha not interfere . if begin to find that he could get money out of I in that way , there would be no end to it . would very soon be spend he spare time in my drawing - room . good - bye , . if say anything , just tell he that he would better come to I . " then be leave look at the bill . it be certainly a great relief to he , -- that he should be thus secure from the domiciliary visit of ; a great relief to he to be assure that would not find he out down at ; but nevertheless , he have to suffer a pang of shame as he feel that have become acquainted with he poverty and have found herself oblige to satisfy he pecuniary liability . 's go down to early in , take in he way . he stay there one night at the inn , and be introduce to sundry influential inhabitant of the borough by , the ironmonger , who be know by those who know to be a very strong supporter of the 's interest . and about half a dozen other of the tradesman of the town come to the inn , and meet Phineas in the parlour . he tell they he be a good sound and a supporter of 's government , of which they neighbour the be so conspicuous a ornament . this be almost all that be say about the out loud ; but each individual man of then present take a opportunity during the meeting of whisper into 's ear a word or two to show that he also be admit to the secret councils of the borough , -- that he too could see the inside of the arrangement . " of course we must support the , " one say . " never mind what you hear about a candidate , , " whisper a second ; " the can do what he please here . " and it seem to Phineas that it be think by they all to be rather a fine thing to be thus hold in the hand by a english nobleman . Phineas could not but reflect much upon this as he lay in he bed at the . the great political question on which the political world be engross up in be the enfranchisement of , -- of down to the rank of artisan and labourer ; -- and yet when he find himself in contact with individual , with man even very much above the artisan and the labourer , he find that they rather like be bound hand and foot , and be keep as tool in the political pocket of a rich man . every one of those tradesman be proud of he own personal subjection to the ! from he go to , have
have promise to be back in the borough for the election . would propose he , and he be to be seconde by Shortribs , the butcher and grazier . mention have be make of a Conservative candidate , and have seem to think that a good stand - up fight upon English principle , with a clear understanding , of course , that victory should prevail on the liberal side , would be a good thing for the borough . but the 's man of business see Phineas on the morning of he departure , and tell he not to regard . " they would all like it , " say the man of business ; " and I daresay they will have enough of it when this Reform be pass ; but at present no one will be fool enough to come and spend he money here . we have they all in hand too well for that , ! " he find the great house at nearly empty . 's mother be there , and be there , and 's private secretary , and 's private secretary . at present that be the entire party . be expect there , with she daughter and ; but , as well as could learn , they would not be at until after he have leave it . there have come up lately a rumour that there would be a autumn session , -- that the house would sit through and a part of , in order that might try the feeling of the new parliament . if this be to be so , have resolve that , in the event of he election at , he would not return to till after this autumn session should be over . he give a account to the , in the presence of the 's son - in - law , of what have take place at , and the express himself as satisfied . it be manifestly a great satisfaction to that he should still have a borough in he pocket , and the more so because there be so very few noblemen left who have such property belong to they . he be very careful in he speech , never say in so many word that the privilege of return a member be he own ; but he meaning be not the less clear . those be dreary day at . there be fishing , -- if Phineas choose to fish ; and he be tell that he could shoot a deer if he be minded to go out alone . but it seem as though it be the intention of the host that he guest should spend they time profitably . himself be shut up with book and papers all the morning , and always take up a book after dinner . the also would read a little , -- and then would sleep a good deal . sleep also , and look as though she would like to sleep if it be not that she husband 's eye be upon she . as it be , she administer tea , not like the practice of have it hand round by a servant when none be there but member of the family circle , and she read novel . get hold of a stiff bit of reading for himself , and try to utilise he time . he take in hand , and work he way gallantly through a couple of volume . but even he , more than once or twice , find himself on the very verge of slumber . then he would wake up and try to think about thing . why be he , , a from , live in that great house of as though he be one of the family , strive to kill the hour , and feel that he be in some way subject to the dominion of he host ? would it not be better for he to get up and go away ? in he heart of heart he do not like , though he believe he to be a good man . and of what service to he be it to like , now that be a possession in the hand of ? then he would tell himself that he owe he position in the world entirely to , and that he be ungrateful to feel himself ever dull in she society . and , moreover , there be something to be do in the world beyond make love and be merry . could occupy himself with a blue book for hour together without wincing . so go to work again with he , and read away till he nod . in those day he often wander up and down the and across the moor to the , and so down to the lake . he would take a book with he , and would seat himself down on spot which he love , and would pretend to read ; -- but I do not think that he get much advantage from he book . he be think of he life , and try to calculate whether the wonderful success which he have achieve would ever be of permanent value to he . would he be nearer to earn he bread when he should be member for than he have be when he be member for ? or be there before he any slightest probability that he would ever earn he bread ? and then he think of , and be angry with himself for remember at that moment that be the mistress of a large fortune . once before when he be sit beside the Linter he have make up he mind to declare he passion to ;-- and he have do so on the very spot . now , within a twelvemonth of that time , he
he make up he mind on the same spot to declare he passion to , and he think he best mode of carry he suit would be to secure the assistance of . , no doubt , have be very anxious that she brother should marry ; but , as Phineas know , have ask for 's hand twice in vain ; and , moreover , himself have declare to Phineas that he would never ask for it again . , who be always reasonable , would surely perceive that there be no hope of success for she brother . that would quarrel with he , -- would quarrel with he to the knife , -- he do not doubt ; but he feel that no fear of such a quarrel as that should deter he . he love , and he must indeed be pusillanimous if , love she as he do , he be deter from express he love from any fear of a suitor whom she do not favour . he would not willingly be untrue to he friendship for 's brother . have there be a chance for he would have abstain from put himself forward . but what be the use of he abstain , when by do so he could in no wise benefin he friend , -- when the result of he do so would be that some interloper would come in and carry off the prize ? he would explain all this to , and , if the prize would be kind to he , he would disregard the anger of , even though it might be anger to the knife . as he be think of all this stand before he where he be sit at the top of the fall . at this moment he remember well all the circumstance of the scene when he have be there with she at he last visit to . how thing have change since then ! then he have love with all he heart , and he have now already bring himself to regard she as a discreet matron whom to love would be almost as unreasonable as though he be to entertain a passion for the . the reader will understand how thorough have be the cure effect by 's marriage and the interval of a few month , when the swain be already prepare to make this lady the depositary of he confidence in another matter of love . " you be often here , I suppose ? " say , look down upon he as he sit upon the rock . " well ; -- yes ; not very often ; I come here sometimes because the view down upon the lake be so fine . " " it be the prettiest spot about the place . I hardly ever get here now . indeed this be only the second time that I have be up since we have be at home , and then I come to bring papa here . " there be a little wooden seat near to the rock upon which Phineas have be lie , and upon this sit down . , with he eye turn upon the lake , be consider how he might introduce the subject of he love for ; but he do not find the matter very easy . he have just resolve to begin by say that would certainly never accept , when speak a word or two which stop he altogether . " how well I remember , " she say , " the day when you and I be here last autumn ! " " so do I . you tell I then that you be go to marry . how much have happen since then ! " " Much indeed ! enough for a whole lifetime . and yet how slow the time have go ! " " I do not think it have be slow with I , " say . " no ; you have be active . you have have you hand full of work . I be begin to think that it be a great curse to have be bear a woman . " " and yet I have hear you say that a woman may do as much as a man . " " that be before i have learn my lesson properly . I know better than that now . oh dear ! I have no doubt it be all for the best as it be , but I have a kind of wish that I might be allow to go out and milk the cow . " " and may you not milk the cow if you wish it , ? " " by no means ; -- not only not milk they , but hardly look at they . at any rate , I must not talk about they . " Phinea of course understand that she be complain of she husband , and hardly know how to reply to she . he have be sharp enough to perceive already that be a autocrat in he own house , and he know well enough to be sure that such masterdom would be very irksome to she . but he have not imagine that she would complain to he . " it be so different at , " continue . " everything there seem to be my own . " " and everything here be you own . " " yes ,-- accord to the prayer - book . and everything in truth be my own , -- as all the dainty at the banquet belong to the . " " you mean , " say he , -- and then he hesitate ; " you mean that stand over you , guard you for you own welfare , as the doctor stand over and guard he ? " there be
be a pause before she answer ,-- a long pause , during which he be look away over the lake , and think how he might introduce the subject of he love . but long as be the pause , he have not begin when be again speak . " the truth be , my friend , " she say , " that I have make a mistake . " " a mistake ? " " yes , , a mistake . I have blundere as fools blunder , think that I be clever enough to pick my footstep aright without ask counsel from any one . I have blunder and stumble and fall , and now I be so bruise that I be not able to stand upon my foot . " the word that struck he most in all this be he own christian name . she have never call he before . he be aware that the circle of he acquaintance have fall into a way of miscall he by he name , as one observe to be do now and again in reference to some special young man . most of the man whom he call he friend call he Phineas . even the have do so more than once on occasion in which the greatness of he position have drop for a moment out of he mind . . have call he Phineas when she regard he as she husband 's most cherish pupil ; and have call he . he have always be Phineas to everybody at . but still he be quite sure that have never so call he before . would she have do so now in she husband 's presence . he be sure of that also . " you mean that you be unhappy ? " he say , still look away from she towards the lake . " yes , I do mean that . though I do not know why I should come and tell you so ,-- except that I be still blunder and stumbl , and have fall into a way of hurt myself at every step . " " you can tell no one who be more anxious for you happiness , " say . " that be a very pretty speech , but what would you do for my happiness ? indeed , what be it possible that you should do ? I mean it as no rebuke when I say that my happiness or unhappiness be a matter as to which you will soon become perfectly indifferent . " " why should you say so , ? " " because it be natural that it should be so . you and might have be friend . not that you will be , because you be unlike each other in all you way . but it might have be so . " " and be not you and I to be friend ? " he ask . " no . in a very few month you will not think of tell I what be you desire or what you sorrow ; -- and as for I , it will be out of the question that I should tell mine to you . how can you be my friend ? " " if you be not quite sure of my friendship , , you would not speak to I as you be speak now . " still he do not look at she , but lay with he face support on he hand , and he eye turn away upon the lake . but she , where she be sit , could see he , and be aid by she sight in make comparison in she mind between the two man who have be she lover , -- between he whom she have take and he whom she have leave . there be something in the hard , dry , unsympathising , unchanging virtue of she husband which almost revolt she . he have not a fault , but she have try he at every point and have be able to strike no spark of fire from he . even by disobey she could produce no heat , -- only a access of firmness . how would it have be with she have she throw all idea of fortune to the wind , and link she lot to that of the young Phoebus who be lie at she foot ? if she have ever love any one she have love he . and she have not throw away she love for money . so she swore to herself over and over again , try to conseal herself in she cold unhappiness . she have marry a rich man in order that she might be able to do something in the world ; -- and now that she be this rich man 's wife she find that she could do nothing . the rich man think it to be quite enough for she to sit at home and look after he welfare . in the meantime young , -- she Phoebus as he have be once , -- be think altogether of some one else . " Phinea , " she say , slowly , " I have in you such perfect confidence that I will tell you the truth ; -- as one man may tell it to another . I wish you would go from here . " " what , at once ? " " not to - day , or to - morrow . stay here now till the election ; but do not return . he will ask you to come , and press you hard , and will be hurt ;-- for , strange to say , with all he coldness , he really like you . he have a pleasure in see you here . but he must not have
have that pleasure at the expense of trouble to I . " " and why be it a trouble to you ? " he ask . man be such fool ; -- so awkward , so unready , with they wit ever behind the occasion by a dozen seconds or so ! as soon as the word be uttere , he know that they should not have be speak . " because I be a fool , " she say . " why else ? be not that enough for you ? " " --, " he say . " no , -- no ; I will have none of that . I be a fool , but not such a fool as to suppose that any cure be to be find there . " " only say what I can do for you , though it be with my entire life , and I will do it . " " you can do nothing ,-- except to keep away from I . " " be you earnest in tell I that ? " now at last he have turn himself round and be look at she , and as he look he see the hat of a man appear up the path , and immediately afterwards the face . it be the hat and face of the laird of . " here be , " say , in a tone of not devoid of dismay and trouble . " so I perceive , " say . but there be no dismay or trouble in the tone of she voice . in the countenance of , as he approach closer , there be not much to be read ,-- only , perhaps , some slight addition of gloom , or rather , perhaps , of that frigid propriety of moral demeanour for which he have always be conspicuous , which have grow upon he at he marriage , and which have be greatly increase by the double action of be make a and be garrot . " I be glad that you headache be better , " he say to he wife , who have risen from she seat to meet he . also have risen , and be now look somewhat sheepish where he stand . " I come out because it be worse , " she say . " it irritate I so that I could not stand the house any longer . " " I will send to Callender for . " " pray do nothing of the kind , . I do not want at all . " " where there be illness , medical advice be always expedient . " " I be not ill . a headache be not illness . " " I have think it be , " say , very drily . " at any rate , I would rather not have . " " I be sure it can not do you any good to climb up here in the heat of the sun . have you be here long , ? " " all the morning ; -- here , or hereabout . I clamber up from the lake and have a book in my pocket . " " and you happen to come across he by accident ? " ask . there be something so simple in the question that it be very simplicity prove that there be no suspicion . " yes ; -- by chance , " say . " but every one at always come up here . if any one ever be missing whom I want to find , this be where I should look . " " I be go on towards forest to meet , " say . Blane be the gamekeeper . " if you do not mind the trouble , , I wish you would take down to the house . do not let she stay out in the heat . I will take care that somebody go over to Callender for . " then go on , and be leave with the charge of take back to the house . when 's hat have first appear come up the walk , Phinea have be ready to proclai m himself prepare for any devotion in the service of . indeed , he have begin to reply with criminal tenderness to the indiscreet avowal which have make to he . but he feel now , after what have just occur in the husband 's presence , that any show of tenderness , -- of criminal tenderness , -- be impossible . the absence of all suspicion on the part of have make feel that he be bound by all social law to refrain from such tenderness . begin to descmend the path before he without a word ; -- and go on , and on , as though she would have reach the house without speak , have he not address she . " do you head still pain you ? " he ask . " of course it do . " " I suppose he be right in say that you should not be out in the heat . " " I do not know . it be not worth while to think about that . he send I in , and so of course I must go . and he tell you to take I , and so of course you must take I . " " would you wish that I should let you go alone ? " " yes , I would . only he will be sure to find it out ; and you must not tell he that you leave I at my request . " " do you think that I be afraid of he ? " say . " yes ;-- I think you be . I know that I be , and that
that papa be ; and that he mother hardly dare to call she soul she own . I do not know why you should escape . " " be nothing to I . " " he be something to I , and so I suppose I have better go on . and now I shall have that horrid man from the little town paw I and cover everything with snuff , and bid I take Scotch physic ,-- which seem to increase in quantity and nastiness as dos in decrease . and he will stand over I to see that I take it . " " what ; -- the doctor from ? " " no ; -- but will . if he advise I to have a hole in my glove mende , he would ask I before he go to be whether it be done . he never forget anything in he life , and be never unmindful of anything . that I think will do , . you have bring I out from the tree , and that may be take as bring I home . we shall hardly get scold if we pbe here . remember what I tell you up above . and remember also that it be in you power to do nothing else for I . good - bye . " so he turn away towards the lake , and let go across the wide lawn to the house by herself . he have fail altogether in he intention of tell he friend of he love for , and have come to perceive that he could not for the present carry out that intention . after what have pass it would be impossible for he to go to with a passionate tale of he longing for . if he be even to speak to she of love at all , it must be quite of another love than that . but he never would speak to she of love ; nor ,-- as he feel quite sure , -- would she allow he to do so . but what astounde he most as he think of the interview which have just pass , be the fact that the whom he have know , -- whom he have think he have know , -- should have become so subject to such a man as , a man whom he have despise as be weak , irresolute , and without a purpose ! for the day or two that he remain at , he watch the family closely , and become aware that have be right when she declare that she father be afraid of . " I shall follow you almost immediately , " say the confidentially to , when the candidate for the borough take he departure from . " I do not like to be there just when the election be go on , but I will be at to receive you the day afterwards . " take he leave from , with a warm expression of friendship on the part of he host , and from with a mere touch of the hand . he try to say a word ; but she be sull , or , if not , she put on some mood like to sullenness , and say never a word to he . on the day after the departure of for still have a headache . she have complain of a headache ever since she have be at , and have be over more than once . " I wonder what it be that ail you , " say she husband , stand over she in she own sitting - room up - stair . it be a pretty room , look away to the mountain , with just a glimpse of the lake to be catch from the window , and it have be prepare for she with all the skill and taste of a accomplished upholsterer . she have select the room for herself soon after she engagement , and have thanke she future husband with she sweetest smile for give she the choice . she have thank he and tell he that she always mean to be happy , -- so happy in that room ! he be a man not much give to romance , but he think of this promise as he stand over she and ask after she health . as far as he could see she have never be even comfortable since she have be at . a shadow of the truth come across he mind . perhaps he wife be bore . if so , what be to be the future of he life and of hers ? he go up to every year , and to parliament , as a duty ; and then , during some period of the recess , would have he house full of guest , -- as another duty . but he happiness be to consist in such hour as these which seem to inflict upon he wife the penalty of a continual headache . a shadow of the truth come upon he . what if he wife do not like live quietly at home as the mistress of she husband 's house ? what if a headache be always to be the result of a simple performance of domestic duty ? more than a shadow of truth have come upon herself . the dark clould create by the entire truth be upon she , make everything black and wretch around she . she have ask herself a question or two , and have discover that she have no love for she husband , that the kind of life which he intend to exact from she be insupportable to she , and that she have blunder and fall in she entrance upon life . she perceive that she father have already become weary
weary of , and that , lonely and sad as he would be at by himself , it be he intention to repudiate the idea of make a home at . yes ; -- she would be desert by everyone , except of course by she husband ; and then -- then she would throw herself on some early morning into the lake , for life would be insupportable . " I wonder what it be that ail you , " say . " nothing serious . one can not always help have a headache , you know . " " I do not think you take enough exercise , . I would propose that you should walk four mile every day after breakfast . I will always be ready to accompany you . I have speak to -- " " I hate . " " why should you hate , ? " " how can I tell why ? I do . that be quite reason enough why you should not send for he to I . " " you be unreasonable , . one choose a doctor on account of he reputation in he profession , and that of stand high . " " I do not want any doctor . " " but if you be ill , my dear -- " " I be not ill . " " but you say you have a headache . you have say so for the last ten day . " " have a headache be not be ill . I only wish you would not talk of it , and then perhaps I should get rid of it . " " I can not believe that . Headache in nine case out of ten come from the stomach . " though he say this , -- say it because it be the common - place common - sense sort of thing to say , still at the very moment there be the shadow of the truth before he eye . what if this headache mean simple dislike to he , and to he mode of life ? " it be nothing of that sort , " say , impatient at have she ailment inquire into with so much accuracy . " then what be it ? you can not think that I can be happy to hear you complain of headache every day , -- make it a excuse for absolute idleness . " " what be it that you want I to do ? " she say , jump up from she seat . " set I a task , and if I do not go mad over it , I will get through it . there be the account book . give they to I . I do not suppose I can see the figure , but I will try to see they . " " , this be unkind of you , -- and ungrateful . " " of course ; -- it be everything that be bad . what a pity that you do not find it out last year ! oh dear , oh dear ! what be I to do ? " then she throw herself down upon the sofa , and put both she hand up to she temple . " I will send for at once , " say , walk towards the door very slowly , and speak as slowly as he walk . " no ; -- do no such thing , " she say , spring to she foot again and intercept he before he reach the door . " if he come I will not see he . I give you my word that I will not speak to he if he come . you do not understand , " she say ; " you do not understand at all . " " what be it that I ought to understand ? " he ask . " that a woman do not like to be bother . " he make no reply at once , but stand there twist the handle of the door , and collect he thought . " yes , " say he at last ; " I be begin to find that out ; -- and to find out also what it be that bother a woman , as you call it . I can see now what it be that make you head ache . it be not the stomach . you be quite right there . it be the prospect of a quiet decent life , to which would be attach the performance of certain homely duty . be a learn man , but I doubt whether he can do anything for such a malady . " " you be quite right , ; he can do nothing . " " it be a malady you must cure for yourself , ;-- and which be to be cure by perseverance . if you can bring yourself to try -- " " but I can not bring myself to try at all , " she say . " do you mean to tell I , , that you will make no effort to do you duty as my wife ? " " I mean to tell you that I will not try to cure a headache by do sum . that be all that I mean to say at this moment . if you will leave I for awhile , so that I may lie down , perhaps I shall be able to come to dinner . " he still hesitate , stand with the door in he hand . " but if you go on scold I , " she continue , " what I shall do be to go to bed directly you go away . " he hesitat for a moment longer , and then leave the room without
without another word . 's we hero be elect member for without any trouble to he or , as far as he could see , to any one else . he make one speech from a small raise booth that be call a platform , and that be all that he be call upon to do . make a speech in propose he , and another in seconde he ; and these be all the speech that be require . the thing seem to be so very easy that he be afterwards almost offend when he be tell that the bill for so insignificant a piece of work come to L247 13s . 9d . he have see no occasion for spend even the odd forty - seven pound . but then he be member for ; and as he pass the evening alone at the inn , have dine in company with Messrs . , , and sundry other influential elector , he begin to reflect that , after all , it be not so very great a thing to be a member of parliament . it almost seem that that which have come to he so easily could not be of much value . on the follow day he go to the castle , and be there when the arrive . they two be alone together , and the be very kind to he . " so you have no opponent after all , " say the great man of , with a slight smile . " not the ghost of another candidate . " " I do not think there would be . they have try it once or twice and have always fail . there be only one or two in the place who like to go one way just because they neighbour go the other . but , in truth , there be no conservative fee in the place ! " Phineas , although he be at the present moment the member for himself , could not but enjoy the joke of this . could there be any liberal fee in such a place , or , indeed , any political feeling whatsoever ? would not . and have do just the same have it happen that have be a Tory peer ? " they all seem to be very obliging , " say , in answer to the . " yes , they be . there be not a house in the town , you know , let for longer than seven year , and most of they merely from year to year . and , do you know , I have not a farmer on the property with a lease , -- not one ; and they do not want lease . they know they be safe . but I do like the people round I to be of the same way of think as myself about politics . " on the second day after dinner , -- the last evening of 's visit to , -- the fall suddenly into a confidential conversation about he daughter and he son , and about . so sudden , indeed , and so confidential be the conversation , that be almost silenced for awhile . a word or two have be say about , of the beauty of the place and of the vastness of the property . " I be almost afraid , " say , " that be not happy there . " " I hope she be , " say . " he be so hard and dry , and what I call exact . that be just the word for it . now have never be use to that . with I she always have she own way in everything , and I always find she fit to have it . I do not understand why she husband should treat she differently . " " perhaps it be the temper of the man . " " temper , yes ; but what a bad prospect be that for she ! and she , too , have a temper , and so he will find if he try she too far . I can not stand . I tell so fairly . it be one of those house in which a man can not call he hour he own . I tell that I could not undertake to remain there for above a day or two . " " it be very sad , " say . " yes , indeed ; it be sad for she , poor girl ; and very sad for I too . I have no one else but ,-- literally no one ; and now I be divide from she ! it seem that she have be take as much away from I as though she husband live in . I have lose they both now ! " " I hope not , my lord . " " I say I have . as to , I can perceive that he become more and more indifferent to I every day . he think of I only as a man in he way who must die some day and may die soon . " " you wrong he , . " " I do not wrong he at all . why have he answer every offer I have make he with so much insolence as to make it impossible for I to put myself into further communion with he ? " " he think that you have wrong he . " " yes ; -- because I have be unable to shut my eye to he mode of living . I be to go on pay he debt , and take no other notice whatsoever of he conduct ! " " I do not think he be in debt now . " " because he sister the other
other day spend every shilling of she fortune in pay they . she give he ! do you think she would have marry but for that ? I do not . I could not prevent she . I have say that I would not cripple my remaining year of life by raise the money , and I could not go back from my word . " " you and might raise the money between you . " " it would do no good now . she have marry , and the money be nothing to she or to he . might have put thing right by marry if he please . " " I think he do he best there . " " no ; -- he do he worst . he ask she to be he wife as a man ask for a railway - ticket or a pair of glove , which he buy with a price ; and because she would not jump into he mouth he give it up . I do not believe he even really want to marry she . I suppose he have some disreputable connection to prevent it . " " nothing of the kind . he would marry she to - morrow if he could . my belief be that be sincere in refuse he . " " I do not doubt she sincerity . " " and that she will never change . " " ah , well ; I do not agree with you , and I daresay I know they both better than you do . but everything go against I . I have set my heart upon it , and therefore of course I shall be disappoint . what be he go to do this autumn ? " " he be yacht now . " " and who be with he ? " " I think the boat belong to . " " the greatest blackguard in all ! a man who shoot pigeon and ride steeple - chase ! and the worst of be this , that even if he do not like the man , and if he be tired of this sort of life , he would go on just the same because he think it a fine thing not to give way . " this be so true that do not dare to contradict the statement , and therefore say nothing . " I have some faint hope , " continue the , " while could always watch he ; because , in he way , he be fond of he sister . but that be all over now . she will have enough to do to watch herself ! " Phineas have feel that the have put he down rather sharply when he have say that would never accept , and he be therefore not a little surprised when speak again off the follow morning , hold in he hand a letter which he have just receive from she . " they be to be at on the tenth , " he say , " and she purpose to come here for a couple of night on she way . " " and all ? " " well , yes ; and all . I be not very fond of , but I will put up with she for a couple of day for the sake of have . she be more like a child of my own now than anybody else . I shall not see she all the autumn afterwards . I can not stand . " " it will be better when the house be full . " " you will be there , I suppose ? " " well , no ; I think not , " say . " you have have enough of it , have you ? " Phineas make no reply to this , but smile slightly . " by , I do not wonder at it , " say the . , who would have give all he have in the world to be stay in the same country house with , could not explain how it have come to pass that he be obliged to absent himself . " I suppose you be ask ? " say the . " oh , yes , I be ask . nothing can be kinder than they be . " " tell I that you be come as a matter of course . " " I explain to he after that , " say , " that I should not return . I shall go over to . I have a deal of hard reading to do , and I can get through it there without interruption . " he go up from to on that day , and find himself quite alone in 's lodging . I mean not only that he be alone at he lodging , but he be alone at he club , and alone in the street . be not quite over , and yet all the bird of passage have migrate . , by he short session , have half ruin the tradesman , and have change the summer mode of life of all those who account themselves to be anybody . Phinea , as he sit alone in he room , feel himself to be nobody . he have tell the that he be go to , and to he must go ; -- because he have nothing else to do . he have be ask indeed to join one or two party in they autumn plan . have want he to go to the Pyrenees , and have suggest that he should join the yacht ; -- but neither plan suite he . it would have suite he to be at with , but be a barred house to he . he old friend , , have tell
tell he not to come thither , explain , with sufficient clearness , she reason for exclude he from the number of she husband 's guest . as he think of it the past scene of he life become very marvellous to he . twelve month since he would have give all the world for a word of love from , and have barely dared to hope that such a word , at some future day , might possibly be speak . now such a word have in truth be spoken , and it have come to be simply a trouble to he . she have own to he , -- for , in truth , such have be the meaning of she warning to he , -- that , though she have marry another man , she have love and do love he . but in think of this he take no pride in it . it be not till he have think of it long that he begin to ask himself whether he might not be justified in gather from what happen some hope that Violet also might learn to love he . he have think so little of himself as to have be afraid at first to press he suit with . might he not venture to think more of himself , have learn how far he have succeed ? but how be he to get at ? from the moment at which he have leave he have be angry with himself for not have ask to allow he to remain there till after the Baldock party should have go on to . the , who be very lonely in he house , would have consent at once . Phineas , indeed , be drive to confess to himself that success with would at once have put a end to all he friendship with ; -- as also to all he friendship with . he would , in such case , be bound in honour to vacate he seat and give back Loughton to he offended patron . but he would have give up much more than he seat for ! at present , however , he have no means of get at she to ask she the question . he could hardly go to in opposition to the wish of . a little adventure happen to he in which somewhat relieve the dulness of the day of the first week in . he remain in till the middle of , half resolve to rush down to when should be there ,-- endeavour to find some excuse for such a proceeding , but rack he brain in vain , -- and then there come about he little adventure . the adventure be commence by the receipt of the follow letter :-- of the , 3rd , 186 -- . my , I must say I think you have treat I badly , and without that sort of brotherly fairness which we on the public press expect from one another . however , perhaps we can come to a understanding , and if so , thing may yet go smoothly . give I a turn and I be not at all adverse to give you one . will you come to I here , or shall I call upon you ? yours always , . be not only surprise , but disgust also , at the receipt of this letter . he could not imagine what be the deed by which he have offend . he think over all the circumstance of he short connection with the 's , but could remember nothing which might have create offence . but he disgust be greater than he surprise . he think that he have do nothing and say nothing to justify in call he " dear . " he , who have 's secret in he keeping ; he who hope to be the possessor of 's affections , -- he to be call " dear " by such a one as ! he soon make up he mind that he would not answer the note , but would go at once to the 's office at the hour at which be always there . he certainly would not write to " dear slide ; " and , until he have hear something more of this cause of offence , he would not make a enemy for ever by call the man " dear . " he go to the office of the 's , and find ensconce in a little glass cupboard , write a article for the next day 's copy . " I suppose you be very busy , " say , insert himself with some difficulty on to a little stool in the corner of the cupboard . " not so particular but what I be glad to see you . you shoot , do not you ? " " ! " say . it could not be possible that be intend , after this abrupt fashion , to propose a duel with pistol . " Grouse and pheasant , and they sort of thing ? " ask . " oh , ah ; I understand . yes , I shoot sometimes . " " be it the 12th or 20th for grouse in ? " " the 12th , " say . " what make you ask that just now ? " " I be do a letter about it ,-- advise man not to shoot too many of the young bird , and show that they will have none next year if they do . I have a fellow here just now who know all about it , and he put down a lot ; but I forget to make he tell I the day of beginning . what be a good place to date from ? " suggest or . " Stirl 's
's too much of a town , be not it ? sound better for game , I think . " so the letter which be to save the young grouse be date from ; and have write the word , throw down he pen , come off he stool , and rush at once at he subject . " well , now , , " he say , " do not you know that you have treat I badly about ? " " treat you badly about ! " Phinea , as he repeat the word , be quite in the dark as to 's meane . do intend to convey a reproach because Phineas have not personally send some tiding of the election to the 's ? " very badly , " say , with he arm akimbo , -- " very badly indeed ! on the press together do expect that they be to be stick by , and not throw over . damn it , I say ; what be the good of a brotherhood if it be not to be brotherhand ? " " upon my word , I do not know what you mean , " say . " do not I tell you that I have in my heye ? " say . " oh -- h ! " " it be very well to say ho , and look guilty , but do not I tell you ? " " I never hear such nonsense in my life . " " Nonsense ? " " how on earth could you have stood for ? what interest would you have there ? you could not even have find a elector to propose you . " " now , I will tell you what I will do , . I think you have throw I over most shabby , but I will not stand about that . you shall have Loughton this session if you will promise to make way for I after the next election . if you will agree to that , we will have a special leader to say how well Lord what 's - he - name have do with the borough ; and we will be you horgan through the whole session . " " I never hear such nonsense in my life . in the first place , be safe to be in the schedule of reduce borough . it will be throw into the county , or join with a group . " " I will stand the chance of that . will you agree ? " " ! no ! it be the most absurd proposal that be ever make . you might as well ask I whether I would agree that you should go to heaven . go to heaven if you can , I should say . I have not the slightest objection . but it be nothing to I . " " very well , " say . " very well ! now we understand each other , and that be all that I desire . I think that I can show you what it be to come among gentleman of the press , and then to throw they over . good morning . " Phineas , quite satisfied at the result of the interview as regard himself , and by no means sorry that there should have arisen a cause of separation between and he " dear , " shook off a little dust from he foot as he leave the office of the 's , and resolve that in future he would attempt to make no connection in that direction . as he return home he tell himself that a member of parliament should be altogether independent of the press . on the second morning after he meeting with he late friend , he see the result of he independence . there be a startling article , a tremendous article , show the pressing necessity of immediate reform , and prove the necessity by a illustration of the borough - mongering rottenness of the present system . when such a patron as ,-- himself a with a sinecure , -- could by he mere word put into the house such a stick as ,-- a man who have struggle to stand on he leg before the speaker , but have want both the courage and the capacity , nothing further could surely be want to prove that the of 1832 require to be supplement by some more energetic measure . laugh as he read the article , and declare to himself that the joke be a good joke . but , nevertheless , he suffer . , when he be really anxious to use he thong earnestly , could generally raise a wale . he Honest ? on the 10th of , do return to . he go down by the mail train on the night of the 10th , have telegraph to the inn for a bed , and be up eat he breakfast in that hospitable house at nine o'clock . the landlord and landlady with all they staff be at a loss to imagine what have bring down they member again so quickly to he borough ; but the reader , who will remember that with she daughter and be to pass the 11th of the month at , may perhaps be able to make a guess on the subject . Phineas have be think of make this sudden visit to ever since he have be up in town , but he could suggest to himself no reason to be give to for he sudden reappearance . the have be very kind to he , but he have say nothing which could justify he young friend in run in and out of at pleasure , without invitation and without notice . be so well aware of this himself that often
often as he have half resolve during the last ten day to return to , so often have he determine that he could not do so . he could think of no excuse . then the heaven favour he , and he receive a letter from , in which there be a message for . " if you see my father , tell he that I be ready at any moment to do what be necessary for raise the money for . " take this as he excuse he return to . as chance arrange it , he meet the stand on the great step before he own castle door . " what , ; be this you ? I think you be in . " " not yet , my lord , as you see . " then he open he budget at once , and blush at he own hypocrisy as he go on with he story . he have , he say , feel the message from to be so all - important that he could not bring himself to go over to without deliver it . he urge upon the Earl that he might learn from this how anxious be to effect a reconciliation . when it occur to he , he say , that there might be a hope of do anything towards such a object , he could not go to leave the good work behind he . in love and war all thing be fair . so he declare to himself ; but as he do so he feel that he story be so weak that it would hardly gain for he a admittance into the Castle . in this he be completely wrong . the Earl , swallow the bait , put he arm through that of the intruder , and , walk with he through the path of the shrubbery , at length confess that he would be glad to be reconcile to he son if it be possible . " let he come here , and she shall be here also , " say the , speak of . to this Phinea could say nothing out loud , but he tell himself that all should be fair between they . he would take no dishonest advantage of . he would give the whole message as it be give to he by . but should it so turn out that he himself get a opportunity of say to Violet all that he have come to say , and should it also turn out , -- a event which he acknowledge to himself to be most unlikely , -- that do not reject he , then how could he write he letter to ? so he resolve that the letter should be write before he see . but how could he write such a letter and instantly afterwards do that which would be false to the spirit of a letter so write ? could he bid come home to woo , and instantly go forth to woo she for himself ? he find that he could not do so ,--unless he tell the whole truth to . in no other way could he carry out he project and satisfy he own idea of what be honest . the bade he send to the hotel for he thing . " the people be all here , you know , but they go very early to - morrow . " then declare that he also must return to very early on the morrow ; -- but in the meantime he would go to the inn and fetch he thing . the thank he again and again for he generous kindness ; and , blush as he receive the thanks , go back and write he letter to . it be a elaborate letter , write , as regard the first and larger portion of it , with word intend to bring the prodigal son back to the father 's home . and everything be say about that could or should have be say . then , on the last page , he tell he own story . " now , " he say , " I must speak of myself :" -- and he go on to explain to he friend , in the plainest language that he could use , he own position . " I have love she , " he say , " for six month , and I be here with the express intention of ask she to take I . the chance be ten to one that she refuse I . I do not deprecate you anger , -- if you choose to be angry . but I be endeavour to treat you well , and I ask you to do the same by I . I must convey to you you father 's message , and after do so I can not address myself to without tell you . I should feel myself to be false be I to do so . in the event , -- the probable , nay , almost certain event of my be refuse ,-- I shall trust you to keep my secret . do not quarrel with I if you can help it ; -- but if you must I will be ready . " then he post the letter and go up to the Castle . he have only the one day for he action , and he know that be watch by as by a dragon . he be tell that the be out with the young lady , and be show to he room . on go to the drawing - room he find , with whom he have be , to a certain degree , a favourite , and be soon deeply engage in a conversation as to the practicability of shut up all the brewery and distillery by
by Act of parliament . but lunch relieve he , and bring the young lady in at two . seem to be really glad to see he , and even , 's daughter , be very gracious to he . for the have be speak well of he young member , and have in a way grow into the good graces of sober and discreet people . after lunch they be to ride ;-- the , that be , and . and she daughter be to have the carriage . " I can mound you , , if you would like it , " say the . " of course he will like it , " say ; " do you suppose will object to ride with I in ? it will not be the first time , will it ? " " , " say , " you have the most singular way of talking . " " I suppose I have , " say ; " but I do not think I can change it now . know I too well to mind it much . " it be past five before they be on horseback , and up to that time have not find himself alone with for a moment . they have sit together after lunch in the dining - room for nearly a hour , and have saunter into the hall and knock about the billiard ball , and then stand together at the open door of a conservatory . but or have always be there . nothing could be more pleasant than 's word , or more familiar than she manner to . she have express strong delight at he success in get a seat in parliament , and have talk to he about the as though they have create some special bond of union between she and which ought to make they intimate . but , for all that , she could not be get to separate herself from ; -- and when she be tell that if she mean to ride she must go and dress herself , she go at once . but he think that he might have a chance on horseback ; and after they have be out about half a hour , chance do favour he . for a while he ride behind with the carriage , calculate that by he so do the would be put off he guard , and would be dispose after awhile to change place with he . and so it fall out . at a certain fall of ground in the park , where the road turn round and cross a bridge over the little river , the carriage come up with the first two horse , and speak a word to the . then Violet pull up , allow the vehicle to pass the bridge first , and in this way she and be bring together , -- and in this way they ride on . but he be aware that he must greatly increase the distance between they and the other of they party before he could dare to plead he suit , and even be that do he feel that he would not know how to plead it on horseback . they have go on some half mile in this way when they reach a spot on which a green ride lead away from the main road through the tree to the left . " you remember this place , do you not ? " say . declare that he remember it well . " I must go round by the woodman 's cottage . you will not mind come ? " say that he would not mind , and trot on to tell they in the carriage . " where be she go ? " ask ; and then , when explain , she beg the to go back to . the Earl , feel the absurdity of this , declare that know she way very well herself , and thus get he opportunity . they ride on almost without speak for nearly a mile , canter through the tree , and then they take another turn to the right , and come upon the cottage . they ride to the door , and speak a word or two to the woman there , and then pass on . " I always come here when I be at , " say , " that I may teach myself to think kindly of . " " I understand it all , " say . " he use to be so nice ; -- and be so still , I believe , only that he have teach himself to be so rough . will he ever change , do you think ? " know that in this emergency it be he especial duty to be honest . " I think he would be change altogether if we could bring he here , -- so that he should live among he friend . " " do you think he would ? we must put we head together , and do it . do not you think that it be to be do ? " reply that he think it be to be do . " I will tell you the truth at once , , " he say . " you can do it by a single word . " " yes ; -- yes ; " she say ; " but I do not mean that ;-- without that . it be absurd , you know , that a father should make such a condition as that . " say that he think it be absurd ; and then they ride on again , canter through the wood . he have be bold to speak to she about as he have do , and she have answer just as he would
would have wish to be answer . but how could he press he suit for himself while she be canter by he side ? presently they come to rough ground over which they be force to walk , and he be close by she side . " , " she say , " I wonder whether I may ask a question ? " " any question , " he reply . " be there any quarrel between you and ? " " none . " " or between you and he ? " " no ;-- none . we be greater allie than ever . " " then why be you not go to be at ? she have write to I expressly say you would not be there . " he pause a moment before he reply . " it do not suit , " he say at last . " it be a secret then ? " " yes ; -- it be a secret . you be not angry with I ? " " angry ; no . " " it be not a secret of my own , or I should not keep it from you . " " perhaps I can guess it , " she say . " but I will not try . I will not even think of it . " " the cause , whatever it be , have be full of sorrow to I . I would have give my left hand to have be at this autumn . " " be you so fond of it ? " " I should have be stay there with you , " he say . he pause , and for a moment there be no word speak by either of they ; but he could perceive that the hand in which she hold she whip be play with she horse 's mane with a nervous movement . " when I find how it must be , and that I must miss you , I rush down here that I might see you for a moment . and now I be here I do not dare to speak to you of myself . " they be now beyond the rock , and , without speak a word , again put she horse into a trot . he be by she side in a moment , but he could not see she face . " have you not a word to say to I ? " he ask . " no ; -- no ;--no ; " she reply , " not a word when you speak to I like that . there be the carriage . come ;-- we will join they . " then she canter on , and he follow she till they reach the and and . " I have do my devotion now , " say , " and be ready to return to ordinary life . " Phineas could not find another moment in which to speak to she . though he spend the evening with she , and stand over she as she sang at the 's request , and press she hand as she go to bed , and be up to see she start in the morning , he could not draw from she either a word or a look . upon go to immediately after he return from , have say nothing further to , and have hear nothing further from she than what be record in the last chapter . he feel very keenly that he position be unsatisfactory , and brood over it all the autumn and early winter ; but he could form no plan for improve it . a dozen time he think of writing to , and ask for a explicit answer . he could not , however , bring himself to write the letter , think that write expression of love be always weak and vapid , -- and deter also by a conviction that , if drive to reply in writing , would undoubtedly reply by a refusal . fifty time he ride again in he imagination he ride in , and he tell himself as often that the sy 's answer to he , -- she no , no , no ,-- have be , of all possible answer , the most indefinite and provoke . the tone of she voice as she gallop away from he , the bearing of she countenance when he rejoin she , she manner to he when he see she start from the Castle in the morning , all forbade he to believe that he word to she have be take as a offence . she have reply to he with a direct negative , simply with the word " no ; " but she have so say it that there have hardly be any sting in the no ; and he have know at the moment that whatever might be the result of he suit , he need not regard as he enemy . but the doubt make he sojourn in very wearisome to he . and there be other matters which ten also to he discomfort , though he be not leave even at this period of he life without a continuation of success which seem to be very wonderful . and , first , I will say a word of he discomfort . he hear not a line from in answer to the letter which he have write to he lordship . from he do hear frequently . write to he exactly as though she have never warn he away from , and as though there have be no occasion for such warning . she send he letter fill chiefly with politics , say something also of the guest at , something of the game , and just a word or two here and there of she husband
husband . the letter be very good letter , and he preserve they carefully . it be manifest to he that they be intend to be good letter , and , as such , to be preserve . in one of these , which he receive about the end of , she tell he that she brother be again in he old haunt , at the , and that he have send to for all property of he own that have be leave there . but there be no word in that letter of ; and though do speak more than once of , she always do so as though be simply a joint acquaintance of herself and she correspondent . there be no allusion to the existence of any special regard on he part for . he have think that might probably tell she friend what have occur at ; -- but if she do so , be happy in she power of reticence . we hero be disturb also when he reach home by find that and have retire from for the winter . I do not know whether he might not have be more disturb by the presence of the young lady , for he would have find himself constrain to exhibit towards she some tenderness of manner ; and any such tenderness of manner would , in he exist circumstance , have be dangerous . but he be make to understand that have be take away from because it be think that he have ill - treat the lady , and the accusation make he unhappy . in the middle of the heat of the last session he have receive a letter from he sister , in which some push question have be ask as to he then exist feeling about poor . this he have answer petulantly . nothing more have be write to he about , and nothing be say to he when he reach home . he could not , however , but ask after , and when he do ask , the accusation be make again in that quietly severe manner with which , perhaps , most of we have be make acquainted at some period of we life . " I think , , " say he sister , " we have better say nothing about dear . she be not here at present , and probably you may not see she while you remain with we . " " what be all that about ? " Phineas have demand ,-- understand the whole matter thoroughly . then he sister have demurely refuse to say a word further on the subject , and not a word further be say about . they be at , live , he do not doubt , in a very desolate way , -- and quite willing , he do not doubt also , to abandon they desolation if he would go over there in the manner that would become he after what have pass on one or two occasion between he and the young lady . but how be he to do this with such work on he hand as he have undertaken ? now that he be in , he think that he do love dear very dearly . he feel that he have two identity , -- that he be , as it be , two separate person , -- and that he could , without any real faithlessness , be very much in love with in he position of man of fashion and member of parliament in , and also warmly attach to dear little as a of . he be aware , however , that there be a prejudice against such fulness of heart , and , therefore , resolve sternly that it be he duty to be constant to . how be it possible that he should marry dear , -- he , with such extensive job of work on he hand ! it be not possible . he must abandon all thought of make dear he own . no doubt they have be right to remove she . but , still , as he take he solitary walk along the , and up on the hill that overhing the lake above the town , he feel somewhat asham of himself , and dream of give up parliament , of leave Violet to some noble suitor , -- to , if she would take he , -- and of go to Floodborough with a honest proposal that he should be allow to press to he heart . would probably reject he at last ; whereas Mary , dear , would come to he heart without a scruple of doubt . dear ! in these day of dreaming , he tell himself that , after all , dear be he real love . but , of course , such day be day of dreame only . he have letter in he pocket from which make it impossible for he to think in earnest of give up parliament . and then there come a wonderful piece of luck in he way . there live , or have liv , in the town of a very eccentric old lady , one , who be the aunt of , the mother of we hero . with this lady have quarrell persistently ever since he marriage , because the lady have express she wish to interfere in the management of he family ,-- offer to purchase such right by favourable arrangement in reference to she will . this the doctor have resent , and there have be quarrel . Persse be not a very rich old lady , but she think a good deal of she own money . and now she die , leave L3,000 to she nephew . another sum of about equal amount she bequeath to a seminary ; and thus be she
she worldly wealth divide . " she could not have do better with it , " say the old doctor ; " and as far as we be concerned , the windfall be the more pleasant as be wholly unexpected . " in these day the doctor be undoubtedly gratify by he son 's success in life , and never say much about the law . Phinea in truth do do some work during the autumn , read blue - book , read law book , read perhaps a novel or two at the same time , -- but shutt himself up very carefully as he study , so that he sister be make to understand that for a certain four hour in the day not a sound be to be allow to disturb he . on the receipt of he legacy he at once offer to repay he father all money that have be advance he over and above he original allowance ; but this the doctor refuse to take . " it come to the same thing , Phineas , " he say . " what you have of you share now you can not have hereafter . as regard my present income , it have only make I work a little longer than I have intend ; and I believe that the later in life a man work , the more likely he be to live . " , therefore , when he return to , have he 3,000 in he pocket . he owe some L500 ; and the remainder he would , of course , invest . there have be some talk of a autumnal session , but 's decision have at last be against it . who can not understand that such would be the decision of any Minister to whom be leave the slightest fraction of free will in the matter ? why should any court the danger of unnecessary attack , submit himself to unnecessary work , and incur the odium of summon all he friend from they rest ? in the midst of the doubt as to the new and old , when the political needle be vacillat so tremulously on its pivot , point now to one set of man as the come government and then to another , vague suggestion as to a autumn session might be useful . and they be throw out in all good faith . , when he speak on the subject to the , be earnest in think that the question of Reform should not be postpone even for six month . " do not pledge yourself , " say the ; -- and do not pledge himself . afterwards , when find that he be once more assuredly , he change he mind , and feel himself to be under a fresh obligation to the . have altogether failed , and the country might very well wait till . the country do wait till , somewhat to the disappointment of , who have become tired of blue - book at . the difference between he English life and he life at home be so great , that it be hardly possible that he should not become weary of the latter . he do become weary of it , but strove gallantly to hide he weariness from he father and mother . at this time the world be talk much about Reform , though have become placidly patient . the feeling be grow , and , with he friend , be do all he could to make it grow fast . there be a certain amount of excitement on the subject ; but the excitement have grow downward , from the leader to the people , -- from the self - institute leader of popular politics down , by means of the press , to the rank of work man , instead of grow upward , from the dissatisfaction of the mass , till it express itself by this mouthpiece and that , choose by the people themselves . there be no strong throb through the country , make man feel that safety be to be have by Reform , and could not be have without Reform . but there be a understanding that the press and the orator be too strong to be ignore , and that some new measure of Reform must be conced to they . the sooner the concession be make , the less it might be necessary to concede . and all man of all party be agree on this point . that be in itself odious to many of those who speak of it freely , who offer themselves willingly to be its promoter , be acknowledge . it be not only odious to and to most of those who work with he , but be equally so too many of 's most constant supporter . the have no wish for . indeed it be hard to suppose that such a can wish for any change in a state of thing that must seem to he to be so salutary . Workmen be get full wage . farmer be pay they rent . Capitalist by the dozen be create capitalist by the hundred . nothing be wrong in the country , but the over -dominant spirit of speculative commerce ; -- and there be nothing in Reform to check that . why should the want ? as for such man as , , , and , it be know to all man that they advocate as we all of we advocate doctor . some amount of doctoring be necessary for we . we may hardly hope to avoid it . but let we have as little of the doctor as possible . , and the cheap press , and the rise spirit of the loudest among the people , make it manifest that something must be conceded . let
let we be generous in we concession . that be now the doctrine of many , -- perhaps of most of the lead politician of the day . let we be generous . let we at any rate seem to be generous . let we give with a open hand , -- but still with a hand which , though open , shall not bestow too much . the coach must be allow to run down the hill . indeed , unless the coach go on run no journey will be make . but let we have the drag on both the hind wheel . and we must remember that coach run down hill without drag be apt to come to serious misfortune . but there be man , even in the cabinet , who have other idea of public service than that of drag the wheel of the coach . be in earnest . be in earnest . that exceedingly intelligent young nobleman be in earnest . throw , perhaps , as much of earnestness into the matter as be compatible with he age and he full appreciation of the manner in which the present cry for have be arouse . he be thoroughly honest , thoroughly patriotic , and thoroughly ambitious that he should be write of hereafter as one who to the end of a long life have work sedulously for the welfare of the people ; -- but he disbelieve in , and in the bottom of he heart indulge a aristocratic contempt for the penny press . and there be no man in more in earnest , more truly desirous of Reform , than . it be he great political idea that political advantage should be extend to the people , whether the people clamoure for they or do not clamour for they ,-- even whether they desire they or do not desire they . " you do not ask a child whether he would like to learn he lesson , " he would say . " at any rate , you do not wait till he cry for he book . " when , therefore , man say to he that there be no earnestness in the cry for , that the cry be a false cry , get up for factious purpose by interested person , he would reply that the thing to be do should not be do in obedience to any cry , but because it be demand by justice , and be a debt due to the people . we hero in the autumn have write to on the politics of the moment , and the follow have be 's reply :-- , 12 , 186 --. my , I be stay here with the and of . the house be very full , and be here last week ; but as I do not shoot , and can not play billiards , and have no taste for charade , I be become tired of the gaiety , and shall leave they to -morrow . of course you know that we be not to have the autumn session . I think that be right . could we have be sure of pass we measure , it would have be very well ; but we could not have be sure , and failure with we bill in a session conven for the express purpose of pass it would have injure the cause greatly . we could hardly have go on with it again in the spring . indeed , we must have resign . and though I may truly say that I would as lief have a good measure from as from , and that I be indifferent to my own present personal position , still I think that we should endeaavor to keep we seat as long as we honestly believe ourselves to be more capable of pass a good measure than be we opponent . I be astonish by the difference of opinion which exist about , -- not only as to the difference in the extent and exact tendency of the measure that be need , -- but that there should be such a divergence of idea as to the grand thing to be do and the grand reason for do it . we be all agree that we want Reform in order that the house of Commons may be return by a larger proportion of the people than be at present employ upon that work , and that each member when return should represent a somewhat more equal section of the whole constituency of the country than we member generally do at present . all man confess that a L50 county franchise must be too high , and that a borough with less than two hundred register voter must be wrong . but it seem to I that but few among we perceive , or at any rate acknowledge , the real reason for change these thing and reform what be wrong without delay . one great authority tell we the other day that the sole object of legislation on this subject should be to get together the best possible 658 member of parliament . that to I would be a most repulsive idea if it be not that by it be very vagueness it become inoperative . who shall say what be best ; or what characteristic constitutes excellence in a member of parliament ? if the gentleman mean excellence in general wisdom , or in statecraft , or in skill in talking , or in private character , or even excellence in patriotism , then I say that he be utterly wrong , and have never touch with he intellect the true theory of representation . one only excellence may be acknowledge , and that be the excellence of likeness . as a portrait should be like the person portray , so should a representative house
house be like the people whom it represent . in arrange a franchise do it seem to I that we have a right to regard any other view . if a country be unfit for representative government , -- and it may be that there be still people unable to use properly that greatest of all blessing , -- the question as to what state policy may be best for they be a different question . but if we do have representation , let the representative assembly be like the people , whatever else may be its virtue , -- and whatever else its vex . another great authority have tell we that we house of Commons should be the mirror of the people . I say , not its mirror , but it be miniature . and let the artist be careful to put in every line of the expression of that ever - move face . to do this be a great work , and the artist must know he trade well . in the work have be do with so coarse a hand that nothing be show in the picture but the broad , plain , unspeaking outline of the face . as you look from the represent to the representation you can not but acknowledge the likeness ; -- but there be in that portrait more of the body than of the mind . the true portrait should represent more than the body . with we , hithertoo , there have be snatch of the countenance of the nation which have be inimitable , -- a turn of the eye here and a curl of the lip there , which have seem to denote a power almost divine . there have be marvel on the canva so beautiful that one approach the work of remodel it with awe . but not only be the picture imperfect , -- a thing of snatch , -- but with year it become less and still less like its original . the necessity for remodel it be imperative , and we shall be coward if we decline the work . but let we be specially careful to retain as much as possible of those line which we all acknowledge to be so faithfully representative of we nation . to give to a bare numerical majority of the people that power which the numerical majority have in the , would not be to achieve representation . the nation as it now exist would not be know by such a portrait ; -- but neither can it now be know by that which exist . it seem to I that they who be adverse to change , look back with a unmeasured respect on what we old Parliament have do for we , ignore the majestic growth of the english people , and forget the present in they worship of the past . they think that we must be what we be , -- at any rate , what we be thirty year since . they have not , perhaps , go into the house of artisan , or , if there , they have not look into the breast of the man . with population vice have increase , and these politician , with ears but no eye , hear of drunkenness and sin and ignorance . and then they declare to themselve that this wick , half - barbarous , idle people should be control and not represent . a wicked , half - barbarous , idle people may be controlle ; -- but not a people thoughtful , educated , and industrious . we must look to it that we do not endeaavor to carry we control beyond the wickedness and the barbarity , and that we be ready to submit to control from thoughtfulness and industry . I hope we shall find you help at the good work early in the spring . yours , always faithfully , . be up in before the end of , but do not find there many of those whom he wish to see . be there , and to he he show 's letter , think that it must be convince even to . this he do in . 's drawing - room , know that . low would also condescmend to discuss politics on a occasion . he have dine with they , and they have be glad to see he , and . low have be less severe than hitherto against the great sin of she husband 's late pupil . she have condescende to congratulate he on become member for a english borough instead of a irish one , and have ask he question about . but , nevertheless , 's letter be not receive with that respectful admiration which Phineas think that it deserv . Phineas , foolishly , have read it out loud , so that the attack come upon he simultaneously from the husband and from the wife . " it be just the usual claptrap , " say , " only put into language somewhat more grandiloquent than usual . " " Claptrap ! " say . " it be what I call downright radical nonsense , " say , nodd she head energetically . " Portrait indeed ! why should we want to have a portrait of ignorance and ugliness ? what we all want be to have thing quiet and orderly . " " then you would better have a paternal government at once , " say . " just so , " say , -- " only that what you call a paternal government be not always quiet and orderly . National order I take to be submission to the law . I should not think it quiet and orderly if I be send to without be bring before a jury . " " but such a man as you would not
not be send to , " say , " my next - door neighbour might be , -- which would be almost as bad . let he be send to if he deserve it , but let a jury say that he have deserve it . my idea of government be this , -- that we want to be govern by law and not by caprice , and that we must have a legislature to make we law . if I think that parliament as at present establish make the law badly , I would desire a change ; but I doubt whether we shall have they better from any change in parliament which will give we . " " of course not , " say . " but we shall have a lot of beggar put on horseback , and we all know where they ride to . " then Phineas become aware that it be not easy to convince any man or any woman on a point of politics , -- not even though he who argue may have a eloquent letter from a philosophical in he pocket to assist he . be far advanced and the new have already be bring forward , before come up to town . Phineas have of course see and have hear from he tiding of he wife . she be at with and and , but be to be in soon . , as it appear , do not quite know when he be to expect he wife ; and think that he could perceive from the tone of the husband 's voice that something be amiss . he could not however ask any question except such as refer to the expect arrival . be to come to with ? believe that would be up before , but he do not know whether she would come with he wife . " women , " he say , " be so fond of mystery that one can never quite know what they intend to do . " he correct himself at once however , perceive that he have seem to say something against he wife , and explain that he general accusation against the sex be not intend to apply to . this , however , he do so awkwardly as to strengthen the feeling with Phineas that something assuredly be wrong . " , " say , " never seem to know she own mind . " " I suppose she be like other beautiful girl who be pet on all side , " say . " as for she beauty , I do not think much of it , " say ; " and as for petting , I do not understand it in reference to grow person . child may be pet , and dog , -- though that too be bad ; but what you call petting for grown person be I think frivolous and almost indecent . " Phineas could not help think of 's opinion that it would have be wise to have leave in the hand of the garrotter . the debate on the second reading of the bill be to be commence on the 1st of , and two day before that arrive in . get a note from she in three word to say that she be at home and would see he if he call on afternoon . the to which she allude be the last day of . be now more certain than ever that something be wrong . have there be nothing wrong between and she husband , she would not have rebel against he by ask visitor to the house on a . he have nothing to do with that , however , and of course he do as he be desire . he call on the , and find sitte with . " I be just in time for the debate , " say , when the first greeting be over . " you do not mean to say that you intend to sit it out , " say . " every word of it ,-- unless I lose my seat . what else be there to be do at present ? " " but the place they give we be so unpleasant , " say . " there be worse place even than the ladies 's , " say . " and perhaps it be as well to make oneself use to inconvenience of all kind . you will speak , ? " " I intend to do so . " " of course you will . the great speech will be 's , 's , and 's . " " intend to be very strong , " say . " a man can not be strong or not as he like it , " say . " I believe to be a most useful man , but he never can become a orator . he be of the same class as , --only of course higher in the class . " " we all look for a great speech from , " say . " I have not the slightest idea whether he will open he lip , " say . immediately after that take she leave . " I hate that woman like poison , " continue . " she be always play a game , and it be such a small game that she play ! and she contribute so little to society . she be not witty nor well - inform , -- not even sufficiently ignorant or ridiculous to be a laughing - stock . one get nothing from she , and yet she have make she foot good in the world . " " I think she be a friend of yours . " " you do not think so ! you could not have think so ! how can you bring
bring such a accusation against I , know I as you do ? but never mind now . on what day shall you speak ? " " on if I can . " " I suppose you can arrange it ? " " I shall endeaavor to do so , as far as any arrangement can go . " " we shall carry the second reading , " say . " yes , " say ; " I think we shall ; but by the vote of man who be determined so to pull the bill to piece in committee , that its own parent will not know it . I doubt whether will have the temper to stand it . " " they tell I that will abandon the custody of the bill to after he first speech . " " I do not know that 's temper be more enduring than 's , " say . " well ; -- we shall see . my own impression be that nothing would save the country so effectually at the present moment as the removal of to a higher and a better sphere . " " let we say the house of Lords , " say . " forbid ! " say . Phineas sit there for half a hour and then get up to go , have speak no word on any other subject than that of politics . he longe to ask after . he longe to make some inquiry respect . and , to tell the truth , he feel painfully curious to hear say something about she own self . he could not but remember what have be say between they up over the waterfall , and how he have be warn not to return to . and then again , do know anything of what have pass between he and ? " where be you brother ? " he say , as he rise from he chair . " be in . he be here not a hour before you come in . " " where be he stay ? " " at 's . he go down on , I think . he be to see he father to - morrow morning . " " by agreement ? " " yes ; -- by agreement . there be a new trouble , -- about money that they think to be due to I . but I can not tell you all now . there have be some word between and papa . but I will not talk about it . you would find at 's at any hour before eleven to - morrow . " " do he say anything about I ? " ask . " we mention you name certainly . " " I do not ask from vanity , but I want to know whether he be angry with I . " " angry with you ! not in the least . I will tell you just what he say . he say he should not wish to live even with you , but that he would sooner try it with you than with any man he ever know . " " he have get a letter from I ? " " he do not say so ; -- but he do not say he have not . " " I will see he to - morrow if I can . " and then Phineas prepare to go . " one word , , " say , hardly look he in the face and yet make a effort to do so . " I wish you to forget what I say to you at . " " it shall be as though it be forgote , " say . " let it be absolutely forget . in such a case a man be bound to do all that a woman ask he , and no man have a truer spirit of chivalry than yourself . that be all . look in when you can . I will not ask you to dine here as yet , because we be so frightfully dull . do you best on , and then let we see you on . good - bye . " Phineas as he walk across the park towards he club make up he mind that he would forget the scene by the waterfall . he have never quite know what it have mean , and he would wipe it away from he mind altogether . he acknowledge to himself that chivalry do demand of he that he should never allow himself to think of 's rash word to he . that she be not happy with she husband be very clear to he ; -- but that be altogether another affair . she might be unhappy with she husband without indulge any guilty love . he have never think it possible that she could be happy live with such a husband as . all that , however , be now past remedy , and she must simply endure the mode of life which she have prepare for herself . there be other man and woman in tie together for better and worse , in reference to whose union they friend know that there would be no better ; -- that it must be all worse . must bear it , as it be borne by many another married woman . on the morning Phineas call at 's Hotel at ten o'clock , but in spite of 's assurance to the contrary , he find that be out . he have feel some palpitation at the heart as he make he inquiry , know well the fiery nature of the man he expect to see . it might be that there would be some actual personal conflict between he and this half - mad lord before he get back again into the
the street . what have say about she brother do not in the estimation of make this at all the less probable . the half - mad lord be so singular in he way that it might well be that he should speak handsomely of a rival behind he back and yet take he by the throat as soon as they be together , face to face . and yet , as Phineas think , it be necessary that he should see the half - mad lord . he have write a letter to which he have receive no reply , and he consider it to be incumbent on he to ask whether it have be receive and whether any answer to it be intend to be give . he go therefore to at once , -- as I have say , with some feeling at he heart that there might be violence , at any rate of word , before he should find himself again in the street . but be not there . all that the porter know be that intend to leave the house on the follow morning . then write a note and leave it with the porter . , I particularly want to see you with reference to a letter I write to you last summer . I must be in the to - day from four till the debate be over . I will be at the from two till half - past three , and will come if you will send for I , or I will meet you anywhere at any hour to - morrow morning . yours , always , . . no message come to he at the , and he be in he seat in the by four o'clock . during the debate a note be brotch to he , which run as follow :-- I have get you letter this moment . of course we must meet . I hunt on , and go down by the early train ; but I will come to town on . we shall require to be private , and I will therefore be at you room at one o'clock on that day .-- c. Phinea at once perceive that the note be a hostile note , write in a angry spirit ,-- write to one whom the writer do not at the moment acknowledge to be he friend . this be certainly the case , whatever may have say to he sister as to he friendship for Phineas . crush the note into he pocket , and of course determine that he would be in he room at the hour name . the debate be open by a speech from , in which that gentleman at great length and with much perspicuity explain he notion of that measure of Parliamentary Reform which he think to be necessary . he be listen to with the greatest attention to the close , -- and perhaps , at the end of he speech , with more attention than usual , as there have go abroad a rumour that the intend to declare that this would be the last effort of he life in that course . but , if he ever intend to utter such a pledge , he heart misgave he when the time come for utter it . he merely say that as the management of the bill in committee would be a affair of much labour , and probably spread over many night , he would be assist in he work by he colleague , and especially by he right honourable friend the of for foreign affair . it be then understand that would take the lead should the bill go into committee ; -- but it be understood also that no resignation of leadership have be make by . the measure now propose to the be very much the same as that which have be bring forward in the last session . the exist theory of british representation be not to be change , but the actual practice be to be bring nearer to the ideal theory . the idea of manhood suffrage , and of electoral districts , be to be as for ever remove from the bulwark of the british constitution . there be to be county with agricultural constituency , purposely arran to be purely agricultural , whenever the nature of the county would admit of its be so . no artificer at , let he be Conservative or , can make or Lancashire agricultural ; but and be to be preserve inviolable to the plough , -- and the apple of be still to have they sway . every town in the three kingdom with a certain population be to have two member . but here there be much room for cavil , -- as all man know would be the case . who shall say what be a town , or where shall be its limit ? bit of county might be borrow , so as to lessen the Conservatism of the county without endanger the of the borough . and then there be the borough with one member , -- and then the group of little borough . in the discussion of any such arrangement how easy be the picking of hole ; how impossible the fabrication of a garment that shall be impervious to such picking ! then again there be that great question of the ballot . on that there be to be no mistake . again pledge himself to disappear from the Treasury bench should any motion , clause , or resolution be carry by that House in favour of the ballot . he speak for three hour , and then leave the carcass of he bill to be fight for by the opposing armie . no reader of these page will desire that the speech in the debate should be even
even indicate . it soon become know that the conservative would not divide the house against the second reading of the bill . they declare , however , very plainly they intention of so alte the clause of the bill in committee , -- or at least of attempting so to do , -- as to make the bill they bill , rather than the bill of they opponent . to this reply that as long as nothing vital be touch , the government would only be too happy to oblige they friend opposite . if anything vital be touche , the government could only fall back upon they friend on that side . and in this way man be very civil to each other . but , who open the debate on the , thunder out a assurance to god and man that he would divide the house on the second reading of the bill itself . he do not doubt but that there be many good man and true to go with he into the lobby , but into the lobby he would go if he have no more than a single friend to support he . and he warn the , and he warn the house , and he warn the people of , that the measure of now propose by a so - call liberal be a measure prepare in concert with the ancient enemie of the people . he be very loud , very angry , and quite successful in halloo down sundry attempt which be make to interrupt he . " I find , " he say , " that there be many member here who do not know I yet , -- young member , probably , who be green from the waste lands and road - side of private life . they will know I soon , and then , may be , there will be less of this foolish noise , less of this elongation of unnecessary neck . we Rome must be arouse to a sense of its danger by other voice than these . " he be call to order , but it be rule that he have not be out of order , -- and he be very triumphant . answer he , and it be declare afterwards that 's speech be one of the finest piece of oratory that have ever be utter in that House . he make one remark personal to . " I quite agree with the right honourable gentleman in the chair , " he say , " when he declare that the honourable member be not out of order just now . we all of we agree with he always on such point . the rule of we House have be lay down with the utmost latitude , so that the course of we debate may not be frivolously or too easily interrupt . but a member may be so in order as to incur the displeasure of the house , and to merit the reproach of he countryman . " this little duel give great life to the debate ; but it be say that those two great Reformer , and , could never again meet as friend . in the course of the debate on , get upon he leg . the reader , I trust , will remember that hitherto he have fail altogether as a speaker . on one occasion he have lack even the spirit to use and deliver a oration which he have prepare . on a second occasion he have break down ,-- woefully , and past all redemption , as say those who be not he friend ,-- unfortunately , but not past redemption , as say those who be he true friend . after that once again he have arisen and say a few word which have call for no remark , and have be speak as though he be in the habit of address the daily . it may be doubt whether there be half - a - dozen man now present who recognise the fact that this man , who be so well know to so many of they , be now about to make another attempt at a first speech . Phineas himself diligently attempt to forget that such be the case . he have prepare for himself a few headings of what he intend to say , and on one or two point have arrange he word . he hope be that even though he should forget the word , he might still be able to cling to the thread of he discourse . when he find himself again upon he leg amidst those crowded seat , for a few moment there come upon he that old sensation of awe . again thing grow dim before he eye , and again he hardly know at which end of that long chamber the be sitte . but there arise within he a sudden courage , as soon as the sound of he own voice in that room have make itself intimate to he ear ; and after the first few sentence , all fear , all awe , be go from he . when he read he speech in the report afterwards , he find that he have stray very wide of he intend course , but he have stray without tumbl into ditch , or fall into sunken pit . he have speak much from 's letter , but have have the grace to acknowledge whence have come he inspiration . he hardly know , however , whether he have fail again or not , till come up to he as they be leave the , with he old easy pressing manner . " so you have get into form at last , " he say . " I always think that it would come . I never for a
a moment believe but that it would come sooner or later . " answer not a word ; but he go home and lay awake all night triumphant . the verdict of suffice to assure he that he have succeed . , when he wake , have two matter to occupy he mind , -- he success of the previous night , and he come interview with . he stay at home the whole morning , know that nothing could be do before the hour have name for he visit . he read every word of the debate , studiously postpone the perusal of he own speech till he should come to it in due order . and then he write to he father , commence he letter as though he write have no reference to the affair of the previous night . but he soon find himself compelle to break into some mention of it . " I send you a _Time _, " he say , " in order that you may see that I have have my finger in the pie . I have hithertoo abstain from put myself forward in the house , partly through a base fear for which I despise myself , and partly through a feeling of prudence that a man of my age should not be in a hurry to gather laurel . this be literally true . there have be the fear , and there have be the prudence . my wonder be , that I have not incur more contempt from other because I have be a coward . people have be so kind to I that I must suppose they to have judge I more leniently than I have judge myself . " then , as he be put up the paper , he look again at he own speech , and of course read every word of it once more . as he do so it occur to he that the reporter have be more than courteous to he . the man who have follow he have be , he think , at any rate as long - win as himself ; but to this orator less than half a column have be grant . to he have be grant ten line in big type , and after that a whole column and a half . let come and do he worst ! when it want but twenty minute to one , and he be begin to think in what way he have better answer the half - mad lord , should the lord in he wrath be very mad , there come to he a note by the hand of some messenger . he know at once that it be from , and open it in hot haste it be as follow :-- , we be all talk about you speech . my father be in the gallery and hear it , -- and say that he have to thank I for send you to . that make I very happy . declare that you be eloquent , but too short . that come from he be praise indeed . I have see , who take pride to himself that you be he political child . say that it be the only speech she ever read . I be there , and be delighted . I be sure that it be in you to do it . , . . I suppose we shall see you after the house be up , but I write this as I shall barely have a opportunity of speak to you then . I shall be in , not at home , from six till seven . the moment in which Phineas refold this note and put it into he breast coat - pocket be , I think , the happiest of he life . then , before he have withdraw he hand from he breast , he remember that what be now about to take place between he and would probably be the means of separa he altogether from and she family . Nay , might it not render it necessary that he should abandon the seat in parliament which have be confer upon he by the personal kindness of ? let that be as it might . one thing be clear to he . he would not abandon till he should be desire to do so in the plainest language by herself . look at he watch he see that it be one o'clock , and at that moment be announce . Phineas go forward immediately with he hand out to meet he visitor . " , " he say , " I be very glad to see you . " but do not take he hand . pass on to the table , with he hat still on he head , and with a dark scowl upon he brow , the young lord stand for a few moment perfectly silent . then he chuck a letter across the table to the spot at which be stand . Phineas , take up the letter , perceive that it be that which he , in he great attempt to be honest , have write from the inn at . " it be my own letter to you , " he say . " yes ; it be you letter to I . I receive it oddly enough together with you own note at 's , -- on morning . it have be round the world , I suppose , and reach I only then . you must withdraw it . " " withdraw it ? " " yes , sir , withdraw it . as far as I can learn , without ask any question which would have commit myself or the young lady , you have not act upon it . you have not yet do what you there threaten
threaten to do . in that you have be very wise , and there can be no difficulty in you withdraw the letter . " " I certainly shall not withdraw it , . " " do you remember -- what -- I once -- tell you ,-- about myself and ? " this question he ask very slowly , pause between the word , and look full into the face of he rival , towards whom he have gradually come nearer . and he countenance , as he do so , be by no means pleasant . the redness of he complexion have become more ruddy than usual ; he still wear he hat as though with study insolence ; he right hand be clench ; and there be that look of angry purpose in he eye which no man like to see in the eye of a antagonist . be afraid of no violence , personal to himself ; but he be afraid of , -- of what I may , perhaps , best call " a row . " to be tumbl over the chair and table with he late friend and present enemy in 's room would be most unpleasant to he . if there be to be blow he , too , must strike ; -- and he be very averse to strike 's brother , 's son , 's friend . if need be , however , he would strike . " I suppose I remember what you mean , " say . " I think you declare that you would quarrel with any man who might presume to address . be it that to which you allude ? " " it be that , " say . " I remember what you say very well . if nothing else be to deter I from ask to be my wife , you will hardly think that that ought to have any weight . the threat have no weight . " " it be not speak as a threat , sir , and that you know as well as I do . it be say from a friend to a friend , -- as I think then . but it be not the less true . I wonder what you can think of faith and truth and honesty of purpose when you take advantage of my absence , -- you , whom I have tell a thousand time that I love she better than my own soul ! you stand before the world as a rise man , and I stand before the world as a man -- damne . you have be choose by my father to sit for we family borough , while I be a outcast from he house . you have for you friend , while I have hardly a decent associate leave to I in the world . but I can say of myself that I have never do anything unworthy of a gentleman , while this thing that you be do be unworthy of the lowest man . " " I have do nothing unworthy , " say . " I write to you instantly when I have resolve , -- though it be painful to I to have to tell such a secret to any one . " " you write ! yes ; when I be miles distant ; week , month away . but I do not come here to bullyrag like a old woman . I get you letter only on , and know nothing of what have occur . be to be -- you wife ? " have now come quite close to , and feel that that clenched fist might be in he face in half a moment . of course be not engage to he , but it seem to he that if he be now so to declare , such declaration would appear to have be draw from he by fear . " I ask you , " say , " in what position you now stand towards . if you be not a coward you will tell I . " " whether I tell you or not , you know that I be not a coward , " say . " I shall have to try , " say . " but if you please I will ask you for a answer to my question . " Phineas pause for a moment , think what honesty of purpose and a high spirit would , when combine together , demand of he , and together with these requirement he feel that he be bound to join some feeling of duty towards . be stand there , fiery red , with he hand still clench , and he hat still on , wait for he answer . " let I have you question again , " say , " and I will answer it if I find that I can do so without loss of self - respect . " " I ask you in what position you stand towards . mind , I do not doubt at all , but I choose to have a reply from yourself . " " you will remember , of course , that I can only answer to the best of my belief . " " answer to the best of you belief . " " I think she regard I as a intimate friend . " " have you say as a indifferent acquaintance , you would , I think , have be nearer the mark . but we will let that be . I presume I may understand that you have give up any idea of change that position ? " " you may understand nothing of the kind , . " " why ; -- what hope have you ? " " that be another thing . I shall not speak of that
that ; -- at any rate not to you . " " then , sir , -- " and now advance another step and raise he hand as though he be about to put it with some form of violence on the person of he rival . " , , " say , step back , so that there be some article of furniture between he and he adversary . " I do not choose that there should be a riot here . " " what do you call a riot , sir ? I believe that after all you be a poltroon . what I require of you be that you shall meet I . will you do that ? " " you mean , -- to fight ? " " yes , -- to fight ; to fight ; to fight . for what other purpose do you suppose that I can wish to meet you ? " feel at the moment that the fighting of a duel would be destructive to all he political hope . fight duel in these day . they who do so be always reckon to be fools . and a duel between he and 's son must , as he think , separate he from , from , from , and from he borough . but yet how could he refuse ? " what have you to think of , sir , when such a offer as that be make to you ? " say the fiery - red lord . " I have to think whether I have courage enough to refuse to make myself a ass . " " you say that you do not wish to have a riot . that be you way to escape what you call -- a riot . " " you want to bully I , . " " no , sir ;-- I simply want this , that you should leave I where you find I , and not interfere with that which you have long know I claim as my own . " " but it be not you own . " " then you can only fight I . " " you have better send some friend to I , and I will name some one , whom he shall meet . " " of course I will do that if I have you promise to meet I . we can be in in a hour or two , and back again in a few more hour ; -- that be , any one of we who may chance to be alive . " I will select a friend , and will tell he everything , and will then do as he bid I . " " yes ; -- some old steady - go buffer . , perhaps . " " it will certainly not be . I shall probably ask to manage for I in such a affair . " " perhaps you will see he at once , then , so that may arrange with he this afternoon . and let I assure you , , that there will be a meeting between we after some fashion , let the idea of you friend be what they may . " then purpose to go , but turn again as he be go . " and remember this , " he say , " my complaint be that you have be false to I , -- damnably false ; not that you have fall in love with this young lady or with that . " then the fiery - red lord open the door for himself and take he departure . Phinea , as soon as he be alone , walk down to the house , at which there be a early sitting . as he go there be one great question which he have to settle with himself ,-- be there any justice in the charge make against he that he have be false to he friend ? when he have think over the matter at , after rush down there that he might throw himself at 's foot , he have assure himself that such a letter as that which he resolve to write to , would be even chivalrous in its absolute honesty . he would tell he purpose to the moment that he purpose be form ; -- and would afterwards speak of behind he back as one dear friend should speak of another . have show the slightest intention of accept 's offer , he would have acknowledge to himself that the circumstance of he position make it impossible that he should , with honou , become he friend 's rival . but be he to be debar for ever from get that which he want because want it also ,-- know , as he do so well , that could not get the thing which he want ? all this have be quite sufficient for he at . but now the charge against he that he have be false to he friend ring in he ear and make he unhappy . it certainly be true that have not give up he hope , and that he have speak probably more openly to Phineas respecte they than he have do to any other human being . if it be true that he have be false , then he must comply with any requisition which might make , -- short of voluntarily give up the lady . he must fight if he be ask to do so , even though fighting be he ruin . when again in the yesterday 's scene come back upon he , and more than one man come to he congratulate he . take he hand and speak a word to he . the old nod to he . greet he ; and openly tell he that he have make a
a good speech . how sweet would all this have be have there not be ever at he heart the remembrance of he terrible difficulty , -- the consciousness that he be about to be force into a absurdity which would put a end to all this sweetness ! why be the world in so severe against duelling ? after all , as he regard the matter now , a duel might be the best way , nay , the only way out of a difficulty . if he might only be allow to go out with the whole thing might be arrange . if he be not shoot he might carry on he suit with unfetter by any impediment on that side . and if he be shoot , what matter be that to any one but himself ? why should the world be so thin - skinned , -- so foolishly chary of human life ? do not come to the house , and look for he at both the club which he frequent ,-- leave a note at each as he do not find he . he also leave a note for he at he lodging in . " I must see you this evening . I shall dine at the ,-- pray come there . " after that , go up to , in accordance with the instruction receive from . there he see , meet she for the first time since he have part from she on the great step at . of course he speak to she , and of course she be gracious to he . but she graciousness be only a smile and he speech be only a word . there be many in the room , but not enough to make privacy possible , -- as it become possible at a crowded evening meeting . be there , and the , and , and , and with he young wife . it be manifestly a meeting of liberals , semi-social and semi-political ; --so arrange that lady might feel that some interest in politics be allow to they , and perhaps some influence also . afterwards himself come in . Phineas , however , be most struck by find that be there , and that be not . in regard to , he be quite sure that have such a meeting take place before 's marriage , would have be present . " I must speak to you as we go away , " say , whisper a word into 's ear . " I have be leave note for you all about the town . " " not a duel , I hope , " say . how pleasant it be , -- that meet ; or would have be have there not be that nightmare on he breast ! they all talk as though there be perfect accord between they and perfect confidence . there be there great man ,-- cabinet ministers , and beautiful woman , -- the wife and daughter of some of 's highest nobles . and , throw back , now and again , a thought to , find himself among they as one of themselves . how could any say that he be wrong ? on a sofa near to he , so that he could almost touch she foot with he , be sit , and as he lean over from he chair discuss some point in 's bill with that most inveterate politician , , look into he face and smile . oh heaven ! if and he might only toss up as to which of they should go to and remain there for the next ten year , and which should have for a wife in ! " come along , , if you mean to come , " say . be of course bound to go , though be still talk , and be still smile ineffably . the " I know it be a duel ; -- bedad I do , " say , stand at the corner of and , when have half tell he story . " I be sure of it from the tone of you voice , my boy . we must not let it come off , that be all ; -- not if we can help it . " then be allow to proceed and finish he story . " I do not see any way out of it ; I do not , indeed , " say . by this time have come to think that the duel be in very truth the best way out of the difficulty . it be a bad way out , but then it be a way ; -- and he could not see any other . " a for ill treat he , that be nonsense , " say . " what be the girl to do , if one fellow may not come on as soon as another fellow be down ? but then , you see , a fellow never know when he be down himself , and therefore he think that he be ill use . I will tell you what now . I should not wonder if we could not do it on the sly ,-- unless one of you be stupid enough to hit the other in a awkward place . if you be certain of you hand now , the right shoulder be the best spot . " feel very certain that he would not hit in a awkward place , although he be by no means sure of he hand . let come what might , he would not aim at he adversary . but of this he have think it proper to say nothing to . and the duel do come off on the sly . the meeting in the drawing - room in , of which mention
mention be make in the last chapter , take place on a afternoon . on the , , , and follow , the great debate on 's bill be continue , and at three on the night the divide . there be a majority in favour of the , not large enough to permit they to claim a triumph for they party , or even a ovation for themselves ; but still sufficient to enable they to send they bill into committee . and have again join they force together in opposition to the ministerial measure . on the have show himself in the , but during the remainder of this interesting period he be absent from he place , nor be he see at the club , nor do any man know of he whereabouts . I think that be the first to miss he with any real sense of he absence . she would now go to on the afternoon of every , -- at which time she husband be attend the second service of he church , -- and there she would receive those whom she call she father 's guest . but as she father be never there on the , and as these gatherings have be create by herself , the reader will probably think that she be obey she husband 's behest in regard to the after a very indifferent fashion . the reader may be quite sure , however , that know well what be be do in . whatever might be 's fault , she do not commit the fault of disobey she husband in secret . there be , probably , a few word on the subject ; but we need not go very closely into that matter at the present moment . on the which afford some rest in the middle of the great Reform debate ask for , and no one could answer she question . and then it be remember that be also absent . know nothing of , -- have hear nothing ; but be able to say that have be with , the patronage secretary and liberal whip , early on , express he intention of absent himself for two day . have be wroth , bid he remain at he duty , and point out to he the great importance of the moment . then quote 's reply . " my boy , " say to poor , " the path of duty lead but to the grave . all the same ; I will be in at the death , , my boy , as sure as the sun 's in heaven . " not ten minute after the telling of this little story , enter the room in , and at once ask he after Phineas . " , , I have be out of town myself for two day , and I know nothing . " " have not be with you , then ? " " with I ! no ,-- not with I . I have a job of business of my own which take I over to . and have fle too ? poor Ratler ! I should not wonder if it be not a asylum he be in before the session be over . " certainly possess the rare accomplishment of tell a lie with a good grace . have any man call he a liar he would have consider himself to be not only insult , but injure also . he believe himself to be a man of truth . there be , however , in he estimation certain subject on which a man might depart as wide as the pole be asunder from truth without subject himself to any ignominy for falsehood . in deal with a tradesman as to he debt , or with a rival as to a lady , or with any man or woman in defence of a lady 's character , or in any such matter as that of a duel , believe that a gentleman be bound to lie , and that he would be no gentleman if he hesitate to do so . not the slightest prick of conscience disturb he when he tell that he have be in , and that he know nothing of . but , in truth , during the last day or two he have be in Flanders , and not in , and have stood as second with he friend Phineas on the sand at , a little fishing - town some twelve mile distant from , and have leave he friend since that at a hotel at , -- with a wound just under the shoulder , from which a bullet have be extract . the manner of the meeting have be in this wise . and have hold they meeting , and at this meeting have take certain standing - ground on behalf of he friend , and in obedience to he friend 's positive instruction ;-- which be this , that he friend could not abandon he right of address the young lady , should he hereafter ever think fit to do so . let that be grant , and would do anything . but then that could not be grant , and could only shrug he shoulders . would admit that he friend have be false . " the question lie in a nutshell , " say , with that sweet connaught brogue which always come to he when he desire to be effective ; --" here it be . one gentleman tell another that he be sweet upon a young lady , but that the young lady have refuse he , and always will refuse he , for ever and ever . that be the truth anyhow . be the second gentleman bound by that not to address the young lady ? I say he be not bound .
. it would be a ---- hard tratement , , if a man 's mouth and all the ardent affection of he heart be to be stop in that manner ! by , I do not know who would like to be the friend of any man if that be to be the way of it . " be not very good at a argument . " I think they would better see each other , " say , pull he thick grey moustache . " if you choose to have it so , so be it . but I think it the hardest thing in the world ; -- I do indeed . " then they put they head together in the most friendly way , and declare that the affair should , if possible , be keep private . on the night and go over by and to . , with he friend , cross by the direct boat from to . go to by and , but he take the day route on . it have all be arrange among they , so that there might be no suspicion as to the job in hand . even O'Shaughnessy and have leave by separate train . they meet on the sand at about nine o'clock on the morning , have reach that village in different vehicle from and , and have meet quite unobserved amidst the sand - heap . but one shot have be exchange , and have be wounded in the right shoulder . he have propose to exchange another shot with he left hand , declare he capability of shooting quite as well with the left as with the right ; but to this both and have object . have offer to shake hand with he late friend in a true spirit of friendship , if only he late friend would say that he do not intend to prosecute he suit with the young lady . in all these dispute the young lady 's name be never mention . Phineas indeed have not once name to , speak of she always as the lady in question ; and though correctly surmise the identity of the young lady , he never hint that he have even guess she name . I doubt whether have be so wary when alone with ; but then be , when he speak at all , a very plain - spoken man . of course he lordship 's late friend Phineas would give no such pledge , and therefore move off the ground and back to and , and into , in still live enmity with we hero . and the doctor take back to , and though the bullet be then in he shoulder , make he way through after such a fashion that no one there know what have occur . not a live soul , except the five concerned , be at that time aware that a duel have be fight among the sand - hill . make he way to Dover by the night 's boat , and be able to show himself in on the . " know anything about ? " he say afterwards to , in answer to a inquiry from that anxious gentleman . " not a word ! I think you would better send the town - crier round after he . " , however , do not feel quite so well assure of 's truth as have do . remain during the and at with he patient , and the people at the inn only know that have sprain he shoulder badly ; and on the they come back to again , via and . no bone have be break , and , though he shoulder be very painful , bear the journey well . have receive a telegram on the , tell he that the division would certainly take place on the , -- and on the , at about ten in the evening , Phineas go down to the house . " by ----, you be here , " say , take hold of he with a affection that be too warm . " yes ; I be here , " say , wince in agony ; " but be a little careful , there be a good fellow . I have be down in and put my arm out . " " put you arm out , have you ? " say , observe the sling for the first time . " I be sorry for that . but you will stop and vote ? " " yes ;-- I will stop and vote . I have come up for the purpose . but I hope it will not be very late . " " there be both and to speak yet , and at least three other . I do not suppose it will be much before three . but you be all right now . you can go down and smoke if you like ! " in this way speak in the debate , and hear the end of it , vote for he party , and fight he duel with in the middle of it . he do go and sit on a well - cushion bench in the smoking - room , and then be interrogate by many of he friend as to he mysterious absence . he have , he say , be down in , and have have a accident with he arm , by which he have be confine . when this questioner and that perceive that there be some little mystery in the matter , the questioner do not push they question , but simply entertaine they own surmise . one indiscreet questioner , however , do trouble Phineas sorely , declare that there must have be some affair in which a woman have have a part , and ask after
after the young lady of . this indiscreet questioner be , who , as Phineas think , carry he spirit of intrigue a little too far . stay and vote , and then he go painfully home to he lodging . how singular would it be if this affair of the duel should pass away , and no one be a bit the wiser but those four man who have be with he on the sand at ! again he wonder at he own luck . he have tell himself that a duel with must create a quarrel between he and 's relation , and also between he and ; that it must banish he from he comfortable seat for , and ruin he in regard to he political prospect . and now he have fight he duel , and be back in town , -- and the thing seem to have be a thing of nothing . he have not as yet see or , but he have no doubt but they both be as much in the dark as other people . the day might arrive , he think , on which it would be pleasant for he to tell what have occur , but that day have not come as yet . Whither have go , or what intend to do , he have not any idea ; but he imagine that he should soon hear something of she brother from . that should say a word to of what have occur , -- or to any other person in the world ,-- he do not in the least suspect . there could be no man more likely to be reticent in such matter than , -- or more sure to be guide by a almost exaggerated sense of what honou require of he . do he doubt the discretion of he friend ; -- if only he friend might not damage the secret by be too discreet . of the silence of the doctor and the captain he be by no means equally sure ; but even though they should gossip , the gossiping would take so long a time in ooze out and become recognise information , as to have lose much of its power for injure he . to hear at this moment that he have be over to , and have fight a duel with respect , she would probably feel herself obliged to quarrel with he ; but no such obligation would rest on she , if in the course of six or nine month she should gradually have become aware that such a encounter have take place . , during they interview at the room in Great , have say a word to he about the seat in parliament ; -- have express some opinion that as he , , be interfere with the view of the Standish family in regard to , he ought not to keep the Standish seat , which have be confer upon he in ignorance of any such intend interference . Phinea , as he think of this , could not remember 's word , but there be present to he a idea that such have be they purport . be he bound , in circumstance as they now exist , to give up ? he make up he mind that he be not so bound unless should demand from he that he should do so ; but , nevertheless , he be uneasy in he position . it be quite true that the seat now be he for this session by all parliamentary law , even though the elector themselves might wish to be ry of he , and that could not even open he mouth upon the matter in a tone more loud than that of a whisper . but Phineas , feel that he have consent to accept the favour of a corrupt seat from , feel also that he be bound to give up the spoil if it be demand from he . if it be demand from he , either by the father or the son , it should be give up at once . on the follow morning he find a lead article in the 's banner_ devote solly to himself . " during the late debate , " -- so run a passage in the leading article , -- " , 's irish nominee for he pocket - borough at , do at last manage to stand on he leg and open he mouth . if we be not mistaken , this be 's third session in parliament , and hitherto he have be unable to articulate three sentence , though he have on more than one occasion make the attempt . for what special merit this young man have be select for aristocratic patronage we do not know , -- but that there must be some merit recognisable by aristocratic eye , we surmise . three year ago he be a raw young , live in as only know how to live , earn nothing , and apparently without mean ; and then suddenly he burst out as a member of parliament and as the friend of . the possession of one good gift must be acced to the honourable member for , -- he be a handsome young man , and look to be as strong as a coal - porter . can it be that he promotion have spring from this ? be this as it may , we should like to know where he have be during he late mysterious absence from parliament , and in what way he come by the wound in he arm . even handsome young member of parliament , fet by title lady and they rich lord , be amenable to the law , -- to the law of this country , and to the law of any other which it
it may suit they to visit for a while ! " " Infamous scoundrel ! " say to himself , as he read this . " Vile , low , disreputable blackguard ! " it be clear enough , however , that have find out something of he secret . if so , he only hope would rest on the fact that he friend be not likely to see the column of the 's . be by the time that 's great bill be go into committee be able to move about in comfort , -- with he arm , however , still in a sling . there have be nothing more about he and he wound in the 's , and he be begin to hope that that nuisance would also be allow to die away . he have see ,-- have dine in , where he have be pet to he heart 's content . he dinner have be cut up for he , and he wound have be treat with the tenderest sympathy . and , singular to say , no question be ask . he have be to and have come by a accident . no more than that be tell , and he dear sympathising friend be content to receive so much information , and to ask for no more . but he have not as yet see , and he be begin to think that this romance about might as well be bring to a close . he have not , however , as yet be able to go into crowded room , and unless he go out to large party he could not be sure that he would meet . at last he resolve that he would tell the whole truth , -- not the truth about the duel , but the truth about , and ask for she assistance . when make this resolution , I think that he must have forget much that he have learn of he friend 's character ; and by make it , I think that he show also that he have not learn as much as he opportunity might have teach he . he know 's obstinacy of purpose , he know she devotion to she brother , and he know also how desirous she have be that she brother should win for himself . this knowledge should , I think , have suffice to show he how improbable it be that should assist he in he enterprise . but beyond all this be the fact , -- a fact as to the consequence of which himself be entirely blind , beautifully ignorant ,-- that have once condescende to love himself . Nay ;--she have go farther than this , and have venture to tell he , even after she marriage , that the remembrance of some feeling that have once dwelt in she heart in regard to he be still a danger to she . she have warn he from , and then have receive he in ; -- and now he selecte she as he confidante in this love affair ! have he not be beautifully ignorant and most modestly blind , he would surely have place he confidence elsewhere . it be not that ever confess to herself the existence of a vicious passion . she have , indeed , learn to tell herself that she could not love she husband ; and once , in the excitement of such silent announcement to herself , she have ask herself whether she heart be quite a blank , and have answer herself by desire to absent himself from . during all the subsequent winter she have scour herself inwardly for she own imprudence , she quite unnecessary folly in so do . what ! could not she , , who from she earliest year of girlish womanhood have resolve that she would use the world as man use it , and not as woman do , -- could not she have feel the slight shock of a passing tenderness for a handsome youth without allow the feeling to be a rock before she big enough and sharp enough for the destruction of she entire barque ? could not she command , if not she heart , at any rate she mind , so that she might safely assure herself that , whether this man or any man be here or there , she course would be unaltered ? what though have be in the same house with she throughout all the winter , could not she have so live with he on term of friendship , that every deed and word and look of she friendship might have be open to she husband , -- or open to all the world ? she could have do so . she tell herself that that be not , -- need not have be she great calamity . whether she could endure the dull , monotonous control of she slow but imperious lord , -- or whether she must not rather tell he that it be not to be endure , -- that be she trouble . so she tell herself , and again admit Phineas to she intimacy in . but , nevertheless , , have he not be beautifully ignorant and most blind to he own achievement , would not have expect from assistance with . Phineas know when to find alone , and he come upon she one day at the favourable hour . the two first clause of the bill have be pass after twenty fight and endless division . two point have be settle , as to which , however , have be drive to give way so far and to yield so much , that man declare that such a bill as the government could consent to call its own could never be pass by that parliament in that session . immediately
immediately on he entrance into she room begin about the third clause . would the let have he way about the --? Phineas stop she at once . " my dear friend , " he say , " I have come to you in a private trouble , and I want you to drop politics for half a hour . I have come to you for help . " " a private trouble , ! be it serious ? " " it be very serious , -- but it be no trouble of the kind of which you be think . but it be serious enough to take up every thought . " " can I help you ? " " indeed you can . whether you will or no be a different thing . " " I would help you in anything in my power , . do you not know it ? " " you have be very kind to I ! " " and so would . " " can not help I here . " " what be it , ? " " I suppose I may as well tell you at once , -- in plain language , I do not know how to put my story into word that shall fit it . I love . will you help I to win she to be my wife ? " " you love ! " say . and as she speak the look of she countenance towards he be so change that he become at once aware that from she no assistance might be expect . he eye be not open in any degree to the second reason above give for 's opposition to he wish , but he instantly perceive that she would still cling to that destination of 's hand which have for year past be the favourite scheme of she life . " have you not always know , , what have be we hope for ? " Phineas , though he have perceive he mistake , feel that he must go on with he cause . must know he wish sooner or later , and it be as well that she should learn they in this way as in any other . " yes ; -- but I have know also , from you brother 's own lip , -- and indeed from yours also , , -- that have be three time refuse by . " " what do that matter ? do man never ask more than three time ? " " and must I be debar for ever while he prosecute a hopeless suit ? " " yes ; -- you of all man . " " why so , ? " " because in this matter you have be he chosen friend , -- and mine . we have tell you everything , trust to you . we have believe in you honour . we have think that with you , at any rate , we be safe . " these word be very bitter to , and yet when he have write he letter at , he have intend to be so perfectly honest , chivalrously honest ! now speak to he and look at he as though he have be most basely false -- most untrue to that noble friendship which have be lavish upon he by all she family . he feel that he would become the prey of she most injuriious thought unless he could fully explain he idea , and he feel , also , that the circumstance do not admit of he explain they . he could not take up the argument on 's side , and show how unfair it would be to she that she should be debar from the homage due to she by any man who really love she , because choose to think that he still have a claim , -- or at any rate a chance . and know well of himself , -- or think that he know well , -- that he would not have interfere have there be any chance for . have himself tell he more than once that there be no such chance . how be he to explain all this to ? " , " say , " I can hardly believe this of you , even when you tell it I yourself . " " listen to I , , for a moment . " " certainly , I will listen . but that you should come to I for assistance ! I can not understand it . sometimes become harder than stone . " " I do not think that I be hard . " poor blind fool ! he be still think only of , and of the accusation make against he that he be untrue to he friendship for . of that other accusation which could not be express in open word he understand nothing , -- nothing at all as yet . " hard and false , -- capable of receive no impression beyond the outside husk of the heart . " " oh , , do not say that . if you could only know how true I be in my affection for you all . " " and how do you show it ?-- by come in between and the only means that be open to we of reconcile he to he father ; --mean that have be explain to you exactly as though you have be one of ourselves . have treat you as a brother in the matter , tell you everything , and this be the way you would repay he for he confidence ! " " can I help it , that I have learn to love this girl ? " " yes , sir , -- you can help it . what if she have be 's wife
wife ; -- would you have love she then ? do you speak of love a woman as if it be a affair of fate , over which you have no control ? I doubt whether you passion be so strong as that . you have better put aside you love for . I feel assure that it will never hurt you . " then some remembrance of what have pass between he and near the falls of the , when he first visit , come across he mind . " believe I , " she say with a smile , " this little wound in you heart will soon be cure . " he stand silent before she , look away from she , think over it all . he certainly have believe himself to be violently in love with , and yet when he have just now enter she draw - room , he have almost forgotten that there have be such a passage in he life . and he have believe that she have forget it , -- even though she have counsel he not to come to Loughlinter within the last nine month ! he have be a boy then , and have not know himself ; -- but now he be a man , and be proud of the intensity of he love . there come upon he some pass throb of pain from he shoulder , remind he of the duel , and he be proud also of that . he have be willing to risk everything , -- life , prospect , and position , -- sooner than abandon the slight hope which be he of possessing . and now he be tell that this wound in he heart would soon be cure , and be tell so by a woman to whom he have once sng a song of another passion . it be very hard to answer a woman in such circumstance , because she womanhood give she so strong a ground of vantage ! might venture to throw in he tooth the fickleness of he heart , but he could not in reply tell she that to change a love be better than to marry without love , -- that to be capable of such a change show no such inferiority of nature as do the capacity for such a marriage . she could hit he with she argument ; but he could only remember he , and think how violent might be the blow he could inflict , -- if it be not that she be a woman , and therefore guard . " you will not help I then ? " he say , when they have both be silent for a while . " help you ? how should I help you ? " " I want no other help than this , -- that I might have have a opportunity of meeting Violet here , and of get from she some answer . " " have the question then never be ask already ? " say . to this Phinea make no immediate reply . there be no reason why he should show he whole hand to a adversary . " why do you not go to 's house ? " continue . " you be admit there . you know . go and ask she to stand you friend with she niece . see what she will say to you . as far as I understand these matters , that be the fair , honourable , open way in which gentleman be will nt to make they overture . " " I would make mine to no but to herself , " say . " then why have you make it to I , sir ? " demand . " I have come to you as I would to my sister . " " you sister ? ! I be not you sister , . , be I so , should I fail to remember that I have a dearer brother to whom my faith be pledge . look here . within the last three week have sacrifice everything to he father , because he be determine that should have the money which he think be due to my husband . he have enable my father to do what he will with . will never hurt he ; -- I know that . hard as papa be with he , he will never hurt 's future position . be too proud to do that . have hear what have do ; and now that he have nothing of he own to offer she for the future but he bare title , now that he have give papa power to do what he will with the property , I believe that she would accept he instantly . that be she disposition . " Phineas again pause a moment before he reply . " let he try , " he say . " he be away , -- in . " " send to he , and bid he return . I will be patient , . let he come and try , and I will bide my time . I confess that I have no right to interfere with he if there be a chance for he . if there be no chance , my right be as good as that of any other . " there be something in this which make feel that she could not maintain she hostility against this man on behalf of she brother ; -- and yet she could not force herself to be other than hostile to he . she heart be sore , and it be he that have make it sore . she have lecture herself , school herself with mental sackcloth and ash , rebuk herself with heaviest censure from day to day , because she have
have find herself to be in danger of regard this man with a perilous love ; and she have be constant in this work of penance till she have be able to assure herself that the sackcloth and ash have do they work , and that the danger be past . " I like he still and love he well , " she have say to herself with something almost of triumph , " but I have cease to think of he as one who might have be my lover . " and yet she be now sick and sore , almost beside herself with the agony of the wound , because this man whom she have be able to throw aside from she heart have also be able so to throw she aside . and she feel herself constrain to rebuke he with what bitterest word she might use . she have feel it easy to do this at first , on she brother 's score . she have accuse he of treachery to he friendship , -- both as to and as to herself . on that she could say cut word without subject herself to suspicion even from herself . but now this power be take away from she , and still she wished to wound he . she desire to taunt he with he old fickleness , and yet to subject herself to no imputation . " you right ! " she say . " what give you any right in the matter ? " " simply the right of a fair field , and no favour . " " and yet you come to I for favour , -- to I , because I be she friend . you can not win she yourself , and think I may help you ! I do not believe in you love for she . there ! if there be no other reason , and I could help you , I would not , because I think you heart be a sham heart . she be pretty , and have money -- " " ! " " she be pretty , and have money , and be the fashion . I do not wonder that you should wish to have she . but , , I believe that really love she ; -- and that you do not . he nature be deeper than yours . " he understand it all now as he listen to the tone of she voice , and look into the line of she face . there be write there plainly enough that spreta injuria formae of which she herself be conscious , but only conscious . even he eye , blind as he have be , be open , -- and he know that he have be a fool . " I be sorry that I come to you , " he say . " it would have be better that you should not have do so , " she reply . " and yet perhaps it be well that there should be no misunderstanding between we . " " of course I must tell my brother . " he pause but for a moment , and then he answer she with a sharp voice , " he have be tell . " " and who tell he ? " " I do . I write to he the moment that I know my own mind . I owed it to he to do so . but my letter miss he , and he only learn it the other day . " " have you see he since ? " " yes ;-- I have see he . " " and what do he say ? how do he take it ? do he bear it from you quietly ? " " no , indeed ; " and smile as he speak . " tell I , ; what happen ? what be to be do ? " " nothing be to be do . everything have be do . I may as well tell you all . I be sure that for the sake of I , as well as of you brother , you will keep we secret . he require that I should either give up my suit , or that I should , -- fight he . as I could not comply with the one request , I find myself bound to comply with the other . " " and there have be a duel ? " " yes ; -- there have be a duel . we go over to , and it be soon settled . he wound I here in the arm . " " suppose you have kill he , ? " " that , , would have be a misfortune so terrible that I be bound to prevent it . " then he pause again , regret what he have say . " you have surprise I , , into a answer that I should not have make . I may be sure ,--may I not , -- that my word will not go beyond yourself ? " " yes ; -- you may be sure of that . " this she say plaintively , with a tone of voice and demeanour of body altogether different from that which she lately bear . neither of they know what be take place between they ; but she be , in truth , gradually submit herself again to this man 's influence . though she rebuk he at every turn for what he say , for what he have do , for what he propose to do , still she could not teach herself to despise he , or even to cease to love he for any part of it . she know it all now ,-- except that word or two which have pass between
between and in the ride of . but she suspect something even of that , feel sure that the only matter on which Phineas would say nothing would be that of he own success , -- if success there have been . " and so you and have quarrell , and there have be a duel . that be why you be away ? " " that be why I be away . " " how wrong of you , -- how very wrong ! have he be , -- kill , how could you have look we in the face again ? " " I could not have look you in the face again . " " but that be over now . and be you friend afterwards ? " " no ; -- we do not part as friend . have go there to fight with he , -- most unwillingly , -- I could not afterwards promise he that I would give up . you say she will accept he now . let he come and try . " she have nothing further to say , -- no other argument to use . there be the soreness at she heart still present to she , make she wretch , instigate she to hurt he if she know how to do so , in spite of she regard for he . but she feel that she be weak and powerless . she have shot she arrow at he , -- all but one , -- and if she use that , it be poisoned point would wound herself far more surely than it would touch he . " the duel be very silly , " he say . " you will not speak of it . " " no ; certainly not . " " I be glad at least that I have tell you everything . " " I do not know why you should be glad . I can not help you . " " and you will say nothing to Violet ? " " everything that I can say in 's favour . I will say nothing of the duel ; but beyond that you have no right to demand my secrecy with she . yes ; you have better go , , for I be hardly well . and remember this ,-- if you can forget this little episode about , so will I forget it also ; and so will Oswald . I can promise for he . " then she smile and give he she hand , and he go . she rise from she chair as he leave the room , and wait till she hear the sound of the great door close behind he before she again sit down . then , when he be gone , -- when she be sure that he be no longer there with she in the same house , -- she lay she head down upon the arm of the sofa , and burst into a flood of tear . she be no longer angry with Phineas . there be no further long in she heart for revenge . she do not now desire to injure he , though she have do so as long as he be with she . ,--she resolve instantly , almost instinctively , that must know nothing of all this , lest the political prospect of the young member for should be injure . to have rebuk he , to rebuke he again and again , would be only fair ,-- would at least be womanly ; but she would protect he from all material injury as far as she power of protection might avail . and why be she weep now so bitterly ? of course she ask herself , as she rub away the tear with she hand ,-- why should she weep ? she be not weak enough to tell herself that she be weep for any injury that have be do to . she get up suddenly from the sofa , and push away she hair from she face , and push away the tear from she cheek , and then clench she fists as she hold they out at full length from she body , and stand , look up with she eye fix upon the wall . " ass ! " she exclaim . " fool ! Idiot ! that I should not be able to crush it into nothing and have do with it ! why should he not have she ? after all , he be better than . oh , -- be that you ? " the door of the room have be open while she be stand thus , and she husband have enter . " yes , -- it be I . be anything wrong ? " " very much be wrong . " " what be it , ? " " you can not help I . " " if you be in trouble you should tell I what it be , and leave it to I to try to help you . " " Nonsense ! " she say , shak she head . " , that be uncourteous , -- not to say undutiful also . " " I suppose it be , -- both . I beg you pardon , but I could not help it . " " Laura , you should help such word to I . " " there be moment , , when even a married woman must be herself rather than she husband 's wife . it be so , though you can not understand it . " " I certainly do not understand it . " " you can not make a woman subject to you as a dog be so . you may have all the outside and as much of the inside as you can master .
. with a dog you may be sure of both . " " I suppose this mean that you have secret in which I be not to share . " " I have trouble about my father and my brother which you can not share . my brother be a ruin man . " " who ruin he ? " " I will not talk about it any more . I will not speak to you of he or of papa . I only want you to understand that there be a subject which must be secret to myself , and on which I may be allow to shed tear , -- if I be so weak . I will not trouble you on a matter in which I have not you sympathy . " then she leave he , stand in the middle of the room , depresse by what have occur , -- but not think of it as of a trouble which would do more than make he uncomfortable for that day . after day , and clause after clause , the bill be fight in committee , and few man fight with more constancy on the side of the than do the member for . trouble though he be by he quarrel with , by he love for , by the silence of he friend , -- for since he have tell she of the duel she have become silent to he , never write to he , and hardly speak to he when she meet he in society ,-- nevertheless Phineas be not so trouble but what he could work at he vocation . now , when he would find himself upon he leg in the house , he would wonder at the hesitation which have lately trouble he so sorely . he would sit sometimes and speculate upon that dimness of eye , upon that tendency of thing to go round , upon that obtrusive palpitation of heart , which have afflict he so seriously for so long a time . the now be no more to he than any other chamber , and the member no more than other man . he guard himself from oration , speak always very shortly , -- because he believe that policy and good judgment require that he should be short . but word be very easy to he , and he would feel as though he could talk for ever . and there quickly come to he a reputation for practical usefulness . he be a man with strong opinion , who could yet be submissive . and no man seem to know how he reputation have come . he have make one good speech after two or three failure . all who know he , he whole party , have be aware of he failure ; and he one good speech have be regard by many as no very wonderful effort . but he be a man who be pleasant to other man , -- not combative , not self - assert beyond the point at which self - assertion cease to be a necessity of manliness . nature have be very good to he , make he comely inside and out , -- and with this comeliness he have crept into popularity . the secret of the duel be , I think , at this time , know to a great many man and woman . so Phineas perceive ; but it be not , he think , know either to or to . and in this he be right . no rumour of it have yet reach the ear of either of these persons ; -- and rumour , though she fly so fast and so far , be often slow in reach those ear which would be most interested in she tiding . some di be report of the duel reach even , and he ask he wife . " who tell you ? " say she , sharply . " tell I that it be certainly so . " " always know more than anybody else about everything except he own business . " " then it be not true ? " pause , -- and then she lie . " of course it be not true . I should be very sorry to ask either of they , but to I it seem to be the most improbable thing in life . " then believe that there have be no duel . in he wife 's word he put absolute faith , and he think that she would certainly know anything that she brother have do . as he be a man give to but little discourse , he ask no further question about the duel either in the or at the . at first , Phineas have be greatly dismay when man have ask he question tend to elicit from he some explanation of the mystery ; -- but by degree he become used to it , and as the tiding which have get abroad do not seem to injure he , and as the questionings be not push very closely , he become indifferent . there come out another article in the 's banner_ in which --- - and and p---- 's ---- and be speak of as glaring example of that aristocratic snobility , -- that be the expressive word coin , evidently with great delight , for the occasion , -- which the rotten state of society in high quarter now produce . here be a young lord , infamously notorious , quarrell with one of he boon - companion , whom he have appoint to a private seat in the of , fight duel , break the law , scandalise the public , -- and all this be do without punishment to the guilty ! there be old story afloat , -- so say the article
article -- of what in a former century have be do by and ; but now , in 186 -- , &c . &c . &c . and so the article go on . any reader may fill in without difficulty the concluding indignation and virtuous appeal for reform in social moral as well as parliament . but have so far progress that he have almost come to like this kind of thing . certainly I think that the duel do he no harm in society . otherwise he would hardly have be ask to a semi-political dinner at 's , even though he might have be invite to make one of the five hundred guest who be crowd into she saloon and staircase after the dinner be over . to have be one of the five hundred be nothing ; but to be one of the sixteen be a great deal , -- be indeed so much that , not understand as yet the advantage of he own comeliness , be at a loss to conceive why so pleasant a honour be confer upon he . there be no man among the eight man at the dinner - party not in parliament , -- and the only other except not attach to the government be 's great friend , , the member for . there be four in the room ,-- the , , , and the owner of the mansion . there be also and young , a under - Secretary of . but the wit and grace of the ladie present lent more of character to the party than even the position of the man . herself be a host . there be no woman then in better able to talk to a dozen people on a dozen subject ; and then , moreover , she be still in the flush of she beauty and the bloom of she youth . be there ; -- by what mean divide from she husband Phineas could not imagine ; but be good at such division . have be allow to come with she lord ; -- but , as be well understand , be not so manifestly a husband as be . there be man who can not guard themselves from the assertion of marital rights at most inappropriate moment . now live with he wife most happily ; yet you should pass hour with he and she together , and hardly know that they know each other . one of the 's daughter be there , -- but not the Duchess , who be know to be heavy ; -- and there be the beauteous Marchioness of . be in the room also ,--give a blow at the heart as he see she smile . might it be that he could speak a word to she on this occasion ? have also bring he wife ; -- and then there be . find that it be he fortune to take down to dinner , -- not , but . and , when he be place at dinner , on the other side of he there sit , who address the few word which she speak exclusively to . there have be in former day matter difficult of arrangement between those two ; but I think that those old passage have now be forgote by they both . be , therefore , drive to depend exclusively on for conversation , and he find that he be not call upon to cast he seed into barren ground . up to that moment he have never hear of . , in introduce they , have pronounce the lady 's name so clearly that he have catch it with accuracy , but he could not surmise whence she have come , or why she be there . she be a woman probably something over thirty year of age . she have thick black hair , which she wear in curl ,-- unlike anybody else in the world , -- in curl which hang down low beneath she face , cover , and perhaps intend to cover , a certain thinness in she cheek which would otherwise have take something from the charm of she countenance . she eye be large , of a dark blue colour , and very bright , -- and she use they in a manner which be as yet hardly common with . she seem to intend that you should know that she employ they to conquer you , look as a knight may have look in olden day who enter a chamber with he sword draw from the scabbard and in he hand . she forehead be broad and somewhat low . she nose be not classically beautiful , be broader at the nostril than beauty require , and , moreover , not perfectly straight in its line . she lip be thin . she tooth , which she endeavoure to show as little as possible , be perfect in form and colour . they who criticise she severely say , however , that they be too large . she ching be well form , and divide by a dimple which give to she face a softness of which would otherwise have be much miss . but perhaps she great beauty be in the brilliant clearness of she dark complexion . you might almost fancy that you could see into it so as to read the different line beneath the skin . she be somewhat tall , though by no means tall to a fault , and be so thin as to be almost meagre in she proportion . she always wear she dress close up to she neck , and never show the bareness of she arm . though she be the only woman so clad now present in the room , this singularity do not specially strike one , because in other respects she apparel be
be so rich and quaint as to make inattention to it impossible . the observer who do not observe very closely would perceive that 's dress be unlike the dress of other woman , but see that it be unlike in , unlike in colour , and unlike in material , the ordinary observer would not see also that it be unlike in form for any other purpose than that of maintain its general peculiarity of character . in colour she be abundant , and yet the fabric of she garment be always black . my pen may not dare to describe the tracery of yellow and ruby silk which go in and out through the black lace , across she bosom , and round she neck , and over she shoulders , and along she arm , and down to the very ground at she foot , rob the black stuff of all its sombre solemnity , and produce a brightness in which there be nothing gaudy . she wear no vestige of crinoline , and hardly anything that could be call a train . and the lace sleeve of she dress , with they bright tracery of silk , be fitte close to she arm ; and round she neck she wear the smallest possible collar of lace , above which there be a short chain of gold with a ruby pendant . and she have ruby in she ear , and a ruby brooch , and ruby in the bracelet on she arm . such , as regard the outward woman , be ; and Phineas , as he take he place by she side , think that fortune for the nonce have do well with he ,-- only that he should have like it so much better could he have be seate next to ! I have say that in the matter of conversation he morsel of seed be not throw into barren ground . I do not know that he can truly be say to have produce even a morsel . the subject be all moo by the lady , and so great be she fertility in discoursing that all conversational grass seem to grow with she spontaneously . " , " she say , " what would I not give to be a member of the british parliament at such a moment as this ! " " why at such a moment as this particularly ? " " because there be something to be do , which , let I tell you , senator though you be , be not always the case with you . " " my experience be short , but it sometimes seem to I that there be too much to be do . " " too much of nothingness , . be not that the case ? but now there be a real fight in the list . the one great drawback to the life of woman be that they can not act in politics . " " and which side would you take ? " " what , here in ? " say , -- from which expression , and from one or two other of a similar nature , be lead into a doubt whether the lady be a countrywoman of he or not . " indeed , it be hard to say . politically I should want to out - , to vote for everything that could be vote for , -- ballot , manhood suffrage , womanhood suffrage , unlimited right of striking , tenant right , education of everybody , annual parliament , and the abolition of at least the bench of bishop . " " that be a strong programme , " say . " it be strong , , but that be what I should like . I think , however , that I should be temp to feel a dastard security in the conviction that I might advocate my view without any danger of see they carry out . for , to tell you the truth , I do not at all want to put down lady and gentleman . " " you think that they would go with the bench of bishop ? " " I do not want anything to go , -- that be , as far as real life be concerned . there be that dear good Bishop of be the best friend I have in the world , -- and as for the Bishop of , I would walk from here to there to hear he preach . and I would sooner hem apron for they all myself than that they should want those pretty decoration . but then , , there be such a difference between life and theory ; -- be there not ? " " and it be so comfortable to have theory that one be not bound to carry out , " say . " be not it ? , do you live up to you political theories ? " at this moment be sit perfectly silent between and the 's daughter , and he give a little spring in he chair as this sudden address be make to he . " you of theory , I mean , . be say that it be very well to have far advanced idea , -- it do not matter how far advanced , -- because one be never call upon to act upon they practically . " " that be a dangerous doctrine , I think , " say . " but pleasant , -- so at least say . " " it be at least very common , " say , not care to protect himself by a contradiction . " for myself , " say gravely , " I think I may say that I always be really anxious to carry into practice all those doctrine of policy which I advocate in
in theory . " during this conversation sit as though no word of it reach she ear . she do not understand , and by no means love she . , when he have make he little speech , turn to the 's daughter and ask some question about the conservatory at . " I have call forth a word of wisdom , " say , almost in a whisper . " yes , " say , " and teach a to believe that I be a most unsound politician . you may have ruin my prospects for life , . " " let I hope not . as far as I can understand the way of thing in you government , the aspirant to office succeed chiefly by make themselves uncommonly unpleasant to those who be in power . if a man can hit hard enough he be sure to be take into the elysium of the bench , -- not that he may hit other , but that he may cease to hit those who be there . I do not think man be choose because they be useful . " " you be very severe upon we all . " " indeed , as far as I can see , one man be as useful as another . but to put aside joking , -- they tell I that you be sure to become a minister . " feel that he blush . could it be that people say of he behind he back that he be a man likely to rise high in political position ? " you informant be very kind , " he reply awkwardly , " but I do not know who they be . I shall never get up in the way you describe , -- that be , by abuse the man I support . " after that turn round to , who be sit on the other side of she , and be leave for a moment in silence . he try to say a word to , but only bow she head gracefully in recognition of the truth of the statement he make . so he apply himself for a while to he dinner . " what do you think of ? " say , again address he suddenly . " what do I think about she ? " " you know she , I suppose . " " oh yes , I know she . she be closely connect with the , who be friend of mine . " " so I have hear . they tell I that score of man be rave about she . be you one of they ? " " oh yes ;-- I do not mind be one of sundry scor . there be nothing particular in own to that . " " but you admire she ? " " of course I do , " say . " ah , I see you be joke . I do amazingly . they say woman never do admire woman , but I most sincerely do admire . " " be she a friend of yours ? " " oh no ;-- I must not dare to say so much as that . I be with she last winter for a week at , and of course I meet she about at people 's house . she seem to I to be the most independent girl I ever know in my life . I do believe that nothing would make she marry a man unless she love he and honoure he , and I think it be so very seldom that you can say that of a girl . " " I believe so also , " say . then he pause a moment before he continue to speak . " I can not say that I know very intimately , but from what I have see of she , I should think it very probable that she may not marry at all . " " very probably , " say , who then again turn away to . ten minute after this , when the moment be just at hand in which the lady be to retreat , again address Phineas , look very full into he face as she do so . " I wonder whether the time will ever come , , in which you will give I a account of that day 's journey to ? " " to ! " " yes ; -- to . I be not ask for it now . but I shall look for it some day . " then rise from she seat , and go out with the other . what have Goesler to do with he journey to ? think , as he sit for a while in silence between and ; and why should she , who be a perfect stranger to he , have da to ask he such a question ? but as the conversation round the table , after the lady have go , soon drift into politics and become general , Phineas , for a while , forget and the journey , and listen to the eager word of , now and again utter a word of he own , and show that he , too , be as eager as other . but the session in 's dining - room be not long , and soon find himself make he way amidst a throng of come guest into the room above . he object be to meet , but , fail that , he would not be unwilling to say a few more word to Madame . he first encounter , to whom he have not speak as yet , and , finde himself stand close to she for a while , he ask she after he late neighbour . " do tell I one thing
thing , ;-- who be , and why have I never meet she before ? " " that will be two thing , ; but I will answer both question as well as I can . you have not meet she before , because she be in Germany last spring and summer , and in the year before that you be not about so much as you have be since . still you must have see she , I think . she be the widow of a Austrian banker , and have live the greater part of she life at . she be very rich , and have a small house in , where she receive people so exclusively that it have come to be think a honour to be invite by . she enemy say that she father be a german Jew , live in , in the employment of the Viennese banker , and they say also that she have be marry a second time to a Austrian count , to whom she allow ever so much a year to stay away from she . but of all this , nobody , I fancy , know anything . what they do know be that spend seven or eight thousand a year , and that she will give no man a opportunity of even ask she to marry he . people use to be shy of she , but she go almost everywhere now . " " she have not be at ? " " oh no ; but then be so much more advanced than we be ! after all , we be but humdrum people , as the world go now . " then begin to roam about the room , strive to find a opportunity of engrosse five minute of 's attention . during the time that be give he the history of he eye have wander round , and he have perceive that be stand in the further corner of a large lobby on to which the stair open , -- so situated , indeed , that she could hardly escape , because of the increase crowd , but on that very account almost impossible to be reache . he could see , also , that she be talk to , a unmarried peer of something over thirty year of age , with a unrivalled pair of whisker , a small estate , and a rise political reputation . have be talk to Violet through the whole dinner , and be begin to think that he should like to make another journey to , with the object of meet he lordship on the sand . when have do speak , he eye be turn through a large open doorway towards the spot on which he idol be stand . " it be of no use , my friend , " she say , touch he arm . " I wish I could make you know that it be of no use , because then I think you would be happier . " to this Phinea make no answer , but go and roam about the room . why should it be of no use ? would marry any man merely because he be a lord ? some half - hour after this he have succeed in make he way up to the place in which be still stand , with beside she . " I have be make such a struggle to get to you , " he say . " and now you be here , you will have to stay , for it be impossible to get out , " she answer . " have make the attempt half - a - dozen time , but have fail grievously . " " I have be quite contente , " say ; --" more than content . " feel that he ought to give some special reason to to account for he effort to reach she , but yet he have nothing special to say . have not be there , he would immediately have tell she that he be wait for a answer to the question he have ask she in , but he could hardly do this in presence of the noble under - Secretary of State . she receive he with she pleasant genial smile , look exactly as she have look when he have part from she on the morning after they ride . she do not show any sign of anger , or even of indifference at he approach . but still it be almost necessary that he should account for he search of she . " I have so longed to hear from you how you get on at , " he say . " yes , -- yes ; and I will tell you something of it some day , perhaps . why do you not come to 's ? " " I do not even know that be in town . " " you ought to have know . of course she be in town . where do you suppose I be liive ? be there yesterday , and can tell you that my aunt be quite blooming . " " be bloom , " say ; " certainly bloom ; -- that be , if evergreens may be say to bloom . " " Evergreens do bloom , as well as spring plant , . you come and see she , ; -- only you must bring a little money with you for the 's . that be my aunt 's present hobby , as know to he cost . " " I wish I may never spend half - a - sovereign worse . " " but it be a perilous affair for I , as my aunt want I to go out as a sort of lead unmarried female emigrant pioneer myself . "
" " you do not mean that , " say , with much anxiety . " of course you will go , " say . " I should , if I be you . " " I be in doubt , " say . " it be such a grand prospect , " say he . " such a opening in life . so much excitement , you know ; and such a useful career . " " as if there be not plenty of opening here for , " say , " and plenty of excitement . " " do you think there be ? " say . " you be much more civil than , I must say . " then begin to hope that he need not be afraid of . " what a happy man you be at dinner ! " continue , address herself to Phineas . " I think be the happy man . " " you have all to yourself for nearly two hour , and I suppose there be not a creature in the room who do not envy you . I do not doubt that ever so much interest be make with as to take down to dinner . , I know , intrigue . " " , really I must -- contradict you . " " and begge for it as a particular favour . the , with a sigh , own that it be impossible , because of he cumbrous rank ; and , when it be offer to he , declare that he be fatigue with the business of the , and not up to the occasion . how much do she say to you ; and what do she talk about ? " " the ballot chiefly , -- that , and manhood suffrage . " " ah ! she say something more than that , I be sure . never let any man go without entrance he . if you have anything near you heart , , touch it , I be sure . " now have two thing near he heart ,-- political promotion and , -- and have manage to touch they both . she have ask he respecte he journey to , and have touch he very nearly in reference to . " you know , of course ? " say to . " oh yes , I know the lady ; -- that be , as well as other people do . no one , I take it , know much of she ; and it seem to I that the world be become tired of she . a mystery be good for nothing if it remain always a mystery . " " and it be good for nothing at all when it be find out , " say . " and therefore it be that be a bore , " say . " you do not find she a bore ? " say . then , choose to oppose as well as he could on that matter , as on every other , declare that he have find most delightful . " and beautiful , -- be she not ? " say . " beautiful ! " exclaim . " I think she very beautiful , " say . " so do I , " say . " and she be a dear ally of mine . we be a week together last winter , and swore a undying friendship . she tell I ever so much about . " " but she tell you nothing of she second husband ? " say . " now that you have run into scandal , I shall have do , " say . half a hour after this , when be prepare to fight he way out of the house , he be again close to Madame . he have not find a single moment in which to ask for a answer to he old question , and be retire from the field discomfit , but not dispirit . , he think , be not a serious obstacle in he way . have tell he that there be no hope for he ; but then 's mind on that subject be , he think , prejudice . certainly know what be he wish , and know they , smile on he and be gracious to he . would she do so if he pretension be thoroughly objectionable to she ? " I see that you be successful this evening , " say to he . " I be not aware of any success . " " I call it great success to be able to make you way where you will through such a crowd as there be here . you seem to I to be so stout a cavalier that I shall ask you to find my servant , and bid he get my carriage . will you mind ? " , of course , declare that he would be delighted . " he be a german , and not in livery . but if somebody will call out , he will hear . he be very sharp , and much more attentive than you English footman . a hardly ever make a good servant . " " be that a compliment to we Britons ? " " no , certainly not . if a man be a servant , he should be clever enough to be a good one . " Phineas have now give the order for the carriage , and , have return , be stand with in the cloak - room . " after all , we be surely the most awkward people in the world , " she say . " you know , who be talk to just now . you should have hear he try to pay I a compliment before dinner . it be like
like a donkey walk a minuet , and yet they say he be a clever man and can make speeches . " could it be possible that 's ears be so sharp that she have hear the thing which have say of she ? " he be a well - inform man , " say . " for a lord , you mean , " say . " but he be a oaf , be he not ? and yet they say he be to marry that girl . " " I do not think he will , " say , stoutly . " I hope not , with all my heart ; and I hope that somebody else may ,--unless somebody else should change he mind . thank you ; I be so much oblige to you . mind you come and call on I , -- 193 , . I dare say you know the little cottage . " then he put into she carriage , and walk away to he club . do not send a to 's house in be very stately ,-- a large house with five front window in a row , and a big door , and a huge square hall , and a fat porter in a round - top chair ; -- but it be dingy and dull , and could not have be paint for the last ten year , or furnish for the last twenty . nevertheless , have " evening , " and people go to they , -- though not such a crowd of people as would go to the evening of . now have not be ask to the evening of for the present season , and the reason be after this wise . " yes , , " have say to she daughter , who , early in the spring , be prepare the card . " you may send one to , certainly . " " I do not know that he be very nice , " say , whose eye at have be sharper perhaps than she mother 's , and who have she suspicions . but do not like interference from she daughter . " , certainly , " she continue . " they tell I that he be a very rising young man , and he sit for 's borough . of course he be a radical , but we can not help that . all the rise young man be radicals now . I think he very civil at . " " but , mamma -- " " well ! " " do not you think that he be a little free with ? " " what on earth do you mean , ? " " have you not fancie that he be -- fond of she ? " " good gracious , no ! " " I think he be . and I have sometimes fancie that she be fond of he , too . " " I do not believe a word of it , , -- not a word . I should have see it if it be so . I be very sharp in see such thing . they never escape I . even Violet would not be such a fool as that . send he a card , and if he come I shall soon see . " quite understand she mother , though she could never master she , -- and the card be prepare . could never master she mother by she own effort ; but it be , I think , by a little intrigue on she part that be master , and , indeed , altogether cow , in reference to we hero , and that this victory be gain on that very afternoon in time to prevent the sending of the card . when the mother and daughter be at tea , before dinner , come into the room , and , after have be pat and pet and praise by he mother , he take up all the card out of a china bowl and run he eye over they . " ! " he say , " the greatest ass in all ! ! you know she will not come . " " I do not see why she should not come , " say ; --" a mere country clergyman 's daughter ! " " ;-- a great friend of mine , and therefore he always blackball my other friend at the club . ; I think you be at dagger draw with . " " they say he be go to be reconcile to he father , , and I do it for 's sake . and he will not come , so it do not signify . and I do believe that have really refuse he . " " you be quite right about he not come , " say , continue to read the card ; " Chiltern certainly will not come . ;-- I wonder what you know about Sparrowsky that you should ask he here . " " he be ask about , ; he be indeed , " plead . " I believe that be a penniless adventurer . ; well , he be a . Greesw ; you mix you people nicly at any rate . be the most old - fashioned in . " " of course we be not political , . " " . they come alternately , -- one and one . " be ask everywhere , . " " I do not doubt it . they say he be a very good sort of fellow . they say also that have find that out as well as other people . " " what do you mean , ? " " I mean that everybody be say that this be go to set himself up in the
the world by marry you niece . he be quite right to try it on , if he have a chance . " " I do not think he would be right at all , " say , with much energy . " I think he would be wrong ,-- shamefully wrong . they say he be the son of a irish doctor , and that he have not a shilling in the world . " " that be just why he would be right . what be such a man to do , but to marry money ? he be a deuce good - look fellow , too , and will be sure to do it . " " he should work for he money in the city , then , or somewhere there . but I do not believe it , ; I do not , indeed . " " very well . I only tell you what I hear . the fact be that he and have already quarrell about she . if I be to tell you that they have be over to together and fight a duel about she , you would not believe that . " " fight a duel about ! people do not fight duel now , and I should not believe it . " " very well . then send you card to . " and , so say , leave the room . sit in silence for some time toast she toe at the fire , and sit by , wait for order . she feel pretty nearly sure that new order would be give if she do not herself interfere . " you have better put by that card for the present , my dear , " say at last . " I will make inquiry . I do not believe a word of what have say . I do not think that even be such a fool as that . but if rash and ill - natured people have speak of it , it may be as well to be careful . " " it be always well to be careful ; -- be it not , mamma ? " " not but what I think it very improper that these thing should be say about a young woman ; and as for the story of the duel , I do not believe a word of it . it be absurd . I dare say that invent it at the moment , just to amuse himself . " the card of course be not send , and at any rate put so much faith in she son 's story as to make she feel it to be she duty to interrogate she niece on the subject . lady Baldock at this period of she life be certainly not free from fear of . in the numerous encounter which take place between they , the aunt seldom gain that amount of victory which would have completely satisfi she spirit . she longe to be dominant over she niece as she be dominant over she daughter ; and when she find that she miss such supremacy , she longe to tell to depart from out she border , and be no longer niece of hers . but have she ever do so , would have go at the instant , and then terrible thing would have follow . there be a satisfaction in turn out of door a nephew or niece who be pecuniarily dependent , but when the youthful relative be richly endow , the satisfaction be much diminished . it be the duty of a guardian , no doubt , to look after the ward ; but if this can not be do , the ward 's money should at least be hold with as close a fist as possible . but , though she know that she would be sorely wounded , pok about on she old body with the sharp lance of disobedience , and strike with the cruel sword of satire , if she take upon herself to scold or even to question , nevertheless would not abandon the pleasure of lecturing and teaching . " it be my duty , " she would say to herself , " and though it be take in a bad spirit , I will always perform my duty . " so she perform she duty , and ask some few question respect . " my dear , " she say , " do you remember meet a at ? " " a , aunt ! why , he be a particular friend of mine . of course I do , and he be at . I have meet he there more than once . do not you remember that we be ride about together ? " " I remember that he be there , certainly ; but I do not know that he be a special -- friend . " " most especial , aunt . a 1 , I may say ;--among young man , I mean . " be certainly the most indiscreet of old woman in such a matter as this , and Violet the most provoking of young lady . lady Baldock , believe that there be something to fear , -- as , indeed , there be , much to fear ,-- should have be content to destroy the card , and to keep the young lady away from the young gentleman , if such keeping away be possible to she . but be certainly very wrong to speak of any young man as be a 1 . fond as I be of , I can not justify she , and must acknowledge that she use the most offensive phrase she could find , on purpose to annoy she aunt . " , " say , bridl up , " I never hear such
such a word before from the lip of a young lady . " " not as a 1 ? I think it simply mean very good . " " a 1 be a nobleman , " say . " no , aunt ;-- a 1 be a ship ,-- a ship that be very good , " say . " and do you mean to say that be ,-- be ,-- be ,-- very good ? " " yes , indeed . you ask , and . you know he save poor from be throttle in the street . " " that have nothing to do with it . a policeman might have do that . " " then he would have be a 1 of policeman ,-- though a 1 do not mean a policeman . " " he would have do he duty , and so perhaps do . " " of course he do , aunt . it could not have be he duty to stand by and see throttle . and he nearly kill one of the man , and take the other prisoner with he own hand . and he make a beautiful speech the other day . I read every word of it . I be so glad he be a . I do like young man to be liberals . " now be a Tory , as have be all the , -- since the first who have be buy over from the in the time of iii at the cost of a barony . " you have nothing to do with politics , . " " why should not I have something to do with politics , aunt ? " " and I must tell you that you name be be very unpleasantly mention in connection with that of this young man because of you indiscretion . " " what indiscretion ? " Violet , as she make she demand for a more direct accusation , stand quite upright before she aunt , look the old woman full in the face ,-- almost with she arm akimbo . " call he a 1 , . " " people have be talk about I and , because I just now , at this very moment , call he a 1 to you ! if you want to scold I about anything , aunt , do find out something less ridiculous than that . " " it be most improper language , -- and if you use it to I , I be sure you would to other . " " to what other ? " " to , -- and those sort of people . " " call a 1 to he face ! well , -- upon my honour I do not know why I should not . say he ride beautifully , and if we be talk about riding I might do so . " " you have no business to talk to about at all . " " have I not ? I think that perhaps the one sin might palliate the other . you know , aunt , no young lady , let she be ever so ill - dispose , can marry two objectionable young man , -- at the same time . " " I say nothing about you marrying . " " then , aunt , what do you mean ? " " I mean that you should not allow yourself to be talk of with a adventurer , a young man without a shilling , a person who have come from nobody know where in the bog of . " " but you use to ask he here . " " yes , -- as long as he know he place . but I shall not do so again . and I must beg you to be circumspect . " " my dear aunt , we may as well understand each other . I will not be circumspect , as you call it . and if ask I to marry he to - morrow , and if I like he well enough , I would take he ,-- even though he have be dug right out of a bog . not only because I like he ,-- mind ! if I be unfortunate enough to like a man who be nothing , I would refuse he in spite of my liking , -- because he be nothing . but this young man be not nothing . be a fine fellow , and if there be no other reason to prevent my marry he than he be the son of a doctor , and come out of the bog , that would not do so . now I have make a clean breast to you as regard ; and if you do not like what I have say , aunt , you must acknowledge that you have bring it on yourself . " be leave for a time speechless . but no card be send to . get no card from , but one morning he receive a note from which be of more importance to he than any card could have be . at this time , bit by bit , the of the day have nearly make its way through the committee , but have be so mutilated as to be almost impossible of recognition by its progenitor . and there be still a clause or two as to the rearrangement of seat , respecte which it be know that there would be a combat , -- probably combat , -- carry on after the internecine fashion . there be a certain clipping of county to be do , as to which it be say that have declare that he would not yield till he be make to do so by the brute force of majority ; -- and there be another clause for the
the drafting of certain superfluous member from little borough , and bestow they on populious town at which they be much want , respecte which have proclaim that the clause as it now stand be a faineant clause , capable of do , and intend to do , no good in the proper direction ; a clause put into the bill to gull ignorant folk who have not eye enough to recognise the fact that it be faineant ; a make - believe clause , -- so say , -- to be detest on that account by every true reformer worse than the old bond and Tory figment of representation , as to which there be at least no hypocritical pretence of popular fitness . have be very loud and very angry , -- have talk much of demonstration among the people , and have almost threaten the House . the House in its present mood do not fear any demonstration , -- but it do fear that might help , and that might help . it be now , -- the middle of , -- and minister , who have be at work on they Reform ever since the beginning of the session , be become weary of it . and then , should these odious clause escape the threaten - alliance , -- then there be the house of Lords ! " what a pity we can not pass we bill at the Treasury , and have do with they ! " say . " yes , indeed , " reply . " for myself , I be never so tired of a session in my life . I would not go through it again to be make , -- no , not to be make of the . " 's note to be as follow :-- House of , , 186 --. my , you be no doubt aware that 's death have take into the , and that as he be under - Secretary for the Colony , and as the under - Secretary must be in the , the vacancy must be fill up . the heart of at this moment be almost in he mouth . not only to be select for political employment , but to be select at once for a office so singularly desirable ! Under- secretaries , he fancie , be pay two thousand a year . what would say now ? but he great triumph soon receive a check . " have speak to I on the subject , " continue the letter , " and inform I that he have offer the place at the colony to he old supporter , . " ! I be inclin to think that he could not have do better , as have show great zeal for he party . this will vacate the irish seat at the board , and I be commission by to offer it to you . perhaps you will do I the pleasure of call on I to - morrow between the hour of eleven and twelve . yours very sincerely , . be himself surprised to find that he first feel on read this letter be one of dissatisfaction . here be he golden hope about to be realise , -- hope as to the realisation of which he have be quite despondent twelve month ago , -- and yet he be uncomfortable because he be to be postpone to . have the new under - Secretary be a man whom he have not know , whom he have not learn to look down upon as inferior to himself , he would not have mind it ,-- would have be full of joy at the promotion propose for himself . but be such a poor creature , that the idea of fill a place from which have risen be distasteful to he . " it seem to be all a matter of favour and convenience , " he say to himself , " without any reference to the service . " he triumph would have be so complete have allow he to go into the higher place at one leap . other man who have make themselves useful have do so . in the first hour after receive 's letter , the idea of become a of the be almost displease to he . he have a idea that junior lordship of the Treasury be generally bestow on young member whom it be convenient to secure , but who be not good at do anything . there be a moment in which he think that he would refuse to be make a junior lord . but during the night cooler reflection tell he that he have be very wrong . he have take up politics with the express desire of get he foot upon a rung of the ladder of promotion , and now , in he third session , he be about to be successful . even as a junior lord he would have a thousand a year ; and how long might he have sit in chamber , and have wander about 's , and have loiter in the court strive to look as though he have business , before he would have earn a thousand a year ! even as a junior lord he could make himself useful , and when once he should be know to be a good working man , promotion would come to he . no ladder can be mount without labour ; but this ladder be now open above he head , and he already have he foot upon it . at half - past eleven he be with , who receive he with the blandest smile and a pressure of the hand which be quite cordial . " my dear , " he say , " this give I the most sincere pleasure , -- the greatest pleasure
pleasure in the world . we connection together at of course make it doubly agreeable to I . " " I can not be too grateful to you , . " " no , no ; no , no . it be all you own do . when ask I whether I do not think you the most promising of the young member on we side in you house , I certainly do say that I quite concur . but I should be take too much on myself , I should be ac dishonestly , if I be to allow you to imagine that it be my proposition . have he ask I to recommend , I should have name you ; that I say frankly . but he do not . he do not . name you himself . ' do you think ,' he say , ' that you friend would join we at the Treasury ? ' I tell he that I do think so . ' and do you not think , ' say he , ' that it would be a useful appointment ? ' then I venture to say that I have no doubt whatever on that point ; -- that I know you well enough to feel confident that you would lend a strength to the . then there be a few word say about you seat , and I be commission to write to you . that be all . " be grateful , but not too grateful , and bear himself very well in the interview . he explain to that of course it be he object to serve the country , -- and to be pay for he service , -- and that he consider himself to be very fortunate to be select so early in he career for parliamentary place . he would endeaavor to do he duty , and could safely say of himself that he do not wish to eat the bread of idleness . as he make this assertion , he think of . have eat the bread of idleness , and yet he be promote . but say nothing to about he idle friend . when he have make he little speech he ask a question about the borough . " I have already venture to write a letter to my agent at , tell he that you have accept office , and that you will be shortly there again . he will see and arrange it . but if I be you I should write to and to ,-- after I have see . of course you will not mention my name , " and the look very grave as he utter this caution . " of course I will not , " say . " I do not think you will find any difficulty about the seat , " say the peer . " there never have be any difficulty at yet . I must say that for they . and if we can scrape through with clause 72 we shall be all right ; -- shall we not ? " this be the clause as to which so violend a opposition be expect from , -- a clause as to which himself have feel that he would hardly know how to support the government , in the event of the committee be press to a division upon it . could he , a ardent reformer , a reformer at heart , -- could he say that such a borough as should be spare ; -- that the arrangement by which and have send he to parliament , in obedience to 's order , be in due accord with the theory of a representative legislature ? in what respect have and be worse than ? be he not himself false to he principle in sitting for such a borough as ? he have speak to , and have tell he that be not build in a day , -- and have tell he also that good thing be most value and be more valuable when they come by instalment . but then himself enjoy the satisfaction of sit for a popular Constituency . he be not personally prick in the conscience by he own parliamentary position . now , however , -- now that have consent to join the government , any such consideration as these must be laid aside . he could no longer be a free agent , or even a free thinker . he have be quite aware of this , and have teach himself to understand that member of parliament in the direct service of the government be absolve from the necessity of free - thinking . individual free - thinking be incompatible with the position of a member of the government , and unless such abnegation be practise , no government would be possible . it be of course a man 's duty to bind himself together with no other man but those with whom , on matter of general policy , he could agree heartily ; -- but have find that he could so agree , he know that it would be he duty as a subaltern to vote as he be direct . it would trouble he conscience less to sit for and vote for a objectionable clause as a member of the government , than it would have do to give such a vote as a independent member . in so resolve , he think that he be simply act in accordance with the acknowledge rule of parliamentary government . and therefore , when spoke of 72 , he could answer pleasantly , " I think we shall carry it ; and , you see , in get it through committee , if we can carry it by one , that be as good as a hundred . that be the comfort of close - fight
fight in committee . in the open House we be almost as much beat by a narrow majority as by a vote against we . " " just so ; just so , " say , delighte to see that he young pupil , -- as he regard he ,-- understood so well the system of parliamentary management . " by - the - bye , , have you see lately ? " " not quite lately , " say , blush up to he eye . " or hear from he ? " " no ; -- nor hear from he . when last I hear of he he be in Brussels . " " ah , -- yes ; he be somewhere on the now . I think that as you be so intimate , perhaps you correspond with he . have you hear that we have arrange about 's money ? " " I have hear . have tell I . " " I wish he would return , " say sadly ,-- almost solemnly . " as that great difficulty be over , I would receive he willingly , and make my house pleasant to he , if I can do so . I be most anxious that he should settle , and marry . could you not write to he ? " Phineas , not da to tell that he have quarrell with , -- feel that if he do so everything would go wrong ,-- say that he would write to . as he go away he feel that he be bound to get a answer from . if it should be necessary , he be willing to break with on that matter ,-- even though such breaking should lose he he borough and he place ; -- but not on any other matter . and we hero 's friend be , I think , almost more elated by we hero 's promotion than be we hero himself . he never tell himself that it be a great thing to be a junior lord of the Treasury , though he acknowledge to himself that to have make a successful beginning be a very great thing . but he friend be loud in they congratulation , -- or condolement as the case might be . he have he interview with , and , after that , one of he first step be to inform Bunce that he must change he lodging . " the truth be , , not that I want anything better ; but that a better position will be advantageous to I , and that I can afford to pay for it . " acknowledge the truth of the argument , with she apron up to she eye . " I have get to be so fond of look after you , ! I have indeed , " say . " it be not just what you pay like , because another party will pay as much . but we have get so used to you , , -- have not we ? " be probably not aware herself that the comeliness of she lodger have please she feminine eye , and touch she feminine heart . have anybody say that . be in love with , the scandal would have be monstrous . and yet it be so , -- after a fashion . and know it , -- after he fashion . " do not be such a old fool , " he say , " cry after he because he be six foot high . " " I be not cry after he because he be six foot high , " whin the poor woman ; --" but one do like old face better than new , and a gentleman about one 's place be pleasant . " " be d ---- , " say . but he anger be excited , not by he wife 's love for , but by the use of a objectionable word . Bunce himself have be on very friendly term with , and they twill have have many discussion on matter of politics , Bunce take up the cudgel always for , and generally slipp away gradually into some account of he own martyrdom . for he have be a martyr , have fail in obtain any redress against the policeman who have imprison he so wrongfully . the _People 's banner_ have fight for he manfully , and therefore there be a little disagreement between he and on the subject of that great organ of public opinion . and as think that he lodger be very wrong to sit for 's borough , subject be sometimes touch which be a little galling to . touch this promotion , have nothing but condolement to offer to the new junior lord . " oh yes , " say he , in answer to a argument from , " I suppose there must be lord , as you call th'ey ; though for the matter of that I can not see as they be of any mortal use . " " would not you have the government carry on ? " " government ! well ; I suppose there must be government . but the less of it the better . I be not against government ; -- nor yet against law , ; though the less of they , too , the better . but what do these lord do in the government ? Lords indeed ! I will tell you what they do , . they wote ; that be what they do ! they wote hard ; black or white , white or black . be not that true ? when you be a ' lord , ' will you be able to wote against to save you very soul ? " " if it come to be a question of soul
soul - save , , I sha not save my place at the expense of my conscience . " " not if you know it , you mean . but the worst of it be that a man get so thick into the mud that he do not know whether he be dirty or clean . you will have to wote as you be tell , and of course you will think it be right enough . be not you be among parliament gent long enough to know that that be the way it go ? " " you think no honest man can be a member of the government ? " " I do not say that , but I think honesty 's a deal easier away from th'ey . the fact be , , it be all wrong with we yet , and will be till we get it nigher to the great american model . if a poor man get into parliament , -- you will excuse I , , but I call you a poor man . " " certainly , -- as a member of parliament I be a very poor man . " " just so , -- and therefore what do you do ? you go and lay yourself out for government ! I be not say as how you be anyways wrong . a man have to live . you have win way , and a good physiognomy of you own , and be as big as a life - guardsman . " Phineas as he hear this doubtful praise laugh and blush . " very well ; you make you way with the big wig , lord and earl and they like , and you get return for a rotten borough ; -- you will excuse I , but that be about it , be not it ?-- and then you go in for government ! a man may have a mission to govern , such as and and the like of ' they . but when I hear of a - governing , why then I say ,--d --- - and it all . " " there must be good and bad you know . " " we have get to change a deal yet , , and we will do it . when a young man as have liberal feeling get into parliament , he should not be snap up and bring into the governing business just because he be poor and want 's a salary . they do not do it that way in the ; and they will not do it that way here long . it be the system as I hate , and not you , . well , good - bye , sir . I hope you will like the govern business , and find it suit you health . " these condolement from be not pleasant , but they set he think . he feel assure that and and be wrong . be ignorant . be dishonest . be greedy of popularity . for himself , he think that as a young man he be fairly well inform . he know that he mean to be true in he vocation . and he be quite sure that the object nearest to he heart in politics be not self - aggrandisement , but the welfare of the people in general . and yet he could not but agree with Bunce that there be something wrong . when such man as be call upon to act as governors , be it not to be expect that the ignorant but still intelligent Bunce of the population should -- " --- - and it all " ? on the evening of that day he go up to . 's , very sure that he should receive some encouragement from she and from she husband . she have be angry with he because he have put himself into a position in which money must be spend and none could be make . the low , especially . , have refuse to believe that any success be within he reach . now that he have succeed , now that he be in receipt of a salary on which he could live and save money , he would be sure of sympathy from he old friend the low ! but . be as severe upon he as have be , and even from he could extract no real comfort . " of course I congratulate you , " say coldly . " and you , ? " " well , you know , , I think you have begin at the wrong end . I think so before , and I think so still . I suppose I ought not to say so to a of the Treasury , but if you ask I , what can I do ? " " speak the truth out , of course . " " exactly . that be what I must do . well , the truth be , , that I do not think it be a very good opening for a young man to be make what they call a of the Treasury ,-- unless he have get a private fortune , you know , to support that kind of life . " " you see , , a ministry be such a uncertain thing , " say . " of course it be uncertain ; -- but as I do go into the , it be something to have succeed . " " if you call that success , " say . " you do intend to go on with you profession , " say . he could not tell they that he have change he mind , and that he mean to marry , who would much prefer a parliamentary life for she husband to that of a work
work barrister . " I suppose that be all give up now , " continue . " just for the present , " say . " yes ; -- and for ever I fear , " say , " you will never go back to real work after frittering away you time as a of the Treasury . what sort of work must it be when just anybody can do it that it suit they to lay hold of ? but of course a thousand a year be something , though a man may have it for only six month . " it come out in the course of the evening that be go to stand for the borough vacate by , at which it be consider that the might possibly prevail . " you see , after all , , " say low , " that I be follow you step . " " ah ; you be go into the house in the course of you profession . " " just so , " say . " and be take the first step towards be a - . " " that be as may be , " say . " but it be the kind of the a man do after twenty year of hard work . for myself , I really do not care much whether I succeed or fail . I should like to live to be a Vice - . I do not mind say as much as that to you . but I be not at all sure that parliament be the best way to the . " " but it be a grand thing to get into parliament when you do it by means of you profession , " say . after that take he departure from the house , feel sore and unhappy . but on the next morning he be receive in place with a amount of triumph which go far to compensate he . have write to he to call there , and on he arrival he find both and Goesler with he friend . when Phineas enter the room he first feeling be one of intense joy at see that be present there . then there be one of surprise that Madame Goesler should make one of the little party . have tell he at 's dinner - party that they , in , have not as yet advanc far enough to receive , -- and yet here be the lady in 's drawing - room . now Phineas would have think it more likely that he should find she in than in . the truth be that have be bring by , -- with the consent , indeed , of , but with a consent give with much of hesitation . " what be you afraid of ? " Violet have ask . " I be afraid of nothing , " have answer ; " but one have to choose one 's acquaintance in accordance with rule which one do not lay down very strictly . " " she be a clever woman , " say , " and everybody like she ; but if you think would object , of course you be right . " then have consent , tell herself that it be not necessary that she should ask she husband 's approval as to every new acquaintance she might form . at the same time have be tell that would be there , and so the party have be make up . " ' see the conquering hero come , ' say in she cheeriest voice . " I be so glad that have be make a lord of something , " say . " I have the pleasure of a long political discussion with he the other night , and I quite approve of he . " " we be so much gratified , , " say . " say that it be the best appointment they could have make , and papa be quite proud about it . " " you be 's member ; be you not ? " ask . this be a question which do not quite like , and which he be oblige to excuse by remember that the questioner have live so long out of as to be probably ignorant of the myths , and theories , and system , and work of the british constitution . , little as she know of politics , would never have ask a question so imprudent . but the question be turn off , and , with a easy grace , submit himself to be pet , and congratulate , and purr over , and almost caress by the three lady , they good - natured enthusiasm be at any rate better than the satire of , or the wisdom of . have no misgiving as to be fit for governing , and say nothing as to the short - liv tenure of ministers . , though she have ask a indiscreet question , thoroughly appreciate the advantage of government pay , and the prestige of government power . " you be a lord now , " she say , speak , as be customary with she , with the slightest possible foreign accent , " and you will be a president soon , and then perhaps a secretary . the order of promotion seem odd , but I be tell it be very pleasant . " " it be pleasant to succeed , of course , " say , " let the success be ever so little . " " we know you would succeed , " say . " we be quite sure of it . be we not , ? " " you always say so , my dear . for myself I do not venture to have a opinion on such matters . will you always have
have to go to that big building in the corner , , and stay there from ten till four ? will not that be a bore ? " " we have a half - holiday on , you know , " say . " and do the Lord of the Treasury have to take care of the money ? " ask . " only they own ; and they generally fail in do that , " say . he sit there for a considerable time , wonder whether would come in , and wonder also as to what would say to Madame when he do come in . he know that it be useless for he to expect any opportunity , then or there , of be alone for a moment with . he only chance in that direction would be in some crowded room , at some ball at which he might ask she to dance with he ; but it seem that fate be very unkind to he , and that no such chance come in he way . do not appear , and Goesler with go away , leave Phineas still sit with . each of they say a kind word to he as they go . " I do not know whether I may dare to expect that a of the Treasury will come and see I ? " say . then Phineas make a second promise that he would call in . blush as she remember that she could not ask he to call at 's . " good - bye , , " she say , give he she hand . " I be so very glad that they have choose you ; and I do hope that , as say , they will make you a secretary and a president , and everything else very quickly , -- till it will come to you turn to be make other people . " " he be very nice , " say to Violet as she take she place in the carriage . " he bear be pett and spoil without be either awkward or conceit . " " on the whole , he be rather nice , " say ; " only he have not get a shilling in the world , and have to make himself before he will be anybody . " " he must marry money , of course , " say . " I hope you be contente ? " say , rise from she chair and come opposite to he as soon as they be alone . " of course I be contente . " " I be not ,-- when I first hear of it . why do they promote that empty - head countryman of yours to a place for which he be quite unfit ? I be not contente . but then I be more ambitious for you than you be for yourself . " he sit without answer she for awhile , and she stand wait for he reply . " have you nothing to say to I ? " she ask . " I do not know what to say . when I think of it all , I be lose in amazement . you tell I that you be not contente ; -- that you be ambitious for I . why be it that you should feel any interest in the matter ? " " be it not reasonable that we should be interested for we friend ? " " but when you and I last part here in this room you be hardly my friend . " " be I not ? you wrong I there ; -- very deeply . " " I tell you what be my ambition , and you resent it , " say . " I think I say that I could not help you , and I think I say also that I think you would fail . I do not know that I show much resentment . you see , I tell she that you be here , that she might come and meet you . you know that I wish my brother should succeed . I wish it before I ever know you . you can not expect that I should change my wish . " " but if he can not succeed , " plead Phineas . " who be to say that ? have a woman never be win by devotion and perseverance ? besides , how can I wish to see you go on with a suit which must sever you from my father , and injure you political prospect ;-- perhaps fatally injure they ? it seem to I now that my father be almost the only man in who have not hear of this duel . " " of course he will hear of it . I have half make up my mind to tell he myself . " " do not do that , . there can be no reason for it . but I do not ask you to come here to - day to talk to you about or . I have give you my advice about that , and I can do no more . " " , I can not take it . it be out of my power to take it . " " very well . the matter shall be what you member of parliament call a open question between we . when papa ask you to accept this place at the Treasury , do it ever occur to you to refuse it ? " " it do ; -- for half a hour or so . " " I hope you would , -- and yet I know that I be wrong . I think that you should count yourself to be worth more than that , and that you should ,
, as it be , asser yourself . but then it be so difficult to draw the line between proper self - assertion and proper self - denial ; -- to know how high to go up the table , and how low to go down . I do not doubt that you have be right , -- only make they understand that you be not as other junior lord ; -- that you have be willing to be a junior lord , or anything else for a purpose ; but that the purpose be something higher than that of fetching and carry in parliament for and . " " I hope in time to get beyond fetching and carry , " say . " of course you will ; and know that , I be glad that you be in office . I suppose there will be no difficulty about . " then Phineas laugh . " I hear , " say he , " that , of the 's , have already go down to canvass the elector . " " ! to canvass the elector of ! " and draw herself up and spoke of this unseemly intrusion on she father 's borough , as though the vulgar man who have be name have force he way into the very drawing - room in . at that moment come in . " do you hear what tell I ? " she say . " he have hear that have go down to to stand against he . " " and why not ? " say . " my dear ! " ejaculate . " will no doubt lose he time and he money ; -- but he will gain the prestige of have stood for a borough , which will be something for he on the staff of the 's , " say . " he will get that horrid man to propose he , " say . " very likely , " say . " and the less any of we say about it the better . , my dear fellow , I congratulate you heartily . nothing for a long time have give I greater pleasure than hearing of you appointment . it be equally honourable to yourself and to . it be a great step to have gain so early . " Phinea , as he thank he friend , could not help ask himself what he friend have do to be make a . little as he , , himself have do in the in he two session and a half , have hardly do more in he fifteen or twenty . but then be possess of almost miraculous wealth , and own half a county , whereas he , , own almost nothing at all . of course no would offer a junior lordship at the Treasury to a man with L30,000 a year . after this take he leave . " I think he will do well , " say to he wife . " I be sure he will do well , " reply , almost scornfully . " he be not quite such a black swan with I as he be with you ; but still I think he will succeed , if he take care of himself . it be astonish how that absurd story of he duel with have get about . " " it be impossible to prevent people talk , " say . " I suppose there be some quarrel , though neither of they will tell you . they say it be about . I should hardly think that could have any hope in that direction . " " why should he not have hope ? " " because he have neither position , nor money , nor birth , " say . " he be a gentleman . " say ; " and I think he have position . I do not see why he should not ask any girl to marry he . " " there be no understanding you , , " say , angrily . " I think you have quite other hope about . " " so I have ; but that have nothing to do with it . you spoke of as though he would be guilty of some crime be he to ask to be he wife . in that I disagree with you . be -- " " you will make I sick of the name of . " " I be sorry that I offend you by my gratitude to a man who save you life . " shook he head . he know that the argument use against he be false , but he do not know how to show that he know that it be false . " perhaps I have better not mention he name any more , " continue . " Nonsense ! " " I quite agree with you that it be nonsense , . " " all I mean to say be , that if you go on as you do , you will turn he head and spoil he . do you think I do not know what be go on among you ? " " and what be go on among we , -- as you call it ? " " you be take this young man up and put he on a pedestal and worship he , just because he be well - look , and rather clever and decently behave . it be always the way with woman who have nothing to do , and who can not be make to understand that they should have duty . they can not live without some kind of idolatry . " " have I neglect my duty to you , ? " " yes , -- you know you have ; -- in go to those reception at
at you father 's house on . " " what have that to do with ? " " ! " " I begin to think I have better tell not to come here any more , since he presence be disagreeable to you . all the world know how great be the service he do you , and it will seem to be very ridiculous . people will say all manner of thing ; but anything will be better than that you should go on as you have do , -- accuse you wife of idolatry toward -- a young man , because -- he be -- well - look . " " I never say anything of the kind . " " you do , . " " I do not . I do not speak more of you than of a lot of other . " " you accuse I personally , say that because of my idolatry I have neglect my duty ; but really you make such a jumble of it all , with papa 's visitor , and afternoon , that I can not follow what be in you mind . " then stand for awhile , collect he thought , so that he might unravel the jumble , if that be possible to he ; but find that it be not possible , he leave the room , and close the door behind he . then be leave alone to consider the nature of the accusation which she husband have bring against she ; or the nature rather of the accusation which she have choose to assert that she husband have imply . for in she heart she know that he have make no such accusation , and have intend to make none such . the idolatry of which he have speak be the idolatry which a woman might show to she cat , she dog , she picture , she china , she furniture , she carriage and horse , or she pet maid - servant . such be the idolatry of which have speak ; -- but be there no other worship in she heart , worse , more pernicious than that , in reference to this young man ? she have school herself about he very severely , and have come to various resolution . she have find out and confess to herself that she do not , and could not , love she husband . she have find out and confess to herself that she do love , and could not help love , . then she have resolve to banish he from she presence , and have go the length of tell he so . after that she have perceive that she have be wrong , and have determined to meet he as she meet other man , -- and to conquer she love . then , when this could not be do , when something almost like idolatry grow upon she , she determine that it should be the idolatry of friendship , that she would not sin even in thought , that there should be nothing in she heart of which she need be asham ; -- but that the one great object and purport of she life should be the promotion of this friend 's welfare . she have just begin to love after this fashion , have teach herself to believe that she might combine something of the pleasure of idolatry towards she friend with a full complement of duty towards she husband , when come to she with he tale of love for . the lesson which she get then be a very rough one , -- so hard that at first she could not bear it . she anger at he love for she brother 's wish - for bride be lose in she dismay that should love any one after have once love she . but by sheer force of mind she have conquer that dismay , that feeling of desolation at she heart , and have almost teach herself to hope that might succeed with . he wish it , -- and why should he not have what he wish , -- he , whom she so fondly idolise ? it be not he fault that he and she be not man and wife . she have choose to arrange it otherwise , and be she not bound to assist he now in the present object of he reasonable wish ? she have get over in she heart that difficulty about she brother , but she could not quite conquer the other difficulty . she could not bring herself to plead he cause with . she have not bring herself as yet to do it . and now she be accuse of idolatry for Phineas by she husband , -- she with " a lot of other , " in which lot be of course include . would it not be better that they two should be bring together ? would not she friend 's husband still be she friend ? would she not then forget to love he ? would she not then be safer than she be now ? as she sit alone struggling with she difficulty , she have not as yet forget to love he , -- nor be she as yet safe . 's one morning early in call at 's house and ask for . the servant be show she into the large drawing - room , when she again ask specially for . " I think be there , " say the man , open the door . be not there . be sit all alone , and perceive that she have be catch in the net which she specially wish to avoid . now have not actually or openly quarrell with or with , but she have conceive a strong idea that she niece
niece be countenance in all impropriety by the family generally , and that therefore the family be to be regard as a family of enemy . there be doubtless in she mind considerable confusion on the subject , for she do not know whether or be the suitor whom she must fear , -- and she be aware , after a sort of muddled fashion , that the claim of these two wicked young man be antagonistic to each other . but they be both regard by she as emanation from the same source of iniquity , and , therefore , without go deeply into the machination of ,-- without resolve whether be injure she by press she brother as a suitor upon , or by press a rival of she brother ,--still she become aware that it be she duty to turn a cold shoulder on those two house in and . but she difficulty in do this be very great , and it may be say that be place in a unjust and cruel position . before the end of she have propose to leave , and to take she daughter and Violet down to , -- or to , if they preferre it , or to . " in ! " Violet have exclaim . " would not a month among the glacier be delightful ! " have say . " do not let I keep you in town , aunt , " Violet reply ; " but I do not think I shall go till other people go . I can have a room at 's house . " then , whose position be hard and cruel , resolve that she would stay in town . here she have in she hand a ward over whom she have no positive power , and yet in respect to whom she duty be imperative ! she duty be imperative , and be not the woman to neglect she duty ; -- and yet she know that the do of she duty would all be in vain . Violet would marry a shoe - black out of the street if she be so minded . it be of no use that the poor lady have provide herself with two string , two most excellent string , to she bow , -- two string either one of which should have contente . there be , a young peer , not very rich indeed , -- but still with mean sufficient for a wife , a rise man , and in every way respectable , although a Whig . and there be , one of the richest commoner in , a fine Conservative too , with a seat in the house , and everything appropriate . he be fifty , but look hardly more than thirty - five , and be , -- so at least frequently assert ,-- violently in love with . why have not the law , or the executor , or the , or some power levy for the protection of the propriety , make absolutely subject to she guardian till she should be make subject to a husband ? " yes , I think she be at home , " say , in answer to 's inquiry for . " at least , I hardly know . she seldom tell I what she mean to do , -- and sometimes she will walk out quite alone ! " a most imprudent old woman be , always open she hand to she adversary , unable to control herself in the scolding of people , either before they face or behind they back , even at moment in which such scolding be most injuriious to she own cause . " however , we will see , " she continue . then the bell be ring , and in a few minute be in the room . in a few minute more they be up - stair together in 's own room , in spite of the openly -displayed wrath of . " I almost wish she have never be bear , " say to she daughter . " oh , mamma , do not say that . " " I certainly do wish that I have never see she . " " indeed she have be a grievous trouble to you , mamma , " say , sympathetically . " ! what nonsense ! " say . " of course it be nonsense . Fancy go to ! and then they have propose . if you could only hear talk in rapture of a month among the glacier ! and I feel so ungrateful . I believe they would spend three month with I at any horrible place that I could suggest , -- at if I be to ask it ,-- so intent be they on take I away from metropolitan danger . " " but you will not go ? " " no !-- I will not go . I know I be very naughty ; but I can not help feel that I can not be good without be a fool at the same time . I must either fight my aunt , or give way to she . if I be to yield , what a life I should have ; -- and I should despise myself after all . " " and what be the special danger to be fear now ? " " I do not know ;-- you , I fancy . I tell she that if she go , I should go to you . I know that would make she stay . " " I wish you would come to I , " say . " I should not think of it really , -- not for any length of time . " " why not ? " " because I should be in 's way . " " you
you would not be in he way in the least . if you would only be down punctually for morning prayer , and go to church with he on afternoon , he would be delighted to have you . " " what do he say about come ? " " not a word . I do not think he quite know who she be then . I fancy he have inquire since , by something he say yesterday . " " what do he say ? " " nothing that matter ;--only a word . I have not come here to talk about , -- nor yet about . " " whom have you come to talk about ? " ask , laugh a little , with something of increase colour in she cheek , though she could not be say to blush . " a lover of course , " say . " I wish you would leave I alone with my lover . you be as bad or worse than my aunt . she , at any rate , varie she prescription . she have become sick of poor because he be a Whig . " " and who be she favourite now ? " " , -- who be really a most unexceptionable old party , and whom I like of all thing . I really think I could consent to be , to get rid of my trouble , -- if he do not dye he whisker and have he coat padde . " " he would give up those little thing if you ask he . " " I should not have the heart to do it . besides , this be not he time of the year for make proposal . he love fever , which be of a very low kind , and intermit annually , never come on till the autumn . it be a rural malady , against which he be proof while among he club ! " " well , , -- I be like you aunt . " " like ? " " in one respect . I , too , will vary my prescription . " " what do you mean , ? " " just this , -- that if you like to marry , I will say that you be right . " " heaven and earth ! and why be I to marry ? " " only for two reason ; because he love you , and because -- " " no ,-- I deny it . I do not . " " I have come to fancy that you do . " " keep you fancy more under control then . but upon my word I can not understand this . he be you great friend . " " what have that to do with it ? " demand . " and you have throw over you brother , ? " " you have throw he over . be he to go on for ever ask and be refuse ? " " I do not know why he should not , " say , " see how very little trouble it give he . half a hour once in six month do it all for he , allow he time for come and go in a cab . " " Violet , I do not understand you . have you refuse so often because he do not pass hour on he knee before you ? " " no , indeed ! he nature would be alter very much for the worse before he could do that . " " why do you throw it in he tooth then that he do not give you more of he time ? " " why have you come to tell I to marry ? that be what I want to know . , as far as I be aware , have not a shilling in the world ,-- except a month 's salary now due to he from the government . I believe to be the son of a country doctor in , -- with about seven sister . be a . be , -- or be a short time ago , -- in love with another lady ; and be not so much in love at this moment but what he be able to intrust he cause to a ambassador . none short of a royal suitor should ever do that with success . " " have he never plead he cause to you himself ? " " my dear , I never tell gentleman 's secret . it seem that if he have , he success be so trifling that he have think he have better trust some one else for the future . " " he have not trust I . he have not give I any commission . " " then why have you come ? " " because , -- I hardly know how to tell he story . there have be thing about which make it almost necessary that should explain himself to I . " " I know it all ;-- about they fighting . Foolish young man ! I be not a bit oblige to either of they , -- not a bit . only fancy , if my aunt know it , what a life she would lead I ! know all about it , and I feel that I be live at he mercy . why be they so wrong - head ? " " I can not answer that , -- though I know they well enough to be sure that be the one in fault . " " it be so odd that you should have throw you brother over . " " I have not throw my brother over . will you accept Oswald if he ask you again ? " " no , "
" almost shoute . " then I hope that may succeed . I want he to succeed in everything . there ; -- you may know it all . he be my . " " that be flatter to I ,-- look at the position in which you desire to place you Phoebus at the present moment . " " come , , I be true to you , and let I have a little truth from you . this man love you , and I think be worthy of you . he do not love I , but he be my friend . as he friend , and believe in he worth , I wish for he success beyond almost anything else in the world . listen to I , . I do not believe in those reason which you give I just now for not become this man 's wife . " " nor do I . " " I know you do not . look at I . I , who have less of real heart than you , I who think that I could trust myself to satisfy my mind and my ambition without caring for my heart , I have marry for what you call position . my husband be very rich , and a , and will probably be a peer . and he be willing to marry I at a time when I have not a shilling of my own . " " he be very generous . " " he have ask for it since , " say . " but never mind . I have not come to talk about myself ;-- otherwise than to bid you not do what I have do . all that you have say about this man 's want of money and of family be nothing . " " nothing at all , " say . " mere word , -- fit only for such people as my aunt . " " well then ? " " well ? " " if you love he --! " " ah ! but if I do not ? you be very close in inquire into my secret . tell I , ;--be not this young once a lover of you own ? " " ! and do you think I can not keep a gentleman 's secret as well as you ? " " what be the good of any secret , , when we have be already so open ? he try he ' prentice hand on you ; and then he come to I . let we watch he , and see who will be the third . I too like he well enough to hope that he will land himself safely at last . " the have certainly no desire to make love by a ambassador , -- at second - hand . he have give no commission to , and be , as the reader be aware , quite ignorant of what be be do and say on he behalf . he have ask no more from than a opportunity of speak for himself , and that he have ask almost with a conviction that by so ask he would turn he friend into a enemy . he have read but little of the workings of 's heart towards himself , and have no idea of the assistance she be anxious to give he . she have never tell he that she be willing to sacrifice she brother on he behalf , and , of course , have not tell he that she be willing also to sacrifice herself . , when she write to he one morning and tell he that would be find in , alone , that afternoon , -- name a hour , and explain that would be there to meet herself and she father , but that at such a hour she would be certainly alone , -- do he even then know how much she be prepared to do for he . the short note be sign " , " and then there come a long postscript . " ask for I , " she say in a postscript . " I shall be there later , and I have tell they to bid you wait . I can give you no hope of success , but if you choose to try , -- you can do so . if you do not come , I shall know that you have change you mind . I shall not think the worse of you , and you secret will be safe with I . I do that which you have ask I to do ,-- simply because you have ask it . burn this at once , -- because I ask it . " Phineas destroy the note , tear it into atom , the moment that he have read it and re-read it . of course he would go to at the hour name . of course he would take he chance . he be not buoy up by much of hope ; -- but even though there be no hope , he would take he chance . when have first tell Phineas of he promotion , he have also ask the new of the to make a certain communication on he behalf to he son . this Phinea have find himself oblige to promise to do ; -- and he have do it . the letter have be difficult enough to write , -- but he have write it . after have make the promise , he have find himself bound to keep it . " dear , " he have commence , " I will not think that there be anything in we late encounter to prevent my so address you . I now write at the instance of you father , who have hear nothing of
of we little affair . " then he explain at length 's wish as he understand they . " pray come home , " he say , finish he letter . " . , I feel that I be bound to tell you that I still mean to try my fortune , but that I have no ground for hoping that my fortune will be good . since the day on the sand , I have never meet she but in society . I know you will be glad to hear that my wound be nothing ; and I think you will be glad to hear that I have get my foot on to the ladder of promotion .-- yours always , " . " now he have to try he fortune , -- that fortune of which he have tell that he have no reason for hoping that it would be good . he go direct from he office at the to , resolve that he would take no trouble as to he dress , simply wash he hand and brush he hair as though he be go down to the house , and he knock at the 's door exactly at the hour name by . " , " he say , " I be so glad to find you alone . " " yes , " she say , laugh . " I be alone , -- a poor unprotected female . but I fear nothing . I have strong reason for believe that be somewhere about . and Pomfret the butler , who have know I since I be a baby , be a host in himself . " " with such ally you can have nothing to fear , " he reply , attempt to carry on she little jest . " even without they , . we unprotect female in these day be so self - reliant that we natural protector fall off from we , finde themselves to be no longer want . now with you , -- what can I fear ? " " nothing , -- as I hope . " " there use to be a time , and that not so long ago either , when young gentleman and lady be think to be very dangerous to each other if they be leave alone . but propriety be less rampant now , and upon the whole virtue and moral , with discretion and all that kind of thing , have be the gainer . do not you think so ? " " I be sure of it . " " all the same , but I do not like to be catch in a trap , . " " in a trap ? " " yes ; -- in a trap . be there no trap here ? if you will say so , I will acknowledge myself to be a dolt , and will beg you pardon . " " I hardly know what you call a trap . " " you be tell that I be here ? " he pause a moment before he reply . " yes , I be tell . " " I call that a trap . " " be I to blame ? " " I do not say that you set it , -- but you use it . " " , of course I have use it . you must know , -- I think you must know that I have that to say to you which have make I long for such a opportunity as this . " " and therefore you have call in the assistance of you friend . " " it be true . " " in such matter you should never talk to any one , . if you can not fight you own battle , no one can fight it for you . " " , do you remember we ride at ? " " very well ; -- as if it be yesterday . " " and do you remember that I ask you a question which you have never answer ? " " I do answer it , -- as well as I know how , so that I might tell you a truth without hurte you . " " it be necessary , -- be necessary that I should be hurt sorely , or make perfectly happy . , I have come to you to ask you to be my wife ; -- to tell you that I love you , and to ask for you love in return . whatever may be my fate , the question must be ask , and a answer must be give . I have not hope that you should tell I that you love I -- " " for what then have you hope ? " " for not much , indeed ; -- but if for anything , then for some chance that you might tell I so hereafter . " " if I love you , I would tell you so now ,-- instantly . I give you my word of that . " " can you never love I ? " " what be a woman to answer to such a question ? no ;--i believe never . I do not think I shall ever wish you to be my husband . you ask I to be plain , and I must be plain . " " be it because --? " he pause , hardly know what the question be which he propose to himself to ask . " it be for no because , -- for no cause except that simple one which should make any girl refuse any man whom she do not love . , I could say pleasant thing to you on any other subject than this , -- because I like you . " "
" I know that I have nothing to justify my suit . " " you have everything to justify it ; -- at least I be bound to presume that you have . if you love I , -- you be justified . " " you know that I love you . " " I be sorry that it should ever have be so ,-- very sorry . I can only hope that I have not be in fault . " " will you try to love I ? " " no ; -- why should I try ? if any trying be necessary , I would try rather not to love you . why should I try to do that which would displease everybody belong to I ? for yourself , I admit you right to address I , -- and tell you frankly that it would not be in vain , if I love you . but I tell you as frankly that such a marriage would not please those whom I be bound to try to please . " he pause a moment before he speak further . " I shall wait , " he say , " and come again . " " what be I to say to that ? do not tease I , so that I be drive to treat you with lack of courtesy . be so much attach to you , and , and , -- and indeed I may say , I myself also , that I trust there may be nothing to mar we good fellowship . , , -- say that you will take a answer , and I will give you my hand . " " give it I , " say he . she give he she hand , and he put it up to he lip and press it . " I will wait and come again , " he say . " I will assuredly come again . " then he turn from she and go out of the house . at the corner of the square he see 's carriage , but do not stop to speak to she . and she also see he . " so you have have a visitor here , " say to . " yes ;-- I have be catch in the trap . " " poor mouse ! and have the cat make a meal of you ? " " I fancy he have , after he fashion . there be cat that eat they mouse without play , -- and cat that play with they mouse , and then eat they ; and cat again which only play with they mouse , and do not care to eat they . be a cat of the latter kind , and have have he afternoon 's diversion . " " you wrong he there . " " I think not , . I do not mean to say that he would not have like I to accept he . but , if I can see inside he bosom , such a little job as that he have now do will be look back upon as one of the past pleasure of he life ; -- not as a pain . " 's it will be necessary that we should go back in we story for a very short period in order that the reader may be tell that be duly re-elect at after he appointment at the . there be some little trouble at , and something more of expense than he have before encounter . absolutely come down , and be propose by for the borough . be a gentleman learn in the law , and hostile to the interest of the noble owner of , be able to raise a little trouble against we hero . be propose by , and seconde by 's clerk , -- though , as it afterwards appear , 's clerk be not in truth a elector , -- and go to the poll like a man . he receive three vote , and at twelve o'clock withdrew . this in itself could hardly have afford compensation for the expense which or he backer must have encounter ; -- but he have a opportunity of make a speech , every word of which be report in the 's ; and if the speech be make in the language give in the report , be really possessed of some oratorical power . most of those who read the speech in the column of the 's banner_ be probably not aware how favourable a opportunity of retouch he sentence in type have be give to by the fact of he connection with the newspaper . the speech have be very severe upon we hero ; and though the speaker have be so hoote and pelt at as to have be altogether inaudible , -- so maltreate that in point of fact he have not be able to speak above a tenth part of he speech at all ,-- nevertheless the speech do give a certain amount of pain . why should have read it who can tell ? but who be there that abstain from reading that which be print in abuse of himself ? in the speech as it be print declare that he have no thought of be return for the borough . he know too well how the borough be manage , what slave the elector be ; -- how they groan under a tyranny from which hitherto they have be unable to release themselves . of course the 's nominee , he lacquey , as the honourable gentleman might be call , would be return . the could order they to return whichever of he lacquey he please .-- there be something peculiarly pleas to the democratic ear in the word lacquey ! any one serve a big man
man , whatever the service may be , be the big man 's lacquey in the 's _.-- the speech throughout be very bitter . , who have previously serve in parliament as the lacquey of a irish earl , and have be turn off by he , have now fall into the service of the earl , and be the lacquey chosen for the present occasion . but he , , who boast himself to be a man of the people , -- he could tell they that the day of they thraldom be come to a end , and that they enfranchisement be near at hand . that friend of the people , , have a clause in he breech - pocket which he would either force down the unwilling throat of , or else drive the imbecile premier from office by carry it in he tooth . , as , must be destroy , but it should be bear again in a better birth as a part of a real electoral district , send a real member , choose by a real constituency , to a real parliament . in those day , -- and they would come soon , -- rather think that would be find " nowhere , " and he rather think also that when he show himself again , as he certainly should do , in the midst of that democratic electoral district as the popular candidate for the honour of represent it in parliament , that democratic electoral district would accord to he a reception very different from that which he be now receive from the 's lacquey in the parliamentary village of . a prettier bit of fiction than these sentences as compose a part of any speech deliver , or propose to be deliver , at , think he have never see . and when he read at the close of the speech that though the 's hired bully do they worst , the remark of be receive by the people with reiterate cheering , he throw himself back in he chair at the Treasury and roar . the poor fellow have be three minute on he leg , have receive three rotten egg , and one dead dog , and have retire . but not the half of the speech as print in the People 's banner_ have be quote . the sins of , who in spite of he inability to open he mouth in public have be make a Treasury hack by the aristocratic influence , -- " by aristocratic influence not confin to the male sex , " -- be describe at great length , and in such language that Phineas for a while be fool enough to think that it would be he duty to belabour with a horsewhip . this notion , however , do not endure long with he , and when tell he that thing of that kind come as a matter of course , he be comforte . but he find it much more difficult to obtain comfort when he weigh the argument bring forward against the abomination of such a borough as that for which he sit , and reflecte that if bring forward he clause , he , , would be bound to vote against the clause , know the clause to be right , because he be a servant of the government . the argument , even though they appear in the 's , be true argument ; and he have on one occasion admit they truth to he friend , -- in the presence of that great cabinet , she husband . " what business have such a man as that down there ? be there a single creature who want he ? " have say . " I do not suppose anybody do want , " Phineas have reply ; " but I be dispose to think the elector should choose the man they do want , and that at present they have no choice left to they . " " they be quite satisfied , " say , angrily . " then , , " continue , " that alone should be sufficient to prove that they privilege of return a member to parliament be too much for they . we can not defend it . " " it be defend by tradition , " say . " and by its great utility , " say , bow to the young member who be present , and forget that very useless old gentleman , she cousin , who have sit for the borough for many year . " in this country it do not do to go too fast , " say . " and then the mixture of vulgarity , falsehood , and pretence ! " say , shudder as she mind recur to the fact that have contaminate by he presence . " I be tell that they hardly let he leave the place alive . " whatever and might think about and the general question of small borough , it be find by the government , to they great cost , that 's clause be a reality . after two month of hard work , all question of franchise have be settle , rate and rent , new and newfangled , fancy franchise and those which no one fancie , franchise for borough and franchise for county , franchise single , dual , three - corner , and four - sided , -- by various clause to which the committee of the whole have agree after some score of division , -- the matter of the franchise have be settle . no doubt there be the house of Lords , and there might yet be shipwreck . but it be generally believe that the Lord would hardly look at the bill , -- that they would not even venture on a amendment .
. the Lords would only be too happy to let the matter be settle by the Commons themselves . but then , after the franchise , come redistribution . how sick of the subject be all member of the government , no one could tell who do not see they weary face . the whole House be sick , have be whip into various lobby , night after night , during the heat of the summer , for week past . Redistribution ! why should there be any redistribution ? they have get , or would get , a beautiful franchise . could they not see what that would do for they ? why redistribute anything ? but , alas , it be too late to go back to so bless a idea as that ! Redistribution they must have . but there should be as little redistribution as possible . be sick of it all , and would not be exigeant . something should be do for overgrown county ; -- something for new town which have prosper in brick and mortar . it would be easy to crush up a peccant borough or two ,-- a borough that have be discover in its sin . and a few borough now bless with two member might consent to be bless only with one . Fifteen small clause might settle the redistribution , in spite of , -- if only would be good - natured . neither the weather , which be very hot , nor the tedium of the session , which have be very great , nor the anxiety of , which be very pressing , have any effect in impair the energy of . he be as instant , as oratorical , as hostile , as indignant about redistribution as he have be about the franchise . he have be sure then , and he be sure now , that desire to burke the question , to deceive the people , to produce a bill that should be no bill . he bring out he clause , -- and make he instance . " would the honourable gentleman who sit lowest on the Treasury bench , -- who at this moment be in sweet confidential intercourse with the right honourable gentleman now of the board of trade , who have once be a friend of the people , -- would the young of the Treasury get up in he place and tell they that no peer of parliament have at present a voice in send a member to they of , -- that no peer would have a voice if this bill , as propose by the government , be pass in its present useless , ineffectual , conservative , and most dishonest form ? " , who reply to this , and who tell that he himself could not answer for any per , -- but that he think it probable that most peer would , by they opinion , somewhat influence the opinion of some elector , -- be think to have get out of he difficulty very well . but there be the clause of to be deal with , -- a clause directly disfranchise seven single - win borough , of which be of course one , -- a clause to which the government must either submit or object . submission would be certain defeat in one way , and objection would be as certain defeat in another , -- if the gentleman on the other side be not dispose to assist the ministers . it be say that the cabinet be divide . and be for letting the seven borough go . could not bring himself to obey , and support he . when be tell that would certainly go into the same lobby with respect the seven borough , he be report to have say that in that case must be prepare with a government . make a beautiful speech about the seven borough ; -- the seven sins , and seven star , and seven church , and seven lamps . he would make no party question of this . who usually act with he would vote as they own sense of right or wrong direct they ; -- from which expression of a special sanction it be consider that these gentleman be not accustom to exercise the privilege now accord to they . but in regard the question as one of right and wrong , and in look at what he believe to be both the wish of the country and its interest , he , , -- he , himself , be simply a humble member of that house ,-- must support the clause of the honourable gentleman . almost all those to whom have be surrender the privilege of use they own judgment for that occasion only , use it discreetly , -- as they chief have use it himself , -- and carry he clause by a majority of fifteen . it be then 3 a.m. , and , rise after the division , say that he right honourable friend the of the be too tired to return to the house , and have request he to state that the government would declare they purpose at 6 p.m . on the follow evening . Phineas , though he have make he little speech in answer to Turnbull with good - humoured flippancy , have record he vote in favour of the seven borough with a sore heart . much as he dislike , he know that be right in this . he have speak to on the subject , as it be ask 's permission to throw up he office , and vote against . but be angry with he , tell he that he conscience be of that restless , uneasy sort which be neither useful nor manly . " we all know , " say
say , " and none better than , that we can not justify such a borough as by the theory of we parliamentary representation , -- any more than we can justify the fact that should return as many member as the . there must be compromise , and you should trust to other who have study the matter more thoroughly than you , to say how far the compromise should go at the present moment . " " it be the influence of the peer , not the paucity of the elector , " say . " and have no peer any influence in a county ? would you disfranchise ? believe I , , if you want to be useful , you must submit yourself in such matter to those with whom you act . " Phineas have no answer to make , but he be not happy in he mind . and he be the less happy , perhaps , because he be very sure that would be beaten . in these day harass he sorely . be very keen against such borough as , declare that be quite right to join he standard to that of on such a issue . be the reformer now , and find himself oblige to fight a lose battle on behalf of a acknowledge abuse . he never go near ; but , unfortunately for he , catch he once in the street and show he no mercy . " be a little ' eavy on you in the _banner_ the other day , -- eh , ?-- too ' eavy , as I tell he . " " can be just as heavy as he please , . " " that be in course . the press be free , thank , -- as yet . but it be not any good rattling away at the 's little borough when it be sure to go . of course it will go , . " " I think it will . " " the whole seven on th'ey . the ' ouse could not but do it . they tell I it be all 's own work , stick out for keep on th'ey . he be very old , and so we will forgive he . but he must go , . " " we shall know all about that soon , . " " if you do not get another seat , , I suppose we shall see you back at the . I hope we may . it be better than be member for , ; -- you may be sure of that . " and then pass on . carry he clause , and be doom . and the other six deadly sins be anathematize , exorcise , and finally get rid of out of the world by the voice of the gentleman who have be proclaim the beauty of such pleasant vice all they life , and who in they heart hate all change that ten towards popular representation . but not the less be beaten ; and , in accordance with the promise make by he first lieutenant immediately after the vote be take , the come forward on the next evening and make he statement . he have already put he resignation into the hand of , and she Majesty have graciously accept it . he be very old , and feel that the time have come in which it behove he to retire into that leisure which he think he have , perhaps , earn . he have hope to carry this bill as the last act of he political life ; but he be too old , too stiff , as he say , in he prejudice , to bend further than he have bend already , and he must leave the completion of the matter in other hand . she Majesty have send for , and have already see Her Majesty . and he other colleague , though they dissent from the clause which have be carry by the united effort of gentleman opposite to he , and of gentleman below he on he own side of the , be younger man than he , and would , for the country 's sake , -- and for the sake of Her Majesty ,-- endeavou to carry the bill through . there would then , of course , be a dissolution , and the future government would , no doubt , depend on the choice of the country . from all which it be understand that be to go on with the bill to a conclusion , whatever might be the division carry against he , and that a new of for foreign affair must be chosen . Phineas understood , also , that he have lose he seat at . for the borough of there would never again be a election . " if I have be , I would have throw the bill up altogether , " say afterwards ; " but of course it be not for I to interfere . " the session be protract for two month after that , -- beyond the time at which grouse should have be shoot , -- and by the 23rd of become the law of the land . " I shall never get over it , " say to , seat one terribly hot evening on a bench behind the , -- " never . I do not suppose such a session for work be ever know before . think what it be to have to keep man together in , with the thermometer at 81 degress , and the river stink like , -- like the very mischief . " , however , do not die . on the last day of the session resign . rumours reach the ear of as to the cause of this , but
but no certain cause be tell he . it be say that have insist upon it , Laurence have by mischance be call upon for some official statement during a unfortunate period of absence . there be , however , a mystery about it ; -- but the mystery be not half so wonderful as the triumph to , when offer he the place . " but I shall have no seat , " say . " we shall none of we have seat to - morrow , " say . " but I shall be at a loss to find a place to stand for . " " the election will not come on till , and you must look about you . both and seem to think you will be in the House . " and so the bill be carry , and the session be end . " the " by the middle of there be assemble a large party at , a country mansion belong to . the man have certainly be choose in reference to they political feeling and position , -- for there be not a guest in the house who have vote for 's clause , or the wife or daughter , or sister of any one who have so voted . indeed , in these day politics run so high that among politician all social gathering be bring together with some reference to the state of party . be invite , and when he arrive at he find that half the cabinet be there . be not there , nor be . be there , and the , -- with the Duchess , and , and ; be there also , and ,-- be detain somewhere out of the way ; and be expect in two day , and at the end of the week . take a opportunity of impart this latter information to very soon after he arrival ; and , as he watch she eye and she mouth while she speak , be quite sure that kknow the story of the duel . " I shall be delighted to see he again , " say . " that be all right , " say . there be also there and , who be great friend of the Palliser , -- and on the very day on which Phineas reach matching , at half a hour before the time for dressing , the of arrive . now , Palliser be the 's nephew and heir , -- and the of be a very great person indeed . I hardly know why it should have be so , but the of be certainly a greater man in public estimation than the other duke then present , -- the of . the of be a useful man , and have be so all he life , sit in and serve he country , constant as any peer in the of , always ready to take on he own shoulders any troublesome work require of he , than whom , and 's predecessor at the head of the liberal party , have have no more devoted adherent . but the of have never yet do a day 's work on behalf of he country . they both wear the , the of have earn it by service , the of have be decorate with the blue ribbon , -- because he be of . the one be a moral , good man , a good husband , a good father , and a good friend . the other , -- do not bear quite so high a reputation . but man and woman think but little of the of , while the other duke be regard with a almost reverential awe . I think the secret lay in the simple fact that the of have not be common in the eyes of the people . he have contrive to envelope himself in something of the ancient mystery of wealth and rank . within three minute of the 's arrival , with a air of great importance , whisper a word to . " he have come . he arrive exactly at seven ! " " who have come ? " ask . " the of ! " she say , almost reprimand he by she tone of voice for he indifference . " there have be a great doubt whether or no he would show himself at last . tell I that he never will pledge himself . I be so glad he have come . " " I do not think I ever see he , " say . " oh , I have see he , -- a magnificent - look man ! I think it be so very nice of get he to meet we . it be very rarely that he will join in a great party , but they say can do anything with he since the heir be bear . I suppose you have hear all about that . " " no , " say ; " I have hear nothing of the heir , but I know that there be three or four baby . " " there be no heir , you know , for a year and a half , and they be all au desespoir ; and the be very nearly quarrell with he nephew ; and -- ; you know it have very nearly come to a separation . " " I do not know anything at all about it , " say , who be not very fond of the lady who be give he the information . " it be so , I can assure you ; but since the boy be bear can do anything with the Duke . she make he go to last spring , and he present she with the favourite for one of the races on
on the very morning the horse run . they say he give three thousand pound for he . " " and do win ? " " no ; -- the horse lose ; and have never know what to do with he since . but it be very pretty of the ; -- be it not ? " Phineas , though he have intend to show to how little he think about the of , -- how small be he respect for a great peer who take no part in politics , -- could not protect himself from a certain feeling of anxiety as to the aspect and gait and word of the man of whom people think so much , of whom he have hear so often , and of whom he have see so little . he tell himself that the of should be no more to he than any other man , but yet the of be more to he than other man . when he come down into the drawing - room he be angry with himself , and stand apart ; -- and be then angry with himself again because he stand apart . why should he make a difference in he own bearing because there be such a man in the company ? and yet he could not avoid it . when he enter the room the be stand in a large bow - window , and two or three lady and two or three man be stand round he . Phinea would not go near the group , tell himself that he would not approach a man so grand as be the of . he see among the party , and after a while he see she retreat . as she retreate , know that some word from have not be receive with the graciousness which she have expect . there be the prettiest smile in the world on the lady 's face , and she take a corner on a sofa with a air of perfect satisfaction . but yet know that she have receive a wound . " I call twice on you in , " say , come up close to she , " but be not fortunate enough to find you ! " " yes ; -- but you come so late in the season as to make it impossible that there should be any arrangement for we meeting . what can any woman do when a gentleman call on she in ? " " I come in . " " yes , you do ; on the 31 st . I keep the most accurate record of all such thing , . but let we hope that we may have better luck next year . in the meantime , we can only enjoy the good thing that be go . " " socially , or politically , ? " " oh , socially . how can I mean anything else when the of be here ? I feel so much taller at be in the same house with he . do not you ? but you be a spoilt child of fortune , and perhaps you have meet he before . " " I think I once see the back of a hat in the park , and somebody tell I that the 's head be inside it . " " and you have never see he but that once ? " " never but that once , -- till now . " " and do not you feel elated ? " " of course I do . for what do you take I , ? " " I do ,--immensely . I believe he to be a fool , and I never hear of he do a kind act to anybody in my life . " " not when he give the racehorse to ? " " I wonder whether that be true . do you ever hear of such a absurdity ? as I be say , I do not think he ever do anything for anybody ; -- but then , you know , to be of ! it be not necessary , -- be it , -- that a of should do anything except be of ? " at this moment come up to , and take he across to the . the have express a desire to be introduce to he . Phineas , half - pleased and half - disgusted , have no alternative , and follow . the shook hand with he , and make a little bow , and say something about the garrotter , which , in he confusion , do not quite understand . he try to reply as he would have reply to anybody else , but the weight of the 's majesty be too much for he , and he bungle . the make another little bow , and in a moment be speak a word of condescension to some other favoured individual . Phineas retreate altogether disgusted , -- hate the , but hat himself worse ; but he would not retreat in the direction of . it might suit that lady to take a instant little revenge for she discomfiture , but it do not suit he to do so . the question with he would be , whether in some future part of he career it might not be he duty to assist in put down Dukes of . at dinner sit between and the Duchess of , and do not find himself very happy . at the other end of the table the , -- the great , be seat at 's right hand , and on he other side Fortune have place . the greatest interest which Phineas have during the dinner be in watch the operation , -- the triumphantly successful operation of that lady . before dinner she have be
be wound by the . the have not condescende to accord the honour of he little bow of graciousness to some little flattering morsel of wit which the lady have uttere on he behoof . she have say a sharp word or two in she momentary anger to ; but when be so good to she in that matter of she place at dinner , she be not fool enough to throw away she chance . throughout the soup and fish she be very quiet . she say a word or two after she first glass of champagne . the refuse two dish , one after another , and then she glide into conversation . by the time that he have he roast mutton before he she be in full play , and as she eat she peach , the be bend over she with he most gracious smile . " do not you think the session be very long , ? " say the to . " very long indeed , , " say , with he attention still fix on . " the find it very troublesome . " " I daresay he do , " say . that duke and that duchess be no more than any other man and any other man 's wife . the session have not be longer to the of than to all the public servant . Phineas have the greatest possible respect for the of , but he could not take much interest in the wailing of the Duchess on she husband 's behalf . " and thing do seem to be so very uncomfortable now , " say the Duchess , -- think partly of the resignation of , and partly of the fact that she own old peculiar maid who have live with she for thirty year have retire into private life . " not so very bad , Duchess , I hope , " say , observe that at this moment 's eye be brilliant with triumph . then there come upon he a sudden ambition , -- that he would like to " cut out " the of in the estimation of . the brightness of 's eye have not be throw away upon we hero . come at the appointed time , and , to the surprise of , be bring to match by . Phineas at first think that it be intend that the and he son should meet and make up they quarrel at 's house . but stay only one night , and on the next morning hear the whole history of he come and go from . " I have almost be on my knee to he to stay , " she say . " indeed , I do go on my knee , -- actually on my knee . " " and what do he say ? " " he put he arm round I and kiss I , and , -- and ,-- I can not tell you all that he say . but it end in this , -- that if can be make to go to , fatt calf without stint will be kill . I shall do all I can to make he go ; and so must you , . of course that silly affair in foreign part be not to make any difference between you two . " Phinea smile , and say he would do he best , and look up into she face , and be just able to talk to she as though thing be go comfortably with he . but he heart be very cold . as have speak to he about there have come upon he , for the first time , -- for the first time since he have know that have be refuse , -- a idea , a doubt , whether even yet Violet might not become 's wife . he heart be very sad , but he struggl on , -- declare that it be incumbent on they both to bring together the father and son . " I be so glad to hear you say so , , " say . " I really do believe that you can do more towards it than any one else . would think nothing of my advice ,-- would hardly speak to I on such a subject . but he respect you as well as like you , and not the less because of what have occur . " how be it that should know atch of the respect or like feel by this reject suitor for that other suitor , -- who have also be reject ? and how be it that she be thus able to talk of one of they to the other , as though neither of they have ever come forward with such a suit ? feel he position to be so strange as to be almost burdensome . he have tell Violet , when she have refuse he , very plainly , that he should come again to she , and ask once more for the great gift which he covet . but he could not ask again now . in the first place , there be that in she manner which make he sure that be he to do so , he would ask in vain ; and then he feel that she be place a special confidence in he , against which he would commit a sin be he to use she present intimacy with he for the purpose of make love . they twill be to put they shoulders together to help , and while do so he could not continue a suit which would be feel by both of they to be hostile to . there might be opportunity for a chance word , and if so the chance word should be speak ; but he could not make
make a deliberate attack , such as he have make in . Violet also probably understand that she have not now be catch in a mousetrap . the be to spend four day at , and on the third day , -- the day before be expect , -- he be to be see riding with by he side . be know as a perfect horsewoman , -- one indeed who be rather fond of go a little fast on horseback , and who ride well to hound . but the move out of a walk , and on this occasion be as steady in she seat and almost as slow as the mount ghost in _. but it be say by some there , especially by , that the conversation between they be not slow . and on the next morning the and be together again before luncheon , stand on a terrace at the back of the house , look down on a party who be play croquet on the lawn . " do you never play ? " say the . " oh yes ; -- one do everything a little . " " I be sure you would play well . why do you not play now ? " " no ;-- I shall not play now . " " I should like to see you with you mallet . " " I be sorry you can not be gratify . I have play croquet till I be tired of it , and have come to think it be only fit for boy and girl . the great thing be to give they opportunity for flirting , and it do that . " " and do you never flirt , ? " " never at croquet , . " " and what with you be the choicest time ? " " that depend on so many thing , -- and so much on the chosen person . what do you recommend ? " " ah ,-- I be so ignorant . I can recommend nothing . " " what do you say to a mountain - top at dawn on a summer day ? " ask . " you make I shiver , " say the . " or a boat on a lake on a summer evening , or a good lead after hound with nobody else within three field , or the bottom of a salt -mine , or the deck of a ocean steamer , or a military hospital in time of war , or a railway journey from to ? " " , you have the most uncomfortable idea . " " I have no doubt you have try each of they ,-- successfully . but perhaps , after all , a comfortable chair over a good fire , in a pretty room , beat everything . " " I think it do , -- certainly , " say the . then he whisper something at which blush and smile , and immediately after that she follow those who have already go in to lunch . Bonteen have be hover round the spot on the terrace on which the and have be stand , look on with envious eye , meditat some attack , some interruption , some excuse for a interpolation , but she courage have fail she and she have not da to approach . the have know nothing of the hovering propinquity of , but have see and have understood it all . " dear , " she say afterwards , " why do you not come and join we ? the be so pleasant . " " two be company , and three be none , " say , who in she anger be hardly able to choose she word quite as well as she might have do have she be more cool . " we friend have make quite a new conquest , " say to . " I be so pleased , " say , with apparently unaffected delight . " it be such a great thing to get anybody to amuse my uncle . you see everybody can not talk to he , and he will not talk to everybody . " " he talk enough to she in all conscience , " say , who be now more angry than ever . the arrive , and be a little nervous as to they meeting . he come back from shooting on the day in question , and be tell by the servant that be in the house . go into the billiard - room in he knickerbocker , think probably that he might be there , and then into the draw - room , and at last into the library , -- but be not to be find . at last he come across . " have you see he ? " he ask . " yes ; -- he be with I half a hour since , walk round the garden . " " and how be he ? come ;-- tell I something about he . " " I never know he to be more pleasant . he would give no promise about , but he do not say that he would not go . " " do he know that I be here ? " " yes ;-- I tell he so . I tell he how much pleasure I should have in see you two together , -- as friend . " " and what do he say ? " " he laugh , and say you be the best fellow in the world . you see I be oblige to be explicit . " " but why do he laugh ? " Phineas ask . " he do not tell I , but I suppose it be because he be think of a little trip he once take to ,
, and he perceive that I know all about it . " " I wonder who tell you . but never mind . I do not mean to ask any question . as I do not like that we first meeting should be before all the people in the draw - room , I will go to he in he own room . " " do , do ; -- that will be so nice of you . " send he card up by a servant , and in a few minute be stand with he hand on the lock of 's door . the last time he have see this man , they have meet with pistol in they hand to shoot at each other , and have in truth do he very best to shoot he opponent . the cause of quarrel be the same between they as ever . Phineas have not give up , and have no intention of give she up . and he have receive no intimation whatever from he rival that there be to be a truce between they . Phineas have indeed write in friendship to , but he have receive no answer ; -- and nothing of certainty be to be gather from the report which have just make . it might well be that would turn upon he now in he wrath , and that there would be some scene which in a strange house would be obviously objectionable . nevertheless he have resolve that even that would be better than a chance encounter among stranger in a drawing - room . so the door be open and the two man meet . " well , old fellow , " say , laugh . then all doubt be over , and in a moment be shak he former , -- and present friend , warmly by the hand . " so we have come to be a under - Secretary have we ?-- and all that kind of thing . " " I have to get into harness , -- when the harness offer itself , " say . " I suppose so . it be a deuce of a bore , be not it ? " " I always like work , you know . " " I think you like hunt better . you use to ride as if you do . there be back again in the stable for you . that poor fool who buy he could do nothing with he , and I let he have he money back . " " I do not see why you should have do that . " " because I be the biggest fool of the two . do you remember when that brute get I down under the bank in the river ? that be about the nearest touch I ever have . bless I ;-- how he do squeeze I ! so here you be ; -- stay with the Palliser , -- one of a government party I suppose . but what be you go to do for a seat , my friend ? " " do not talk about that yet , . " " a sore subject , -- be not it ? I think they have be quite right , you know , to put into the melting - pot ,-- though I be sorry enough for you sake . " " quite right , " say . " and yet you vote against it , old chap ? but , come ; I be not go to be down upon you . so my father have be here ? " " yes ; -- he be here for a day or two . " " Violet have just be tell I . you and he be as good friend as ever ? " " I trust we be . " " he never hear of that little affair ? " and nod he head , intend to indicate the direction of . " I do not think he have yet . " " so tell I . of course you know that she have hear all about it . " " I have reason to suppose as much . " " and so do . " " I tell she myself , " say . " the deuce you do ! but I daresay it be for the best . it be a pity you have not proclaim it at , and then nobody would have believe a word about it . of course my father will hear it some day . " " you be go to , I hope , ? " " that question be easier ask than answer . it be quite true that the great difficulty have be get over . have have she money . and if my father will only acknowledge that he have wrong I throughout , from begin to end , I will go to to - morrow ; -- and would cut you out at the next day , only that be not Loughton any longer . " " you can not expect you father to do that . " " no ; -- and therefore there be a difficulty . so you have have that awfully ponderous here . how do you get on with he ? " " Admirably . he condescende to do something which he call shak hand with I . " " he be the greatest old dust out , " say , disrespectfully . " do he take any notice of ? " " not that I observ . " " he ought not to be allow into the same room with she . " after that there be a short pause , and feel some hesitation in speaking of to . " and how do you get on with she ? " ask . here
here be a question for a man to answer . the question be so hard to be answer , that do not at first make any attempt to answer it . " you know exactly the ground that I stand on , " continue . " she have refuse I three time . have you be more fortunate ? " , as he ask he question , look full into 's face in a manner that be irresistible . he look be not one of anger nor even of pride . it be not , indeed , without a strong dash of fun . but such as it be it show Phineas that intend to have a answer . " no , " say he at last , " I have not be more fortunate . " " perhaps you have change you mind , " say he host . " no ;-- I have not change my mind , " say , quickly . " how stand it then ? come ;-- let we be honest to each other . I tell you down at that I would quarrel with any man who attempt to cut I out with . you make up you mind that you would do so , and therefore I quarrell with you . but we can not always be fight duel . " " I hope we may not have to fight another . " " no ; -- it would be absurd , " say . " I rather think that what we do be absurd . but upon my life I do not see any other way out of it . however , that be over . how be it to be now ? " " what be I to say in answer to that ? " ask . " just the truth . you have ask she , I suppose ? " " yes ;-- I have ask she . " " and she have refuse you ? " " yes ; -- she have refuse I . " " and you mean to ask she again ? " " I shall ; -- if I ever think that there be a chance . indeed , , I believe I shall whether I think that I have any chance or not . " " then we start fairly , . I certainly shall do so . I believe I once tell you that I never would ; -- but that be long before I suspect that you would enter for the same plate . what a man say on such a matter when he be down in the mouth go for nothing . now we understand each other , and you have better go and dress . the bell ring nearly half a hour ago , and my fellow be hang about outside the door . " the interview have in one respect be very pleasant to , and in another it have be very bitter . it be pleasant to he to know that he and be again friend . it be a delight to he to feel that this half - savage but high - spirited young nobleman , who have be so anxious to fight with he and to shoot he , be nevertheless ready to own that he have behave well . have in fact acknowledge that though he have be anxious to blow out we hero 's brain , he be aware all the time that we hero be a good sort of fellow . Phineas understand this , and feel that it be pleasant . but with this understanding , and accompany this pleasure , there be a conviction in he heart that the distance between and would daily grow to be less and still less , -- and that could afford to be generous . if could teach herself to be fond of , what have he , , to offer in opposition to the claim of such a suitor ? that evening take out to dinner . tell himself that this be of course so arrange by , with the express view of serve the interest . it be almost nothing to he at the moment that be intrust to he . he have he ambition respect ; but that for the time be in abeyance . he could hardly keep he eye off . and yet , as he well know , he observation of she must be quite useless . he know beforehand , with absolute accuracy , the manner in which she would treat she lover . she would be kind , genial , friendly , confidential , nay , affectionate ; and yet she manner would mean nothing , would give no clue to she future decision either for or against . it be , as Phineas think , a peculiarity with that she could treat she reject lover as dear familiar friend immediately after she rejection of they . " , " say , " you eye and ears be tell - tale of you passion . " " I hope not , " say , " as I certainly do not wish that any one should guess how strong be my regard for you . " " that be prettily turn ,-- very prettily turn ; and show more readiness of wit than I give you credit for under you present suffer . but of course we all know where you heart be . men do not undertake perilous journey to for nothing . " " that unfortunate journey to ! but , dear , really nobody know why I go . " " you meet there ? " " oh yes ;-- I meet there . " " and there be a duel ? " " , -- you must not ask I to criminate myself ! " " of course there be , and of course
course it be about , and of course the lady think herself bound to refuse both the gentleman who be so very wicked , and of course -- " " well , -- what follow ? " " ah ! if you have not wit enough to see , I do not think it can be my duty to tell you . but I wish to caution you as a friend that you eye and ears should be more under you command . " " you will go to ? " say to . " I can not possibly tell as yet , " say he , frown . " then I can tell you that you ought to go . I do not care a bit for you frown . what do the fifth commandment say ? " " if you have no better argument than the commandment , -- " " there can be none better . do you mean to say that the commandment be nothing to you ? " " I mean to say that I sha not go to because I be tell in the twentieth chapter of to honour my father and mother , -- and that I should not believe anybody who tell I that he do anything because of the commandment . " " oh , ! " " people be so prejudiced and so use to humbug that for the most part they do not in the least know they own motive for what they do . I will go to to - morrow , -- for a reward . " " for what reward ? " say , blush . " for the only one in the world that could tempt I to do anything . " " you should go for the sake of duty . I should not even care to see you go , much as I long for it , if that feel do not take you there . " it be arrange that and be to leave matching together . Phineas be to remain at he office all , and in the general election be to take place . what he have hitherto hear about a future seat be most vague , but he be to meet and in , and it have be understand that , who be now at , be to make some inquiry as to that group of borough of which at this moment for one . but as be the smallest of four borough , and as one of the four have for many year have a representative of its own , fear that no success would be find there . in he present agony he begin to think that there might be a strong plea make for a few private seat in the of , and that the propriety of throw into the melting - pot be , after all , open to question . he and be to return to together , and , accord to he present scheme , be to proceed at once to to look after the cub-hunting . nothing that either or could say to he would induce he to promise to go to . when Phineas presse it , he be tell by that he be a fool for he pain , -- by which Phineas understood perfectly well that when do go to , he , Phineas , be to take that as strong evidence that everything be over for he as regard . when express she eagerness that the visit should be make , she be stop with a assurance that she could have it do at once if she please . let he only be enable to carry with he the tiding of he betrothal , and he would start for he father 's house without a hour 's delay . but this authority Violet would not give he . when he answer she after this fashion she could only tell he that he be ungenerous . " at any rate I be not false , " he reply on one occasion . " what I say be the truth . " there be a very tender part between and . she have learn from he pretty nearly all he history , and certainly know more of the reality of he affair than any of those in who have be he most staunch friend . " of course you will get a seat , " she say as he take he leave of she . " if I understand it at all , they never throw over a ally so useful as you be . " " but the intention be that in this matter nobody shall any longer have the power of throw over , or of not throw over , anybody . " " that be all very well , my friend ; but cake will still be hot in the mouth , even though turn purist , with to help he . if you want any assistance in find a seat you will not go to the 's _,-- even yet . " " certainly not to the 's _. " " I do not quite understand what the franchise be , " continue . " household in borough , " say Phineas with some energy . " very well ; -- household in borough . I daresay that be very fine and very liberal , though I do not comprehend it in the least . and you want a borough . very well . you will not go to the household . I do not think you will ; -- not at first , that be . " " where shall I go then ? " " oh , -- to some great patron of a borough ; -- or to a club ;-- or perhaps to some great firm . the household will know nothing about
about it till they be tell . be not that it ? " " the truth be , Madame Max , I do not know where I shall go . I be like a child lose in a wood . and you may understand this ; -- if you do not see I in before the end of , I shall have perish in the wood . " " then I will come and find you , -- with a troop of householder . you will come . you will be there . I do not believe in death come without sign . you be full of life . " as she speak , she have hold of he hand , and there be nobody near they . they be in a little book - room inside the library at , and the door , though not latch , be nearly close . Phineas have flatter himself that have retreate there in order that this farewell might be speak without interruption . " and , ;-- I wonder whether I may say one thing , " she continue . " you may say anything to I , " he reply . " no , -- not in this country , in this . there be thing one may not say here , -- that be taboo by a sort of consent , -- and that without any reason . " she pause again , and be at a loss to think what be the subject on which she be about to speak . could she mean -- ? no ; she could not mean to give he any outward plain - speak sign that she be attach to he . it be the peculiar merit of this man that he be not vain , though much be do to he to fill he with vanity ; and as the idea cross he brain , he hate himself because it have be there . " to I you may say anything , , " he say , -- " here in , as plainly as though we be in . " " but I can not say it in , " she say . then in french , blush and laugh as she speak ,-- almost stammer in spite of she usual self - confidence , -- she tell he that accident have make she rich , full of money . money be a drug with she . money she know be want , even for householder . would he not understand she , and come to she , and learn from she how faithful a woman could be ? he still be hold she by the hand , and he now raise it to he lip and kiss it . " the offer from you , " he say , " be as high - minded , as generous , and as honourable as its acceptance by I would be mean - spirited , vile , and ignoble . but whether I fail or whether I succeed , you shall see I before the winter be over . " also say a word of farewell to Violet before he leave , but there be nothing peculiar in she little speech to he , or in he to she . " of course we shall see each other in . do not talk of not be in the house . of course you will be in the . " then Phineas have shake he head and smile . where be he to find a requisite number of householder prepare to return he ? but as he go up to he tell himself that the air of the of be now the very breath of he nostril . Life to he without it would be no life . to have come within the reach of the good thing of political life , to have make he mark so as to have almost insured future success , to have be the petted young official aspirant of the day , -- and then to sink down into the miserable platitude of private life , to undergo daily attendance in law - court without a brief , to listen to man who have come to be much below he in estimation and social intercourse , to sit in a wretch chamber up three pair of stair at 's , whereas he be now at this moment provide with a gorgeous apartment look out into the from the in , to be attend by a mongrel between a clerk and a errand boy at 17 . 6d . a week instead of by a private secretary who be the son of a earl 's sister , and be pet by countess ' daughter innumerable , -- all this would surely break he heart . he could have do it , so he tell himself , and could have take glory in do it , have not these other thing come in he way . but the other thing have come . he have run the risk , and have throw the dice . and now when the game be so nearly win , must it be that everything should be lose at last ? he know that nothing be to be gain by melancholy look at he club , or by show of wretchedness at he office . be very empty ; but the approach election still keep some there who otherwise would have be look after the first flush of pheasant . be there , and be not long in ask what be he view . " ah ; -- that be so hard to say . tell I that he would be look about . " " Ratler be very well in the , " say , " but he be of no use for anything beyond it . I suppose you be not bring
bring up at the ? " " oh no , " say , remember the glory of Trinity . " because there would have be a opening . what do you say to , -- the new borough ? " " Broadbury the brewer be there already ! " " yes ; -- and ready to spend any money you like to name . let I see . be group with , and be a deal too strong at to hear of any other claim . I do not think we could dare to propose it . there be the hamlet , but it will take a wack of money . " " I have not get a wack of money , " say , laugh . " that be the devil of it . I think , if I be you , I should hark back upon some place in . could not you get to give you up he seat ? " " what ! ? " " yes . he have not a ghost of a chance of get into office again . nothing on earth would induce he to look at a paper during all those week he be at the ; and when speak to he , all he say be , 'Ah , bother ! ' do not like it , I can tell you . " " but that would not make he give up he seat . " " of course you would have to arrange it . " by which to mean that he , , be in some way to give to Fitzgibbon some adequate compensation for the surrender of he position as a county member . " I be afraid that be out of the question , " say . " if he be to go , I should not get it . " " would you have a chance at ? " " I be think of try it , " say . " of course you know that be very ill . " this be the brother of , and be the sit member of . " upon my word I think I should try that . I do not see where we be to put we hand on a seat in . I do not indeed . " Phinea , as he listen to this , could not help think that , though he have certainly express a great deal of solicitude , be not as true a friend as he use to be . perhaps he , , have risen too fast , and be begin to think that he might as well be out of the way . he write to he father , ask after the borough , and ask after the health of . and in he letter he tell he own story very plainly ,-- almost pathetically . he perhaps have be wrong to make the attempt which he have make . he begin to believe that he have be wrong . but at any rate he have make it so far successfully , and failure now would be doubly bitter . he think that the party to which he belong must now remain in office . it would hardly be possible that a new election would produce a House of Commons favourable to a conservative ministry . and with a liberal ministry he , , would be sure of he place , and sure of a official income , -- if only he could find a seat . it be all very true , and be almost pathetic . the old doctor , who be inclin to be proud of he son , be not unwilling to make a sacrifice . . declare before she daughter that if there be a seat in all , Phineas ought to have it . and stand by listening , and wonder what would do if he lose he seat . would he come back and live in , and be like any other girl 's lover ? poor have come to lose she ambition , and to think that girl whose lover stay at home be the happiest . nevertheless , she would have walk all the way to 's house and back again , might that have avail to get the seat for Phineas . then there come a express over from . the doctor be want at once to see . be very bad with gout in he stomach . accord to the messenger it be suppose that be die . before have have a opportunity of answer he son 's letter , , the late member for , have be gather to he father . understand enough of election for parliament , and of the nature of borough , to be aware that a candidate 's chance of success be very much improve by be early in the field ; and he be aware , also , that the death of would probably create various aspirant for the honour of represent . but he could hardly address the Earl on the subject while the dead body of the late member be lie in the house at . the bill which have pass in the late session for reform the constitution of the of have not touch , a future measure have be promise to the irish for they comfort ; and therefore be , as to 's influence , the same as it have ever be . he have not there the plenary power which the other lord have hold in he hand in regard to ; -- but still the interest would go a long way . it might be possible to stand against it , but it would be much more desirable that the candidate should have it at he back . be fully alive to this as he sit opposite to the old lord , say now a
a word about the old lord 's gout in he leg and arm , and then about the gout in the stomach , which have carry away to another world the lamented late member for the borough . " poor Jack ! " say , piteously . " if I would know it , I need not have pay over two thousand pound for he last year ;-- need I , doctor ? " " no , indeed , " say , feel that he patient might perhaps approach the subject of the borough himself . " he never would live by any rule , you know , " say the desolate brother . " very hard to guide ; -- be he not , my lord ? " " the very devil . now , you see , I do do what I be tell pretty well , -- do not I , doctor ? " " sometimes . " " by , I do nearly always . I do not know what you mean by sometimes . I have be drink brandy - and - water till I be sick of it , to oblige you , and you tell I about -- sometimes . you doctor expect a man to be a slave . have not I keep it out of my stomach ? " " thank , yes . " " it be all very well thank , but I should have go as poor have go , if I have not be the most careful man in the world . he be drink champagne ten day ago ;--would do it , you know . " could talk about himself and he own ailment by the hour together , and , who have think that he noble patient be approach the subject of the borough , be begin again to feel that the double interest of the gout that be present , and the gout that have pass away , would be too absorbing . he , however , could say but little to direct the conversation . " , you see , liv more in than you do , and be subject to temptation . " " I do not know what you call temptation . have not I the temptation of a bottle of wine under my nose every day of my life ? " " no doubt you have . " " and I do not drink it . I hardly ever take above a glass or two of brown sherry . by ! when I think of it , I wonder at my own courage . I do , indeed . " " but a man in , my lord -- " " why the deuce would he go to ? by - the - bye , what be I to do about the borough now ? " " let my son stand for it , if you will , my lord . " " they have clean sweep away 's seat at , have not they ? , ha , ha ! what a nice game for he , -- to have be force to help to do it himself ! there be nobody on earth I pity so much as a radical peer who be oblige to work like a nigger with a spade to shovel away the ground from under he own foot . as for I , I do not care who sit for . I do care for poor Jack while he be alive . I do not think I shall interfere any longer . I be glad it last 's time . " have probably already forgote that he himself have throw over for the last session but one . " Phinea , my lord , " begin the father , " be now under - of . " " oh , I have no doubt he be a very fine fellow ; -- but you see , he be a out - and - out . " " no , my lord . " " then how can he serve with such man as and ? they have turn out poor old among they , because he be not fast enough for they . do not tell I . " " my anxiety , of course , be for my boy 's prospect . he seem to have do so well in parliament . " " why do not he stand for or ? " " the money , you know , my lord ! " " I sha not interfere here , doctor . if he come , and the people then choose to return he , I shall say nothing . they may do just as they please . they tell I , of , be go to stand . if he do , it be the d ---- piece of impudence I ever hear of . he be a tenant of my own , though he have a lease for ever ; and he father never own a acre of land in the county till he uncle di . " then the doctor know that , with a little management , the lord 's interest might be secure for he son . come over and stand for the borough against , and the contest be sharp enough . the gentry of the neighbourhood could not understand why such a man as should admit a liberal candidate to succeed he brother . no one canvass for the young under - Secretary with more persistent zeal than do he father , who , when first spoke of go into parliament , have produce so many good argument against that perilous step . 's agent stand aloon , -- desolate with grief at the death of the late member . at such a moment of family affliction , , he declare , could not think of
of such a matter as the borough . but it be know that be dreadfully jealous of , whose property in that part of the county be now nearly equal to he own , and who see much more company at be ever entertaine at . a word from , -- so say the conservative of the county ,-- would have put into the seat ; but that word be not speak , and the conservative of the neighbourhood swore that be a renegade . the contest be very sharp , but we hero be return by a majority of seventeen vote . again successful ! as he think of it he remember story of great generals who be say to have chain Fortune to the wheel of they chariot , but it seem to he that the goddess have never serve any general with such staunch obedience as she have display in he cause . have not everything go well with he ; -- so well , as almost to justify he in expect that even yet would become he wife ? dear , dearest Violet ! if he could only achieve that , no general , who ever lead a army across the , would be he equal either in success or in the reward of success . then he question himself as to what he would say to miss on that very night . he be to meet dear little that even at a neighbour 's house . he sister have so tell he in a tone of voice which he quite understood to imply a caution . " I shall be so glad to see she , " Phinea have reply . " if there ever be a angel on earth , it be , " say . " I know that she be as good as gold , " say . " gold ! " reply , -- " gold indeed ! she be more precious than refin gold . but , , perhaps you have better not single she out for any special attention . she have think it wisest to meet you . " " of course , " say . " why not ? " " that be all , . I have nothing more to say . of course be different from girl . " " that be true , , at any rate . " " do not laugh at I , Phineas , when I be think of nothing but of you and you interest , and when I be make all manner of excuse for you because I know what must be the distraction of the world in which you live . " make more than one attempt to renew the conversation before the evening come , but think that he have have enough of it . he do not like be tell that excuse be make for he . after all , what have he do ? he have once kiss behind the door . " I be so glad to see you , , " he say , come and take a chair by she side . he have be specially warn not to single out for he attention , and yet there be the chair left vacant as though it be expect that he would fall into it . " thank you . we do not happen to meet last year , do we ,-- Finn ? " " do not call I , . " " you be such a great man now ! " " not at all a great man . if you only know what little man we understrapper be in you would hardly speak to I . " " but you be something -- of now ; -- be you not ? " " well ; -- yes . that be the name they give I . it simply mean that if any member want to badger some one in the about the Colony , I be the man to be badger . but if there be any credit to be have , I be not the man who be to have it . " " but it be a great thing to be in parliament and in the government too . " " it be a great thing for I , , to have a salary , though it may only be for a year or two . however , I will not deny that it be pleasant to have be successful . " " it have be very pleasant to we , . have be so much rejoice . " " I be so sorry not to see she . she be at , I suppose . " " oh , yes ; -- she be at home . she do not like come out at night in winter . I have be stay here you know for two day , but I go home to - morrow . " " I will ride over and call on you mother . " then there be a pause in the conversation for a moment . " do it not seem odd , , that we should see so little of each other ? " " you be so much away , of course . " " yes ; -- that be the reason . but still it seem almost unnatural . I often wonder when the time will come that I shall be quietly at home again . I have to be back in my office in this day week , and yet I have not have a single hour to myself since I have be at . but I will certainly ride over and see you mother . you will be at home on I suppose . " " yes , -- I shall be at home . " upon that he get up and go away , but
but again in the evening he find himself near she . perhaps there be no position more perilous to a man be honesy than that in which Phineas now find himself ; -- that , namely , of know himself to be quite love by a girl whom he almost love himself . of course he love ; and they who talk best of love protest that no man or woman can be in love with two person at once . be not in love with ; but he would have like to take she in he arm and kiss she ; -- he would have like to gratify she by swear that she be dearer to he than all the world ; he would have like to have a episode , -- and do , at the moment , think that it might be possible to have one life in and another life altogether different at . " dear , " he say as he press she hand that night , " thing will get themselves settle at last , I suppose . " he be behave very ill to she , but he do not mean to behave ill . he ride over to , and see . , however , receive he very coldly ; and do not appear . have communicate to she mother she resolution as to she future life . " the fact be , mamma , I love he . I can not help it . if he ever choose to come for I , here I be . if he do not , I will bear it as well as I can . it may be very mean of I , but it be true . " at there be a dull house at during the greater part of this autumn . a few man go down for the grouse shoot late in the season ; but they stay but a short time , and when they go be leave alone with she husband . have explain to he wife , more than once , that though he understand the duty of hospitality and enjoy the performance of they , he have not marry with the intention of live in a whirlwind . he be dispose to think that the whirlwind have hitherto be too predominant , and have say so very plainly with a good deal of marital authority . this autumn and winter be to be devote to the cultivation of proper relation between he and he wife . " do that mean and ? " he wife have ask he , when the proposition be make to she . " it mean mutual regard and esteem , " reply in he most solemn tone , " and I trust that such mutual regard and esteem between we may yet be possible . " when show he a letter from she brother , receive some week after this conversation , in which express he intention of come to for , he return the note to he wife without a word . he suspect that she have make the arrangement without ask he , and be angry ; but he would not tell she that she brother would not be welcome at he house . " it be not my do , " she say , when she see the frown on he brow . " I say nothing about anybody be do , " he reply . " I will write to and bid he not come , if you wish it . of course you can understand why he be come . " " not to see I , I be sure , " say . " nor I , " reply . " he be come because my friend will be here . " " ! why be I not tell of this ? I know nothing of 's come . " " , it be settle in you own presence last . " " I deny it . " then rise up , very haughty in she gait and with something of fire in she eye , and silently leave the room . , when he find himself alone , be very unhappy . look back in he mind to the summer weeks in , he remember that he wife have tell Violet that she be to spend she at , that he himself have give a muttered assent and that Violet , -- as far as he could remember , -- have make no reply . it have be one of those thing which be so often mention , but not settle . he feel that he have be strictly right in deny that it have be " settle " in he presence ; -- but yet he feel that he have be wrong in contradict he wife so peremptorily . he be a just man , and he would apologise for he fault ; but he be a austere man , and would take back the value of he apology in additional austerity . he do not see he wife for some hour after the conversation which have be narrate , but when he do meet she he mind be still full of the subject . " " , he say , " I be sorry that I contradict you . " " I be quite use to it , . " " no ; -- you be not use to it . " she smile and bow she head . " you wrong I by say that you be use to it . " then he pause a moment , but she say not a word , -- only smile and bow she head again . " I remember , " he continue , " that something be say in my presence to about she come here at . it be so slight , however
however , that it have pass out of my memory till recal by a effort . I beg you pardon . " " that be unnecessary , . " " it be , dear . " " and do you wish that I should put she off , -- or put off , -- or both ? my brother never yet have see I in you house . " " and whose fault have that been ? " " I have say nothing about anybody 's fault , . I merely mention a fact . will you let I know whether I shall bid he stay away ? " " he be welcome to come ,-- only I do not like assignation for love - make . " " Assignation ! " " Clandestine meeting . would not wish it . " " ! do you think that would exercise any secrecy in the matter , -- or that she will not tell Lady Baldock that will be here , -- as soon as she know it herself ? " " that have nothing to do with it . " " surely , , it must have much to do with it . and why should not these two young people meet ? the acknowledged wish of all the family be that they should marry each other . and in this matter , at any rate , my brother have behave extremely well . " say nothing further at the time , and it become a understanding that be to be a month at , stay from the 20th of to the 20th of , and that be to come there for ,-- which with he would probably mean three day . before come , however , there be various other source of uneasiness at . there have been , as a matter of course , great anxiety as to the election . with this anxiety have be very strong , and even have be war with some amount of fire as the announcement reach he of the success and of the failure . the english return come first , -- and then the , which be quite as interesting to as the . he own seat be quite safe , -- be not contest ; but some neighbour seat be source of great solicitude . then , when this be over , there be the tiding from to be receive ; and respecte one special borough in , evince more solicitude than she husband approve . there be much danger for the domestic bliss of the house of , when thing come to such a pass , and such word be spoken , as the election at produce . " he be in , " say , open a telegram . " who be in ? " say , with that fry on he brow to which he wife be now well accustom . though he ask the question , he know very well who be the hero to whom the telegram refer . " we friend , " say , speak still with a excited voice , -- with a voice that be intend to display excitement . if there be to be a battle on this matter , there should be a battle . she would display all she anxiety for she young friend , and fl it in she husband 's face if he choose to take it as a injury . what , -- should she endure reproach from she husband because she regard the interest of the man who have save he life , of the man respect whom she have suffer so many heart - struggle , and as to whom she have at last come to the conclusion that he should ever be regard as a second brother , love equally with the elder brother ? she have do she duty by she husband , -- so at least she have assure herself ; -- and should he dare to reproach she on this subject , she would be ready for the battle . and now the battle come . " I be glad of this , " she say , with all the eagerness she could throw into she voice . " I be , indeed , -- and so ought you to be . " the husband 's brow grow blacker and blacker , but still he say nothing . he have long be too proud to be jealous , and be now too proud to express he jealousy , -- if only he could keep the expression back . but he wife would not leave the subject . " I be so thankful for this , " she say , presse the telegram between she hand . " I be so afraid he would fail ! " " you over - do you anxiety on such a subject , " at last he say , speak very slowly . " what do you mean , ? how can I be over-anxious ? if it concern any other dear friend that I have in the world , it would not be a affair of life and death . to he it be almost so . I would have walk from here to to get he he election . " and as she speak she hold up the clenched fist of she left hand , and shake it , while she still hold the telegram in she right hand . " , I must tell you that it be improper that you should speak of any man in those term ; -- of any man that be a stranger to you blood . " " a stranger to my blood ! what have that to do with it ? this man be my friend , be you friend ; -- save you life , have be my brother 's best friend ,
, be love by my father , -- and be love by I , very dearly . tell I what you mean by improper ! " " I will not have you love any man ,-- very dearly . " " ! " " I tell you that I will have no such expression from you . they be unseemly , and be use only to provoke I . " " be I to understand that I be insult by a accusation ? if so , let I beg at once that I may be allow to go to . I would rather accept you apology and retractation there than here . " " you will not go to , and there have be no accusation , and there will be no apology . if you please there will be no more mention of 's name between we , for the present . if you will take my advice you will cease to think of he extravagantly ; -- and I must desire you to hold no further direct communication with he . " " I have hold no communication with he , " say , advance a step towards he . but simply point to the telegram in she hand , and leave the room . now in respect to this telegram there have be a unfortunate mistake . I be not prepared to say that there be any reason why Phineas himself should not have send the news of he success to ; but he have not do so . the piece of paper which she still hold crush in she hand be in itself very innocent . " for the Loughshanes . have do the trick . " such be the word write on the slip , and they have be send to by she young cousin , the clerk in the office who act as private secretary to the under - Secretary of . resolve that she husband should never see those innocent but rather undignified word . the occasion have become one of importance , and such word be unworthy of it . besides , she would not condescmend to defend herself by bring forward a telegram as evidence in she favour . so she burn the morsel of paper . and do not meet again till late that even . she be ill , she say , and would not come down to dinner . after dinner she write he a note . " dear , I think you must regret what you say to I . if so , pray let I have a line from you to that effect . yours affectionately , . " when the servant hande it to he , and he have read it , he smile and thanke the girl who have bring it , and say he would see she mistress just now . anything would be better than that the servant should know that there be a quarrel . but every servant in the house have know all about it for the last three hour . when the door be close and he be alone , he sit finger the note , think deeply how he should answer it , or whether he would answer it at all . no ; he would not answer it ;-- not in writing . he would give he wife no write record of he humiliation . he have not act wrongly . he have say nothing more than now , upon mature consideration , he think that the circumstance demand . but yet he feel that he must in some sort withdraw the accusation which he have make . if he do not withdraw it , there be no know what he wife might do . about ten in the evening he go up to she and make he little speech . " my dear , I have come to answer you note . " " I think you would have write to I a line . " " I have come instead , . now , if you will listen to I for one moment , I think everything will be make smooth . " " of course I will listen , " say , know very well that she husband 's moment would be rather tedious , and resolve that she also would have she moment afterwards . " I think you will acknowledge that if there be a difference of opinion between you and I as to any question of social intercourse , it will be better that you should consent to adopt my opinion . " " you have the law on you side . " " I be not speak of the law . " " well ; -- go on , . I will not interrupt you if I can help it . " " I be not speak of the law . I be speak simply of convenience , and of that which you must feel to be right . if I wish that you intercourse with any person should be of such or such a nature it must be best that you should comply with my wish . " he pause for she assent , but she neither assent nor dissent . " as far as I can understand the position of a man and wife in this country , there be no other way in which life can be make harmonious . " " life will not run in harmoney . " " I expect that ours shall be make to do so , . I need hardly say to you that I intend to accuse you of no impropriety of feeling in reference to this young man . " " no , ; you need hardly say that . indeed , to speak my own mind , I think that you need hardly have allude to it . I
I might go further , and say that such a allusion be in itself a insult , -- a insult now repeat after hour of deliberation , -- a insult which I will not endure to have repeat again . if you say another word in any way suggest the possibility of improper relation between I and , either as to deeds or thought , as be above I , I will write to both my father and my brother , and desire they to take I from you house . if you wish I to remain here , you have better be careful ! " as she be make this speech , she temper seem to rise , and to become hot , and then hotter , till it glow with a red heat . she have be cool till the word insult , use by herself , have convey back to she a strong impression of she own wrong , -- or perhaps I should rather say a strong feeling of the necessity of become indignant . she be stand as she speak , and the fire flash from she eye , and he quail before she . the threat which she have hold out to he be very dreadful to he . he be a man terribly in fear of the world 's good opinion , who lack the courage to go through a great and harassing trial in order that something better might come afterwards . he married life have be unhappy . he wife have not submit either to he will or to he way . he have that great desire to enjoy he full rights , so strong in the mind of weak , ambitious man , and he have tell himself that a wife 's obedience be one of those rights which he could not abandon without injury to he self - esteem . he have think about the matter , slowly , as be he wont , and have resolve that he would assert himself . he have assert himself , and he wife tell he to he face that she would go away and leave he . he could detain she legally , but he could not do even that without the fact of such forcible detention be know to all the world . how be he to answer she now at this moment , so that she might not write to she father , and so that he self - assertion might still be maintain ? " passion , , can never be right . " " would you have a woman submit to insult without passion ? I at any rate be not such a woman . " then there be a pause for a moment . " if you have nothing else to say to I , you have better leave I . I be far from well , and my head be throbb . " he come up and take she hand , but she snatch it away from he . " , " he say , " do not let we quarrel . " " I certainly shall quarrel if such insinuation be repeat . " " I make no insinuation . " " do not repeat they . that be all . " he be cow and leave she , have first attempt to get out of the difficulty of he position by make much of she allege illness , and by offer to send for . she positively refuse to see , and at last succeeded in induce he to quit the room . this have occur about the end of , and on the 20th of reach . Life in 's house have go quietly during the intervening three week , but not very pleasantly . the name of have not be mention . have triumph ; but she have no desire to acerbate she husband by any unpalatable allusion to she victory . and he be quite willing to let the subject die away , if only it would die . on some other matter he continue to assert himself , take he wife to church twice every , use longer family prayer than she approve , read a additional sermon himself every evening , call upon she for weekly attention to elaborate household account , ask for she personal assistance in much local visiting , initiate she into he favourite methods of family life in the country , till sometimes she almost long to talk again about , so that there might be a rupture , and she might escape . but she husband assert himself within bounds , and she submit , long for the coming of . she could not write to she father and beg to be take away , because she husband would read a sermon to she on evening . to , very shortly after she arrival , she tell she whole story . " this be terrible , " say . " this make I feel that I never will be marry . " " and yet what can a woman become if she remain single ? the curse be to be a woman at all . " " I have always feel so proud of the privileges of my sex , " say . " I never have find they , " say the other ; " never . I have try to make the best of its weakness , and this be what I have come to ! I suppose I ought to have love some man . " " and do you never love any man ? " " no ;-- I think I never do , -- not as people mean when they speak of love . I have feel that I would consent to be cut in little piece for my brother , -- because of my regard for he .
. " " ah , that be nothing . " " and I have feel something of the same thing for another , -- a longing for he welfare , a delight to hear he praise , a charm in he presence , -- so strong a feeling for he interest , that be he to go to wrack and ruin , I too , should , after a fashion , be wrack and ruin . but it have not be love either . " " do I know whom you mean ? may I name he ? it be . " " of course it be . " " do he ever ask you , -- to love he ? " " I fear he would do so , and therefore accept 's offer almost at the first word . " " I do not quite understand you reasoning , . " " I understand it . I could have refuse he nothing in my power to give he , but I do not wish to be he wife . " " and he never ask you ? " pause a moment , think what reply she should make ; -- and then she tell a fib . " no ; he never ask I . " but do not believe the fib . be quite sure that Phineas have ask to be he wife . " as far as I can see , " say , " be he present passion . " " I do not believe it in the least , " say , fire up . " it do not much matter , " say . " it would matter very much . you know , you , -- you ; you know whom he love . and I do believe that sooner or later you will be he wife . " " never . " " yes , you will . have you not love he you would never have condescende to accuse he about that woman . " " I have not accuse he . why should he not marry ? it would be just the thing for he . she be very rich . " " never . you will be he wife . " " Laura , you be the most capricious of woman . you have two dear friend , and you insist that I shall marry they both . which shall I take first ? " " will be here in a day or two , and you can take he if you like it . no doubt he will ask you . but I do not think you will . " " no ; I do not think I shall . I shall knock under to , and go in for woman 's rights , and look forward to stand for some female borough . never seem to I to be very charming , and upon my word it do not become more alluring by what I find at . " it be thus that and discuss these matters together , but have never show to she friend the card in she hand , as have show those which she hold . have in fact tell almost everything that there be to tell , -- have speak either plainly with true word , or equally plainly with word that be not true . have almost come to love ; -- but she never tell she friend that it be so . at one time she have almost make up she mind to give herself and all she wealth to this adventurer . he be a better man , she think , than ; and she have come to persuade herself that it be almost imperative on she to take the one or the other . though she could talk about remain unmarried , she know that that be practically impossible . all those around she ,-- those of the Baldock as well as those of the faction ,-- would make such a life impossible to she . besides , in such a case what could she do ? it be all very well to talk of disregard the world and of set up a house for herself ; -- but she be quite aware that that project could not be use further than for the purpose of scare she amiable aunt . and if not then , -- then could she contend herself to look forward to a joint life with and ? she might , of course , oblige she aunt by take , or oblige she aunt equally by take ; but she be strongly of opinion that either or would be preferable to these . think over it always she have come to feel that it must be either or ; but she have never whisper she think to man or woman . on she journey to , where she then know that she be to meet , she endeavoure to persuade herself that it should be Phineas . but have mar it all by that ill - tell fib . there have be a moment before in which have feel that have sacrifice something of that truth of love for which she give he credit to the glance of 's eye ; but she have rebuk herself for the idea , accuse herself not only of a little jealousy , but of foolish vanity . be he , whom she have reject , not to speak to another woman ? then come the blow from , and know that it be a blow . this gallant lover , this young , this unassuming but ardent lover , have simply take up with she as soon as he have fail with she friend . have be most enthusiastic in she expressions of friendship . such platonic regards might be all very well . it be for
for to look to that . but , for herself , she feel that such expression be hardly compatible with she idea of have she lover all to herself . and then she again remember 's bright blue eye . come on eve , and be receive with open arm by he sister , and with that painful , irritat affection which such a girl as can show to such a man as , when she will not give he that other affection for which he heart be pante . the two man be civil to each other , -- but very cold . they call each other and , but even that be not do without a effort . on the morning ask he brother - in - law to go to church . " it be a kind of thing I never do , " say . give a little start , and look a look of horror . show that she be unhappy . turn away she face , and smile . as they walk across the take 's part . " he only mean that he do not go to church on day . " " I do not know what he mean , " say . " we need not speak of it , " say . " certainly not , " say . " I have be to church with he on myself , " say , perhaps not reflec that the practice of early year have little to do with the young man 's life at present . day and the next day pass without any sign from , and on the day after that he be to go away . but he be not to leave till one or two in the afternoon . not a word have be say between the two woman , since he have be in the house , on the subject of which both of they be think . very much have be say of the expediency of he go to , but on this matter he have decline to make any promise . sit in 's room , in the presence of both of they , he have refuse to do so . " I be bad to drive , " he say , turn to , " and you have better not try to drive I . " " why should not you be drive as well as another ? " she answer , laugh . the , though he have pass two entire day in the house with without renew he suit , have come to Loughlinter for the express purpose of do so , and have he plan perfectly fix in he own mind . after breakfast on that last morning he be up - stair with he sister in she own room , and immediately make he request to she . " , " he say , " go down like a good girl , and make come up here . " she stand a moment look at he and smile . " and , mind , " he continue , " you be not to come back yourself . I must have Violet alone . " " but suppose will not come ? young lady do not generally wait upon young man on such occasion . " " no ; -- but I rank she so high among young woman , that I think she will have common sense enough to teach she that , after what have pass between we , I have a right to ask for a interview , and that it may be more conveniently have here than in the wilderness of the house below . " whatever may have be the argument use by she friend , do come . she reach the door all alone , and open it bravely . she have promise herself , as she come along the passage , that she would not pause with she hand on the lock for a moment . she have first go to she own room , and as she leave it she have look into the glass with a hurried glance , and have then rest for a moment , -- think that something should be do , that she hair might be smoothe , or a ribbon set straight , or the chain arrange under she brooch . a girl would wish to look well before she lover , even when she mean to refuse he . but she pause be but for a instant , and then she go on , have touch nothing . she shook she head and press she hand together , and go on quick and open the door ,-- almost with a little start . " Violet , this be very good of you , " say , stand with he back to the fire , and not move from the spot . " have tell I that you think I would do as much as this for you , and therefore I have do it . " " thanks , dearest . it be the old story , , and I be so bad at word ! " " I must have be bad at word too , as I have not be able to make you understand . " " I think I have understand . you be always clear - spoken , and I , though I can not talk , be not muddle - pat . I have understand . but while you be single there must be yet hope ;--unless , indeed , you will tell I that you have already give yourself to another man . " " I have not do that . " " then how can I not hope ? Violet , I would if I could tell you all my feeling plainly . once , twice , thrice
thrice , I have say to myself that I would think of you no more . I have try to persuade myself that I be better single than marry . " " but I be not the only woman . " " to I you be ,-- absolutely , as though there be none other on the face of 's earth . I live much alone ; but you be always with I . should you marry any other man , it will be the same with I still . if you refuse I now I shall go away , -- and live wildly . " " , what do you mean ? " " I mean that I will go to some distant part of the world , where I may be kill or live a life of adventure . but I shall do so simply in despair . it will not be that I do not know how much better and greater should be the life at home of a man in my position . " " then do not talk of go . " " I can not stay . you will acknowledge , , that I have never lie to you . I be think of you day and night . the more indifferent you show yourself to I , the more I love you . Violet , try to love I . " he come up to she , and take she by both she hand , and tear be in he eye . " say you will try to love I . " " it be not that , " say , look away , but still leave she hand with he . " it be not what , dear ? " " what you call , -- try . " " it be that you do not wish to try ? " " Oswald , you be so violent , so headstrong . I be afraid of you , -- as be everybody . why have you not write to you father , as we have ask you ? " " I will write to he instantly , now , before I leave the room , and you shall dictate the letter to he . by heaven , you shall ! " he have drop she hand when she call he violent ; but now he take they again , and still she permit it . " I have postpone it only till I have speak to you once again . " " no , , I will not dictate to you . " " but will you love I ? " she pause and look down , have even now not withdraw she hand from he . but I do not think he know how much he have gai . " you use to love I , -- a little , " he say . " indeed , -- indeed , I do . " " and now ? be it all change now ? " " no , " she say , retreat from he . " how be it , then ? Violet , speak to I honestly . will you be my wife ? " she do not answer he , and he stand for a moment look at she . then he rush at she , and , seize she in he arm , kiss she all over , -- she forehead , she lip , she cheek , then both she hand , and then she lip again . " by g ----, she be my own ! " he say . then he go back to the rug before the fire , and stand there with he back turn to she . Violet , when she find herself thus desert , retreat to a sofa , and sit herself down . she have no negative to produce now in answer to the violent assertion which he have pronounce as to he own success . it be true . she have doubt , and doubt , -- and still doubt . but now she must doubt no longer . of one thing she be quite sure . she could love he . as thing have now go , she would make he quite happy with assurance on that subject . as to that other question , -- that fearful question , whether or not she could trust he , -- on that matter she have better at present say nothing , and think as little , perhaps , as might be . she have take the jump , and therefore why should she not be gracious to he ? but how be she to be gracious to a lover who stand there with he back turn to she ? after the interval of a minute or two he remembe himself , and turn round . see she seat , he approach she , and go down on both knee close at she foot . then he take she hand again , for the third time , and look up into she eye . " , you on you knee ! " she say . " I would not bend to a princess , " he say , " to ask for half she throne ; but I will kneel here all day , if you will let I , in thanks for the gift of you love . I never knee to beg for it . " " this be the man who can not make speeches . " " I think I could talk now by the hour , with you for a listener . " " oh , but I must talk too . " " what will you say to I ? " " nothing while you be knee . it be not natural that you should kneel . you be like with he lock
lock shorn , or Hercule with a distaff . " " be that better ? " he say , as he get up and put he arm round she waist . " you be in earnest ? " she ask . " in earnest . I hardly think that that would be doubt . do you not believe I ? " " I do believe you . and you will be good ? " " ah ,-- I do not know that . " " try , and I will love you so dearly . Nay , I do love you dearly . I do . I do . " " say it again . " " I will say it fifty time , -- till you ear be weary with it " ; -- and she do say it to he , after she own fashion , fifty time . " this be a great change , " he say , get up after a while and walk about the room . " but a change for the better ; -- be it not , ? " " so much for the better that I hardly know myself in my new joy . but , , we will have no delay , -- will we ? no shilly - shally . what be the use of wait now that it be settled ? " " none in the least , . let we say , -- this day twelvemonth . " " you be laugh at I , . " " remember , sy , that the first thing you have to do be to write to you father . " he instantly go to the writing - table and take up paper and pen . " come along , " he say . " you be to dictate it . " but this she refuse to do , tell he that he must write he letter to he father out of he own head , and out of he own heart . " I can not write it , " he say , throw down the pen . " my blood be in such a tumult that I can not steady my hand . " " you must not be so tumultuous , , or I shall have to live in a whirlwind . " " oh , I shall shake down . I shall become as steady as a old stager . I will go as quiet in harness by - and - by as though I have be break to it a four -year - old . I wonder whether could not write this letter . " " I think you should write it yourself , . " " if you bid I I will . " " bid you indeed ! as if it be for I to bid you . do you not know that in these new trouble you be undertake you will have to bid I in everything , and that I shall be bound to do you bidding ? do it not seem to be dreadful ? my wonder be that any girl can ever accept any man . " " but you have accept I now . " " yes , indeed . " " and you repent ? " " no , indeed , and I will try to do you biddings ; -- but you must not be rough to I , and outrageous , and fierce , -- will you , ? " " I will not at any rate be like be with poor . " " no ; -- that be not you nature . " " I will do my best , dearest . and you may at any rate be sure of this , that I will love you always . so much good of myself , if it be good , I can say . " " it be very good , " she answer ; " the best of all good word . and now I must go . and as you be leave I will say good - bye . when be I to have the honour and felicity of beholde you lordship again ? " " say a nice word to I before I be off , . " " I ,-- love , -- you , -- better , -- than all the world beside ; and I mean , -- to be you wife , -- some day . be not those twenty nice word ? " he would not prolong he stay at , though he be ask to do so both by and he sister , and though , as he confess himself , he have no special business elsewhere . " it be no use mince the matter . I do not like , and I do not like be in he house , " he say to . and then he promise that there should be a party get up at before the winter be over . he plan be to stop that night at , and write to he father from thence . " you blood , perhaps , will not be so tumultuous at , " say . he shook he head and go on with he plan . he would then go on to and down to , and there wait for he father 's answer . " there be no reason why I should lose more of the hunting than necessary . " " pray do not lose a day for I , " say . as soon as he hear from he father , he would do he father 's bidding . " you will go to , " say ; " you can hunt at , you know . " " I will go to if he ask I , only you will have to go with I
I . " " I think we be to go to ,-- , " say . " and so that be settle at last , " say to that night . " I hope you do not regret it . " " on the contrary , I be as happy as the moment be long . " " my fine girl ! " " I be happy because I love he . I have always love he . you have know that . " " indeed , no . " " but I have , after my fashion . I be not tumultuous , as he call himself . since he begin to make eye at I when he be nineteen -- " " Fancy Oswald make eye ! " " oh , he do , and mouth too . but from the begin , when I be a child , I have know that he be dangerous , and I have think that he would pass on and forget I after a while . and I could have live without he . Nay , there have be moment when I think I could learn to love some one else . " " poor Phinea , for instance . " " we will mention no name . , perhaps , more likely . he have be my most constant lover , and then he would be so safe ! you brother , , be dangerous . he be like the bad ice in the parks where they stick up the pole . he have have a pole stuck upon he ever since he be a boy . " " yes ; -- give a dog a bad name and hang he . " " remember that I do not love he a bit the less on that account ; -- perhaps the better . a sense of danger do not make I unhappy , though the threaten evil may be fatal . I have enter myself for my forlorn hope , and I mean to stick to it . now I must go and write to he worship . only think ,-- I never write a love - letter yet ! " nothing more shall be say about 's first love - letter , which be , no doubt , creditable to she head and heart ; but there be two other letter send by the same post from which shall be submit to the reader , as they will assist the telling of the story . one be from to she friend , and the other from to she aunt , . no letter be write to , as it be think desirable that he should receive the first intimation of what have be do from he son . respecte the letter to , which shall be first give , think it right to say a word to she husband . he have be of course tell of the engagement , and have reply that he could have wish that the arrangement could have be make elsewhere than at he house , know as he do that Lady Baldock would not approve of it . to this have make no reply , and have condescende to congratulate the bride - elect . when 's letter to be complete she take care to put it into the letter - box in the presence of she husband . " I have write to , " she say , " to tell he of this marriage . " " why be it necessary that he should be tell ? " " I think it be due to he , -- from certain circumstance . " " I wonder whether there be any truth in what everybody be say about they fight a duel ? " ask . he wife make no answer , and then he continue -- " you tell I of you own knowledge that it be untrue . " " not of my own knowledge , . " " yes ; -- of you own knowledge . " then walk away , and be certain that he wife have deceive he about the duel . there have be a duel , and she have know it ; and yet she have tell he that the report be a ridiculous fabrication . he never forget anything . he remember at this moment the word of the falsehood , and the look of she face as she tell it . he have believe she implicitly , but he would never believe she again . he be one of those man who , in spite of they experience of the world , of they experience of they own life , imagine that lip that have once lie can never tell the truth . 's letter to be as follow : , 28th , 186 --. my , be here , and have just leave we . it be possible that you may see he as he pass through . but , at any rate , I think it best to let you know immediately that she have accept he , -- at last . if there be any pang in this to you , be sure that I will grieve for you . you will not wish I to say that I regret that which be the dearest wish of my heart before I know you . lately , indeed , I have be tear in two way . you will understand what I mean , and I believe I need say nothing more ;-- except this , that it shall be among my prayer that you may obtain all thing that may tend to make you happy , honourable , and of high esteem . you most sincere friend . even though she husband should read the letter , there be nothing in that of which she need be asham . but
but he do not read the letter . he simply speculate as to its contents , and inquire within himself whether it would not be for the welfare of the world in general , and for the welfare of himself in particular , that husband should demand to read they wife 's letter . and this be 's letter to she aunt :-- my , the thing have come at last , and all you trouble will be soon over ;--for I do believe that all you trouble have come from you unfortunate niece . at last I be go to be married , and thus take myself off you hand . have just be here , and I have accept he . I be afraid you hardly think so well of as I do ; but then , perhaps , you have not know he so long . you do know , however , that there have be some difference between he and he father . I think I may take upon myself to say that now , upon he engagement , this will be settle . I have the inexpressible pleasure of feeling sure that will welcome I as he daughter - in - law . tell the news to with my best love . I will write to she in a day or two . I hope my cousin will condescmend to give I away . of course there be nothing fix about time ; -- but I should say , perhaps , in nine year . you affectionate niece , . , . " what do she mean about nine year ? " say in she wrath . " she be joke , " say the mild . " I believe she would -- joke , if I be go to be bury , " say . how bear the receive 's letter , he be sit in he gorgeous apartment in the . it be gorgeous in comparison with the very dingy room at 's to which he have be accustom in he early day , -- and somewhat gorgeous also as compare with the lodging he have so long inhabit in 's house . the room be large and square , and look out from three window on to 's . there be in it two very comfortable arm -chair and a comfortable sofa . and the office table at which he sit be of old mahogany , shin brightly , and seem to be fitte up with every possible appliance for official comfort . this stood near one of the window , so that he could sit and look down upon the park . and there be a large round table cover with book and newspaper . and the walls of the room be bright with map of all the coloney . and there be one very interesting map , -- but not very bright , -- show the american colony , as they use to be . and there be a little inner closet in which he could brush he hair and wash he hand ; and in the room adjoin there sit , -- or ought to have sat , for he be often absent , vex the mind of , -- the 's nephew , he private secretary . and it be all very gorgeous . often as he look round upon it , think of he old bedroom at , of he little garret at Trinity , of the dingy chamber in 's , he would tell himself that it be very gorgeous . he would wonder that anything so grand have fall to he lot . the letter from be bring to he in the afternoon , have reach by some day - mail from . he be sit at he desk with a heap of papers before he refer to a contemplate railway from , in , to the foot of the . it have become he business to get up the subject , and then discuss with he principal , , the expediency of advise the government to lend a company five million of money , in order that this railway might be make . it be a big subject , and the contemplation of it gratify he . it require that he should look forward to great event , and exercise the wisdom of a statesman . what be the chance of these coloney be swallow up by those other region , -- once colony , -- of which the map that hang in the corner tell so eloquent a tale ? and if so , would the five million ever be repay ? and if not swallow up , be the colony worth so great a adventure of national money ? could they repay it ? would they do so ? should they be make to do so ? , who be now a and in parliament , would not have greater subject than this before he , even if he should come to be . have specially ask he to get up this matter , -- and he be get it up sedulously . once in nine year the harbour of be block up by ice . he have just jot down the fact , which be material , when 's letter be bring to he . he read it , and put it down by he side very gently , go back to he map as though the thing would not so trouble he mind as to disturb he work . he absolutely write , automatically , certain word of a note about the harbour , after he have receive the information . a horse will gallop for some score of yard , after he back have be break , before he know of he great ruin ; -- and so it be with . he back be broken , but , nevertheless
nevertheless , he gallop , for a yard or two . " close in 1860 - 61 for thirteen day . " then he begin to be aware that he back be broken , and that the writing of any more note about the ice in harbwe be for the present out of the question . " I think it best to let you know immediately that she have accept he . " these be the word which he read the oftenest . then it be all over ! the game be play out , and all he victory be as nothing to he . he sit for a hour in he gorgeous room think of it , and various be the answer which he give during the time to various message ; -- but he would see nobody . as for the coloney , he do not care if they revolt to - morrow . he would have part with every colony belong to to have get the hand of for himself . now , -- now at this moment , he tell himself with oath that he have never love any one but . there have be so much to make such a marriage desirable ! I should wrong my hero deeply be I to say that the weight of he sorrow be occasion by the fact that he have lose a heiress . he would never have think of look for have he not first learn to love she . but as the idea open itself out to he , everything have seem to be so suitable . have become he wife , the mouth of the and of the Bunce would have be stop altogether . would have come to he house as he familiar guest , and he would have be connect with half a score of peer . a seat in parliament would be simply he proper place , and even Under - Secretaryships of might soon come to be below he . he be play a great game , but hitherto he have play it with so much success , -- with such wonderful luck ! that it have see to he that all thing be within he reach . nothing more have be want to he than 's hand for he own comfort , and 's fortune to support he position ; and these , too , have almost seem to be within he grasp . he goddess have indeed refuse he , -- but not with disdain . even have talk of he marriage as not improbable . all the world , almost , have hear of the duel ; and all the world have smile , and seem to think that in the real fight would be the victor , -- that the lucky pistol be in he hand . it have never occur to any one to suppose , -- as far as he could see , -- that he be presum at all , or push himself out of he own sphere , in ask to be he wife . no ;--he would trust he luck , would persevere , and would succeed . such have be he resolution on that very morning , -- and now there have come this letter to dash he to the ground . there be moment in which he declare to himself that he would not believe the letter , -- not that there be any moment in which there be in he mind the slightest spark of real hope . but he would tell himself that he would still persevere . Violet might have be drive to accept that violent man by violent influence , -- or it might be that she have not in truth accept he , that have simply so assert . or , even if it be so , do woman never change they mind ? the manly thing would be to persevere to the end . have he not before be successful , when success seem to be as far from he ? but he could buoy himself up with no real hope . even when these idea be present to he mind , he know , -- he know well , -- at those very moment , that he back be broken . some one have come in and light the candle and draw down the blind while he be sit there , and now , as he look at he watch , he find that it be past five o'clock . he be engage to dine with Goesler at eight , and in he agony he half - resolve that he would send a excuse . would be full of wrath , as she be very particular about she little dinner - party ; -- but , what do he care now about the wrath of ? and yet only this morning he have be congratulate himself , among he other success , upon she favour , and have laugh inwardly at he own falseness , -- he falseness to , -- as he do so . he have say something to himself jocosely about lover ' perjury , the remembrance of which be now very bitter to he . he take up a sheet of note - paper and scrawl a excuse to . news from the country , he say , make it impossible that he should go out to - night . but he do not send the note . at about half - past five he open the door of he private secretary 's room and find the young man fast asleep , with a cigar in he mouth . " , , " he say . " all right ! " be a first cousin of 's , and , have be in the office before have join it , and be a great favourite with he cousin , have
have of course become the - 's private secretary . " I be all here , " say , get up and shake himself . " I be go . just tie up those papers ,-- exactly as they be . I shall be here early to - morrow , but I sha not want you before twelve . good night , Charles . " " , , " say he private secretary , who be very fond of he master , but not very respectful ,-- unless upon express occasion . then go out and walk across the park ; but as he go he become quite aware that he back be broken . it be not the less break because he sang to himself little song to prove to himself that it be whole and sound . it be break , and it seem to he now that he never could become a Atlas again , to bear the weight of the world upon he shoulders . what do anything signify ? all that he have do have be part of a game which he have be play throughout , and now he have be beat in he game . he absolutely ignore he old passion for as though it have never be , and regard himself as a model of constancy , -- as a man who have love , not wisely perhaps , but much too well , -- and who must now therefore suffer a living death . he hate parliament . he hate the . he hate he friend ; and he especially hate . as to , -- he believe that have obtain he object by violence . he would see to that ! yes ; -- let the consequence be what they might , he would see to that ! he go up by the of 's column , and as he pass the Athenaeum he see he chief , , stand under the portico talk to a bishop . he would have go on unnoticed , have it be possible ; but come down to he at once . " I have put you name down here , " say he lordship . " what be the use ? " say , who be profoundly indifferent at this moment to all the club in . " it can not do any harm , you know . you will come up in time . and if you should get into the ministry , they will let you in at once . " " ! " ejaculate Phineas . but take the tone of voice as simply suggestive of humility , and suspect nothing of that profound indifference to all ministers and ministerial honour which have intend to express . " by - the - bye , " say , put he arm through that of the - , " I want to speak to you about the guarantee . we shall be in the 's own mess , you know -- " and so the of go on about the , and strove hard to bear he burden with he break back . he be obliged to say something about the guarantee , and the railway , and the freeze harbour , -- and something especially about the difficulty which would be find , not in the measure themselves , but in the natural pugnacity of the opposition . in the fabrication of garment for the national wear , the great thing be to produce garment that shall , as far as possible , defy hole - picking . it may be , and sometimes be , the case , that garment so fabricated will be good also for wear . , at the present moment , be very anxious and very ingenious in the stopping of hole ; and he think that perhaps he under - Secretary be too much prone to the indulgence of large philanthropical view without sufficient thought of the hole - picker . but on this occasion , by the time that he reach 's , he have be enable to convince he under - Secretary , and though he have always think well of he under - Secretary , he think better of he now than ever he have do . Phinea during the whole time have be meditat what he could do to when they two should meet . could he take he by the throat and smite he ? " I happen to know that be work as hard at the matter as we be , " say , stop opposite to the club . " he move for papers , you know , at the end of last session . " now be a gentleman in the look for promotion in a Conservative government , and of course would oppose any measure that could be bring forward by the - Administration . then slip into the club , and go on alone . a spark of he old ambition with reference to 's be the first thing to make he forget he misery for a moment . he have ask to put he name down , and be not sure whether it have be do . the threat of 's opposition have be of no use towards the strengthening of he break back , but the sight of hurrie in at the coveted door do do something . " a man can not cut he throat or blow he brain out , " he say to himself ; " after all , he must go on and do he work . for heart will break , yet brokenly live on . " Thereupon he go home , and after sit for a hour over he own fire , and look wistfully at a little treasure which he have , -- a treasure obtain by some slight fraud at , and which he now chuck
chuck into the fire , and then instantly again pull out of it , soil but unscorch , -- he dress himself for dinner , and go out to 's . upon the whole , he be glad that he have not send the note of excuse . a man must live , even though he heart be break , and live he must dine . be fond of give little dinner at this period of the year , before be crowded , and when she guest might probably not be call away by subsequent social arrangement . she number seldom exceed six or eight , and she always speak of these entertainment as be of the humblest kind . she send out no big card . she prefer to catch she people as though by chance , when that be possible . " dear . be come to tell I about some sherry on . will you come and tell I too ? I daresay you know as much about it . " and then there be a studious absence of parade . the dish be not very numerous . the bill of fare be simply write out once , for the mistress , and so circulate round the table . not a word about the thing to be eat or the thing to be drunk be ever speak at the table , -- or at least no such word be ever speak by . but , nevertheless , they who know anything about dinner be aware that give very good dinner indeed . be begin to flatter himself that he know something about dinner , and have be hear to assert that the soup at the cottage in be not to be beat in . but he care for no soup to - day , as he slowly make he way up 's staircase . there have be one difficulty in the way of 's dinner - party which have require some patience and great ingenuity in its management . she must either have lady , or she must not have they . there be a great allurement in the latter alternative ; but she know well that if she give way to it , all prospect of general society would for she be close , -- and for ever . this have be in the early day of she widowhood in . she care but little for woman 's society ; but she know well that the society of gentleman without woman would not be that which she desire . she know also that she might as effectually crush herself and all she aspiration by bring to she house indifferent woman ,-- woman lack something either in character , or in position , or in talent , -- as by have none at all . thus there have be a great difficulty , and sometimes she have think that the thing could not be do at all . " these be so stiff , so hard , so heavy ! " and yet she would not have care to succeed elsewhere than among the . by degrees , however , the thing be done . she prudence equal she wit , and even suspicious people have come to acknowledge that they could not put they finger on anything wrong . when have once dine at the cottage in , have tell herself that henceforth she do not care what the suspicious people say . since that the of have almost promise that he would come . if she could only entertain the of she would have do everything . but there be no Duke of there to - night . at this time the of be , of course , not in . but be there ; and we old friend , who have -- resign he place at the ; and there be and . they , with we hero , make up the party . no one doubt for a moment to what source owed he dinner . be good - look , could talk , be sufficiently proper , and all that kind of thing , -- and do as well as any other woman at this time of year to keep in countenance . there be never any sit after dinner at the cottage ; or , I should rather say , there be never any sit after go ; so that the two lady could not weary each other by be alone together . understand quite well that she be not require there to talk to she hostess , and be as willing as any woman to make herself agreeable to the gentleman she might meet at 's table . and thus and Bonteen not unfrequently dine in . " now we have only to wait for that horrible man , , " say , as she welcome . " he be always late . " " what a blow for I ! " say . " no , -- you be always in good time . but there be a limit beyond which good time end , and be shamefully late at once begin . but here he be . " and then , as enter the room , ring the bell for dinner . Phinea find himself place between he hostess and , and be on the other side of . they be hardly seat at the table before some one state it as a fact that and he son be reconcile . now know , or think that he know , that this could not as yet be the case ; and indeed such be not the case , though the father have already receive the son 's letter . but do not choose to say anything at present about . " how odd it be , " say ; " how often you English fathers quarrel with you son
son ! " " how often we English son quarrel with we father rather , " say , who be know for the respect he have always pay to the fifth commandment . " it all come from entail and primogeniture , and old - fashioned English prejudice of that kind , " say . " be a friend of yours , , I think . " " they be both friend of mine , " say . " ah , yes ; but you , -- you , -- you and once do something od together . there be a little mystery , be there not ? " " it be very little of a mystery now , " say . " it be about a lady ; -- be it not ? " say Bonteen , affect to whisper to she neighbour . " I be not at liberty to say anything on the subject , " say ; " but I have no doubt Phinea will tell you . " " I do not believe this about , " say . " I happen to know that be down at three day ago , and that he pass through yesterday on he way to the place where he hunt . the be at . he would have go to if it be true . " " it all depend upon whether will accept he , " say , look over at as she speak . as there be two of 's suitor at table , the subject be become disagreeably personal ; and the more so , as every one of the party know or surmise something of the fact of the case . the cause of the duel at have become almost as public as the duel , and 's courtship have not be altogether hide from the public eye . he on the present occasion might probably be able to carry himself better than , even presum he to be equally eager in he love , -- for he know nothing of the fatal truth . but he be unable to hear 's statement with indifference , and show he concern in the matter by he reply . " any lady will be much to be pitie , " he say , " who do that . be the last man in the world to whom I would wish to trust the happiness of a woman for whom I care . " " be a very good fellow , " say . " just a little wild , " say . " and never have a shilling in he pocket in he life , " say she husband . " I regard he as simply a madman , " say . " I do so wish I know he , " say . " I be fond of madman , and man who have not shilling , and who be a little wild , could you not bring he here , ? " do not know what to say , or how to open he mouth without show he deep concern . " I shall be happy to ask he if you wish it , " he reply , as though the question have be put to he in earnest ; " but I do not see so much of as I use to do . " " you do not believe that will accept he ? " ask . he pause a moment before he speak , and then make he answer in a deep solemn voice , -- with a seriousness which he be unable to repress . " she have accept he , " he say . " do you mean that you know it ? " say . " yes ;-- I mean that I know it . " have anybody tell he beforehand that he would openly make this declaration at 's table , he would have say that of all thing it be the most impossible . he would have declare that nothing would have induce he to speak of in he exist frame of mind , and that he would have have he tongue cut out before he speak of she as the promise bride of he rival . and now he have declare the whole truth of he own wretchedness and discomfiture . he be well aware that all of they there know why he have fight the duel at ; -- all , that be , except perhaps . and he feel as he make the statement as to that he blush up to he forehead , and that he voice be strange , and that he be tell the tale of he own disgrace . but when the direct question have be ask he he have be unable to refrain from answer it directly . he have think of turn it off with some jest or affectation of drollery , but have fail . at the moment he have be unable not to speak the truth . " I do not believe a word of it , " say , -- who also forgot himself . " I do believe it , if say so , " say , who rather like the confusion she have cause . " but who could have tell you , ? " ask . " he sister , , tell I so , " say . " then it must be true , " say . " it be quite impossible , " say . " I think I may say that I know that it be impossible . if it be so , it would be a most shameful arrangement . every shilling she have in the world would be swallow up . " now , in make he proposal have be magnanimous in he offer as to settlement and pecuniary provision generally . for some minute after that
that do not speak another word , and the conversation generally be not so brisk and bright as it be expect to be at 's . Goesler herself thoroughly understand we hero 's position , and feel for he . she would have encourage no questionings about have she think that they would have lead to such a result , and now she exert herself to turn the mind of she guest to other subject . at last she succeed ; and after a while , too , Phineas himself be able to talk . he drank two or three glass of wine , and dash away into politics , take the earliest opportunity in he power of contradicting very plainly on one or two matter . be of course of opinion that the ministry could not stay in long . since he have leave the government the ministers have make wonderful mistake , and he speak of they quite as a enemy might speak . " and yet , , " say , " you use to be so staunch a supporter . " " I have see the error of my way , I can assure you , " say . " I always observe , " say , " that when any of you gentleman resign , -- which you usually do on some very trivial matter , -- the resigning gentleman become of all foe the bitterest . somebody go on very well with he friend , agree most cordially about everything , till he find that he public virtue can not swallow some little detail , and then he resign . or some one , perhaps , on the other side have attack he , and in the melee he be hurt , and so he resign . but when he have resign , and make he parting speech full of love and gratitude , I know well after that where to look for the bitterest hostility to he late friend . yes , I be begin to understand the way in which politics be do in . " all this be rather severe upon ; but he be a man of the world , and bear it better than have borne he defeat . the dinner , take altogether , be not a success , and so Madame Goesler understood . , after he have be contradict by , hardly open he mouth . Phineas himself talk rather too much and rather too loudly ; and , who be well enough inclin to flatter , contradict he . " I make a mistake , " say afterwards , " in have four member of parliament who all of they be or have be in office . I never will have two man in office together again . " this she say to . " my dear , " say , " you resolution ought to be that you will never again have two claimant for the same young lady . " in the drawing - room up - stair manage to be alone for three minute with . " and it be as you say , my friend ? " she ask . she voice be plaintive and soft , and there be a look of real sympathy in she eye . Phineas almost feel that if they two have be quite alone he could have tell she everything , and have wept at she foot . " yes , " he say , " it be so . " " I never doubt it when you have declare it . may I venture to say that I wish it have be otherwise ? " " it be too late now , . a man of course be a fool to show that he have any feeling in such a matter . the fact be , I hear it just before I come here , and have make up my mind to send you a excuse . I wish I have now . " " do not say that , . " " I have make such a ass of myself . " " in my estimation you have do yourself honour . but if I may venture to give you counsel , do not speak of this affair again as though you have be personally concerned in it . in the world now - a - day the only thing disgraceful be to admit a failure . " " and I have fail . " " but you need not admit it , . I know I ought not to say as much to you . " " I , rather , be deeply indebt to you . I will go now , , as I do not wish to leave the house with . " " but you will come and see I soon . " then Phineas promise that he would come soon ; and feel as he make the promise that he would have a opportunity of talk over he love with he new friend at any rate without fresh shame as to he failure . go away with , and , have send he wife away by herself , walk off towards the club with . he be very anxious to have a few word with . have evidently be annoye by , and do not at all love the young under - Secretary . " that fellow have become the most consummate puppy I ever meet , " say he , as he link himself on to the lord , " , and one or two other among they , have contrive to spoil he altogether . " " I do not believe a word of what he say about , " say . " about he marriage with ? " " it would be such a abominable shame to sacrifice the girl , " say . " only
only think of it . everything be gone . the man be a drunkard , and I do not believe he be any more reconcile to he father than you be . must have have some object in say so . " " perhaps a invention of 's altogether , " say . " those irish fellow be just the man for that kind of thing . " " a man , you know , so violent that nobody can hold he , " say , think of . " and so absurdly conceit , " say , think of . " a man who have never do anything , with all he advantage in the world , -- and never will . " " he will not hold he place long , " say . " whom do you mean ? " " . " " oh , . I be talk of . I believe to be a very good sort of a fellow , and he be undoubtedly clever . they say like he amazingly . he will do very well . but I do not believe a word of this about . " then feel himself to be snub , and soon afterwards leave alone . on the day follow 's dinner party , , though he be early at he office , be not able to do much work , still feel that as regard the reality of the world , he back be broken . he might no doubt go on learning , and , after a time , might be able to exert himself in a perhaps useful , but altogether uninteresting kind of way , do he work simply because it be there to be do , -- as the carter or the tailor do he ; -- and from the same cause , knowe that a man must have bread to live . but as for ambition , and the idea of do good , and the love of work for work 's sake , -- as for the elastic spring of delicious and beneficent labour , -- all that be over for he . he would have work from day till night , and from night till day , and from month till month throughout the year to have secure for the assurance that she husband 's position be worthy of she own . but now he have no motive for such work as this . as long as he take the public pay , he would earn it ; and that be all . on the next day thing be a little better with he . he receive a note in the morning from say that they two be to see the that even , in order that the whole question of the railway to the might be understand , and be drive to he work . before the time of the meeting come he have once more lose he own identity in great idea of colonial welfare , and have plan and people a mighty region on the , which should have no sympathy with american democracy . when he wait upon in the afternoon he say nothing about the mighty region ; indeed , he leave it to to explain most of the propose arrangement , -- speak only a word or two here and there as occasion require . but he be aware that he have so far recover as to be able to save himself from lose ground during the interview . " he be about the first Irishman we have have that have be worth he salt , " say to he colleague afterwards . " that other be a terrible fellow , " say , shak he head . on the fourth day after he sorrow have befall he , go again to the cottage in . and in order that he might not be balk in he search for sympathy he write a line to to ask if she would be at home . " I will be at home from five to six , -- and alone .-- . " that be the answer from , and be of course at the cottage a few minute after five . it be not , I think , surprise that a man when he want sympathy in such a calamity as that which have now befall , should seek it from a woman . woman sympathise most effectually with man , as man do with woman . but it be , perhaps , a little odd that a man when he want consolation because he heart have be break , always like to receive it from a pretty woman . one would be dispose to think that at such a moment he would be profoundly indifferent to such a matter , that no delight could come to he from female beauty , and that all he would want would be the softness of a simply sympathetic soul . but he generally want 's a soft hand as well , and a eye that can be bright behind the mutual tear , and lip that shall be young and fresh as they express they concern for he sorrow . all these thing be add to Phineas when he go to in he grief . " I be so glad to see you , " say . " you be very good - nature to let I come . " " no ; -- but it be so good of you to trust I . but I be sure you would come after what take place the other night . I see that you be pain , and I be so sorry for it . " " I make such a fool of myself . " " not at all . and I think that you be right to tell they when the question have be
be ask . if the thing be not to be keep a secret , it be better to speak it out . you will get over it quicker in that way than in any other . I have never see the young lord , myself . " " oh , there be nothing amiss about he . as to what say , the half of it be simply exaggeration , and the other half be misunderstood . " " in this country it be so much to be a lord , " say . think a moment of that matter before he reply . all the family have be very good to he , and have be very good . it be not the fault of any of they that he be now wretch and back - break . he have meditate much on this , and have resolve that he would not even think evil of they . " I do not in my heart believe that that have have anything to do with it , " he say . " but it have , my friend ,-- always . I do not know you . " " she be not mine . " " well ;-- I do not know this Violet that be not yours . I have meet she , and do not specially admire she . but then the taste of man and woman about beauty be never the same . but I know she be one that always live with lord and countess . a girl who always live with countess feel it to be hard to settle down as a plain Mistress . " " she have have plenty of choice among all sort of man . it be not the title . she would not have accept unless she have -- . but what be the use of talk of it ? " " they have know each other long ? " " oh , yes , -- as child . and the desire it of all thing . " " ah ; -- then he arrange it . " " not exactly . nobody could arrange anything for , -- nor , as far as that go , for . they arrange it themselves , I fancy . " " you have ask she ? " " yes ;-- twice . and she have refuse he more than twice . I have nothing for which to blame she ; but yet I have think , -- I have think -- " " she be a jilt then ? " " no ;-- I will not let you say that of she . she be no jilt . but I think she have be strangely ignorant of she own mind . what be the use of talk of it , ? " " none ; -- only sometimes it be better to speak a word , than to keep one 's sorrow to oneself . " " so it be ; -- and there be not one in the world to whom I can speak such a word , except yourself . be not that odd ? I have sister , but they have never hear of , and would be quite indifferent . " " perhaps they have some other favourite . " " ah ;--well . that do not matter , and my best friend here in be 's own sister . " " she know of you attachment ? " " oh , yes . " " and she tell you of 's engagement . be she glad of it ? " " she have always desire the marriage . and yet I think she would have be satisfied have it be otherwise . but of course she heart must be with she brother . I need not have trouble myself to go to after all . " " it be for the best , perhaps . everybody say you behave so well . " " I could not but go , as thing be then . " " what if you have -- shoot he ? " " there would have be a end of everything . she would never have see I after that . indeed I should have shot myself next , feel that there be nothing else leave for I to do . " " ah ;-- you be so peculiar . but I suppose it be best not to shoot a man . and , , there be other lady in the world prettier than . no ;-- of course you will not admit that now . just at this moment , and for a month or two , she be peerless , and you will feel yourself to be of all man the most unfortunate . but you have the ball at you foot . I know no one so young who have get the ball at he foot so well . I call it nothing to have the ball at you foot if you be bear with it there . it be so easy to be a lord if you father be one before you , -- and so easy to marry a pretty girl if you can make she a countess . but to make yourself a lord , or to be as good as a lord , when nothing have be bear to you ,-- that I call very much . and there be woman , and pretty woman too , , who have spirit enough to understand this , and to think that the man , after all , be more important than the lord . " then she sang the old well - worn verse of the song with wonderful spirit , and with a clearness of voice and knowledge of music for which he have hithertoo never give she credit . " a prince can mak ' a
a belt knight , a marquis , duke , and a ' that ; but a honest man 's aboon he might , faith he mauna fa' that . " " I do not know that you sung , . " " only now and then when something specially require it . and I be very fond of Scotch songs . I will se to you now if you like it . " then she sang the whole song ,-- " a man be a man for a ' that , " she say as she finish . " even though he can not get the special bit of pain 's flesh for which he heart have have a craving . " then she sang again :-- " there be maiden in more lovly by far , who would gladly be bride to the young . " " but young get he bride , " say . " take the spirit of the line , , which be true ; and not the tale as it be tell , which be probably false . I often think that of , and young too , probably liv to repent they bargain . we will hope that may not do so . " " I be sure he never will . " " that be all right . and as for you , do you for a while think of you politics , and you speech , and you colony , rather than of you love . you be at home there , and no can rob you of you success . and if you be down in the mouth , come to I , and I will s you a Scotch song . and , look you , the next time I ask you to dinner I will promise you that . Bonteen shall not be here . good - bye . " she give he she hand , which be very soft , and leave it for a moment in he , and he be console . , when she be alone , throw herself on to she chair and begin to think of thing . in these day she would often ask herself what in truth be the object of she ambition , and the aim of she life . now at this moment she have in she hand a note from the of . the have allow himself to say something about a photograph , which have justifi she in writing to he , -- or which she have take for such justification . and the have reply . " he would not , " he say , " lose the opportunity of wait upon she in person which the presentation of the little gift might afford he . " it would be a great success to have the of at she house , -- but to what would the success reach ? what be she definite object , -- or have she any ? in what way could she make herself happy ? she could not say that she be happy yet . the hour with she be too long and the day too many . the of should come , -- if he would . and she be quite resolve as to this , -- that if the do come she would not be afraid of he . Heavens and earth ! what would be the feeling of such a woman as she , be the world to greet she some fine morning as of ! then she make up she mind very resolutely on one subject . should the give she any opportunity she would take a very short time in let he know what be the extent of she ambition . at do exactly as he say he would do . he write to he father as he pass through , and at once go on to he hunting at . but he letter be very stiff and ungainly , and it may be doubt whether be not wrong in refuse the offer which he have make to she as to the dictation of it . he begin he letter , " my , " and do not much improve the style as he go on with it . the reader may as well see the whole letter ;-- , , 27 , 186-- . my Lord , I be now on my way from to , and write this letter to you in compliance with a promise make by I to my sister and to . I have ask to be my wife , and she have accept I , and they think that you will be pleased to hear that this have be do . I shall be , of course , oblige , if you will instruct to let I know what you would propose to do in regard to settlements . think that you will wish to see both and myself at . for myself , I can only say that , should you desire I to come , I will do so on receive you assurance that I shall be treat neither with fatted calf nor with reproach . I be not aware that I have deserve either . I be , my lord , yours affecto , . P.S.-- my address will be " the , . " that last word , in which he half - declare himself to be join in affectionate relation to he father , cause he a world of trouble . but he could find no term for expressing , without a circumlocution which be disagreeable to he , exactly that position of feeling towards he father which really belong to he . he would have write " yours with affection , " or " yours with deadly enmity , " or " yours with respect , " or " yours with most profound
profound indifference , " exactly in accordance with the state of he father 's mind , if he have only know what be that state . he be afraid of go beyond he father in any offer of reconciliation , and be firmly fix in he resolution that he would never be either repentant or submissive in regard to the past . if he father have wish for the future , he would comply with they if he could do so without unreasonable inconvenience , but he would not give way a single point as to thing do and go . if he father should choose to make any reference to they , he father must prepare for battle . the be of course disgust by the pertinacious obstinacy of he son 's letter , and for a hour or two swore to himself that he would not answer it . but it be natural that the father should yearn for the son , while the son 's feeling for the father be of a very much weaker nature . here , at any rate , be that engagement make which he have ever desire . and he son have make a step , though it be so very unsatisfactory a step , towards reconciliation . when the old man read the letter a second time , he skip that reference to fatt calf which have be so peculiarly distasteful to he , and before the evening have pass he have answer he son as follow ;-- , 29 , 186--. my , I have receive you letter , and be truly delighted to hear that dear Violet have accept you as she husband . she fortune will be very material to you , but she herself be better than any fortune . you have long know my opinion of she . I shall be proud to welcome she as a daughter to my house . I shall of course write to she immediately , and will endeaavor to settle some early day for she come here . when I have do so , I will write to you again , and can only say that I will endeaavor to make comfortable to you . you affectionate father , . , the groom , be still here . you have perhaps better write to he direct about you horse . by the middle of arrangement have all be make , and meet she lover at he father 's house . she in the meantime have be with she aunt , and have undergone a good deal of mild unceasing persecution . " my dear Violet , " say she aunt to she on she arrival at , speak with a solemnity that ought to have be terrible to the young lady , " I do not know what to say to you . " " say ' how d' you do ? ' aunt , " say . " I mean about this engagement , " say , with a increase of awe -inspir severity in she voice . " say nothing about it at all , if you do not like it , " say . " how can I say nothing about it ? how can I be silent ? or how be I to congratulate you ? " " the least say , perhaps , the soonest mende , " and smile as she speak . " that be very well , and if I have no duty to perform , I would be silent . but , Violet , you have be leave in my charge . if I see you shipwreck in life , I shall ever tell myself that the fault have be partly mine . " " Nay , aunt , that will be quite unnecessary . I will always admit that you do everything in you power to -- to -- to -- make I run straight , as the sporting man say . " " Sport man ! oh , . " " and you know , aunt , I still hope that I shall be find to have keep on the right side of the post . you will find that poor be not so black as he be pain . " " but why take anybody that be black at all ? " " I like a little shade in the picture , aunt . " " look at . " " I have look at he . " " a young nobleman begin a career of useful official life , that will end in -- ; there be no know what it may end in . " " I daresay not ; -- but it never could have begin or end in my be . " " and ! " " poor . I do like . but , you see , aunt , I like so much better . a young woman will go by she feeling . " " and yet you refuse he a dozen time . " " I never count the time , aunt ; but not quite so many as that . " the same thing be repeat over and over again during the month that remain at , but have no power of interfering , and bear she persecution bravely . she future husband be generally speak of as " that violent young man , " and hint be thrown out as to the personal injury to which he wife might be possibly subject . but the threaten bride only laugh , and speak of these come dangers as part of the general lot of married woman . " I daresay , if the truth be know , my uncle do not always keep he temper , " she once say . now , the truth be , as Violet well know , that " my uncle " have be dumb as
as a sheep before the shearer in the hand of he wife , and have never be know to do anything improper by those who have be most intimate with he even in he earlier day . " you uncle Baldock , miss , " say the outraged aunt , " be a nobleman as different in he manner of life from as chalk from cheese . " " but then come the question , which be the cheese ? " say . would not argue the question any further , but stalk out of the room . meet they at , have have something of a battle with she husband before she leave she home to do so . when she tell he of she desire to assist at this reconciliation between she father and brother , he reply by point out that she first duty be at , and before the interview be end have come to express a opinion that that duty be very much neglect . she in the meantime have declare that she would go to , or that she would explain to she father that she be forbide by she husband to do so . " and I also forbid any such communication , " say . in answer to which , tell he that there be some marital command which she should not consider it to be she duty to obey . when matter have come to this pass , it may be conceive that both and he wife be very unhappy . she have almost resolve that she would take step to enable she to live apart from she husband ; and he have begin to consider what course he would pursue if such step be take . the wife be subject to she husband by the law both of and man ; and be one who think much of such law . in the meantime , carry she point and go to , leave she husband to go up to and begin the session by himself . and be both at before arrive , and many be the consultation which be hold between they as to the best mode in which thing might be arrange . be of opinion that there have better be no arrangement , that should be allow to come in and take he father 's hand , and sit down to dinner , -- and that so thing should fall into they place . be rather in favour of some scene . but the interview have take place before either of they be able to say a word . , on he arrival , have go immediately to he father , take the very much by surprise , and have come off best in the encounter . " my lord , " say he , walk up to he father with he hand out , " I be very glad to come back to . " he have write to he sister to say that he would be at on that day , but have name no hour . he now appear between ten and eleven in the morning , and he father have as yet make no preparation for he , -- have arrange no appropriate word . he have walk in at the front door , and have ask for the . the be in he own morning - room , -- a gloomy room , full of dark book and darker furniture , and thither have at once go . the two woman still be sit together over the fire in the breakfast - room , and know nothing of he arrival . " ! " say he father , " I hardly expect you so early . " " I have come early . I come across country , and sleep at . I suppose be here . " " yes , she be here , -- and . they will be very glad to see you . so be I . " and the father take the son 's hand for the second time . " thank you , sir , " say , look he father full in the face . " I have be very much pleased by this engagement , " continue the . " what do you think I must be , then ? " say the son , laugh . " I have be at it , you know , off and on , ever so many year ; and have sometimes think I be quite a fool not to get it out of my head . but I could not get it out of my head . and now she talk as though it be she who have be in love with I all the time ! " " perhaps she be , " say the father . " I do not believe it in the least . she may be a little so now . " " I hope you mean that she always shall be so . " " I sha not be the worst husband in the world , I hope ; and I be quite sure I sha not be the best . I will go and see she now . I suppose I shall find she somewhere in the house . I think it best to see you first . " " stop half a moment , , " say the . and then do make something of a shambling speech , in which he express a hope that they two might for the future live together on friendly term , forget the past . he ought to have be prepare for the occasion , and the speech be poor and shambling . but I think that it be more useful than it might have be , have it be utter roundly and with that paternal and almost majestic effect which he
he would have achieve have he be thoroughly prepare . but the roundness and the majesty would have go against the grain with he son , and there would have be a danger of some outbreak . as it be , smile , and mutter some word about thing be " all right , " and then make he way out of the room . " that be a great deal better than I have hope , " he say to himself ; " and it have all come from my go in without be announce . " but there be still a fear upon he that he father even yet might prepare a speech , and speak it , to the great peril of they mutual comfort . he meeting with be of course pleasant enough . now that she have succumb , and have tell herself and have tell he that she love he , she do not scruple to be as generous as a maiden should be who have acknowledge herself to be conquer , and have render herself to the conqueror . she would walk with he and ride with he , and take a lively interest in the performance of all he horse , and listen to hunt story as long as he choose to tell they . in all this , she be so good and so love that be more than once temp to throw in she tooth she old , often - repeat assertion , that she be not pro to be in love , -- that it be not she nature to feel any ardent affection for a man , and that , therefore , she would probably remain unmarried . " you begrudge I my little bit of pleasure , " say , in answer to one such attack . " no ; -- but it be so odd to see you , of all woman , become so love - lorn , " " I be not love - lorn , " say , " but I like the freedom of tell he everything and of hear everything from he , and of have he for my own best friend . he might go away for twelve month , and I should not be unhappy , believe , as I do , that he would be true to I . " all of which set think whether she friend have not be wiser than she have be . she have never know anything of that sort of friendship with she husband which already seem to be quite establish between these two . in she misery one day tell the whole story of she own unhappiness to she brother , say nothing of ,-- think nothing of he as she tell she story , but speak more strongly perhaps than she should have do , of the terrible dreariness of she life at , and of she inability to induce she husband to alter it for she sake . " do you mean that he , -- ill - treat you ? " say the brother , with a scowl on he face which seem to indicate that he would like no task better than that of resent such ill - treatment . " he do not beat I , if you mean that . " " be he cruel to you ? do he use harsh language ? " " he never say a word in he life either to I or , as I believe , to any other human being , that he would think himself bound to regret . " " what be it then ? " " he simply choose to have he own way , and he way can not be my way . he be hard , and dry , and just , and dispassionate , and he wish I to be the same . that be all . " " I tell you fairly , , as far as I be concerned , I never could speak to he . he be antipathetic to I . but then I be not he wife . " " I be ; -- and I suppose I must bear it . " " have you speak to my father ? " " no . " " to ? " " yes . " " and what do she say ? " " what can she say ? she have nothing to say . have you . , if I be drive to leave he , can I make the world understand why I do so . to be simply miserable , as I be , be nothing to the world . " " I could never understand why you marry he . " " do not be cruel to I , . " " ! I will stick by you in any way that you wish . if you think well of it , I will go off to to - morrow , and tell he that you will never return to he . and if you be not safe from he here at , you shall go abroad with we . I be sure would not object . I will not be cruel to you . " but in truth neither of 's councillor be able to give she advice that could serve she . she feel that she could not leave she husband without other cause than now exist , although she feel , also , that to go back to he be to go back to utter wretchedness . and when she see and she brother together there come to she dream of what might have be she own happiness have she keep herself free from those terrible bond in which she be now hold a prisoner . she could not get out of she heart the remembrance of that young man who
who would have be she lover , if she would have let he , -- of whose love for herself she have be aware before she have hand herself over as a bale of goods to she unloved , unloving husband . she have marry because she be afraid that otherwise she might find herself force to own that she love that other man who be then a nobody ;-- almost nobody . it be not 's money that have buy she . this woman in regard to money have show herself to be as generous as the sun . but in marry she have maintain herself in she high position , among the first of she own people , -- among the first socially and among the first politically . but have she married , -- have she become , -- there would have be a great descent . she could not have entertain the lead man of she party . she would not have be on a level with the wife and daughter of . she might , indeed , have remain unmarried ! but she know that have she do so , -- have she so resolve , -- that which she call she fancy would have be too strong for she . she would not have remain unmarried . at that time it be she fate to be either or . and she have choose to be . to neither nor to she brother could she tell one half of the sorrow which afflict she . " I shall go back to , " she say to she brother . " do not , unless you wish it , " he answer . " I do not wish it . but I shall do it . be in now , and have be there since parliament meet , but he will be in again in , and I will go and meet he there . I tell he that I would do so when I leave . " " but you will go up to ? " " I suppose so . I must do as he tell I , of course . what I mean is , I will try it for another year . " " if it do not succeed , come to we . " " I can not say what I will do . I would die if I know how . never be a tyrant , ; or at any rate , not a cold tyrant . and remember this , there be no tyranny to a woman like tell she of she duty . talk of beat a woman ! beat might often be a mercy . " remain ten day at , and at last do not get away without a few unpleasant word with he father , -- or without a few word that be almost unpleasant with he mistress . on he first arrival he have tell he sister that he should go on a certain day , and some intimation to this effect have probably be convey to the . but when he son tell he one evening that the post -chaise have be order for seven o'clock the next morning , he feel that he son be ungracious and abrupt . there be many thing still to be say , and indeed there have be no speech of any account make at all as yet . " that be very sudden , " say the . " I think have tell you . " " she have not tell I a word lately . she may have say something before you come here . what be there to hurry you ? " " I think ten day would be as long as you would care to have I here , and as I say that I would be back by the first , I would rather not change my plan . " " you be go to hunt ? " " yes ;-- I shall hunt till the end of . " " you might have hunt here , . " but the son make no sign of change he plan ; and the father , see that he would not change they , become solemn and severe . there be a few word which he must say to he son , -- something of a speech that he must make ; -- so he lead the way into the room with the dark book and the dark furniture , and point to a great deep arm -chair for he son 's accommodation . but as he do not sit down himself , neither do . understand very well how great be the advantage of a stand orator over a sit recipient of he oratory , and that advantage he would not give to he father . " I have hope to have a opportunity of say a few word to you about the future , " say the . " I think we shall be marry in , " say . " so I have hear ; -- but after that . now I do not want to interfere , , and of course the less so , because 's money will to a great degree restore the inroad which have be make upon the property . " " it will more than restore they altogether . " " not if she estate be settle on a second son , , and I hear from Lady Baldock that that be the wish of she relation . " " she shall have she own way , -- as she uy . what that way be I do not know . I have not even ask about it . she ask I , and I tell she to speak to you . " " of course I should wish it to go with the family property
property . of course that would be best . " " she shall have she own way , -- as far as I be concerned . " " but it be not about that , , that I would speak . what be you plan of life when you be marry ? " " plan of life ? " " yes ; -- plan of life . I suppose you have some plan . I suppose you mean to apply yourself to some useful occupation ? " " I do not know really , sir , that I be of much use for any purpose . " laugh as he say this , but do not laugh pleasantly . " you would not be a drone in the hive always ? " " as far as I can see , sir , we who call ourselves lord generally be drone . " " I deny it , " say the , become quite energetic as he defend he order . " I deny it utterly . I know no class of man who do work more useful or more honest . be I a drone ? have I be so from my youth upward ? I have always work , either in the one or in the other , and those of my fellows with whom I have be most intimate have work also . the same career be open to you . " " you mean politics ? " " of course I mean politics . " " I do not care for politics . I see no difference in party . " " but you should care for politics , and you should see a difference in party . it be you duty to do so . my wish be that you should go into parliament . " " I can not do that , sir . " " and why not ? " " in the first place , sir , you have not get a seat to offer I . you have manage matter among you in such a way that poor little have be swallow up . if I be to canvass the elector of Smotherem , I do not think that many would look very sweet on I . " " there be the county , . " " and whom be I to turn out ? I should spend four or five thousand pound , and have nothing but vexation in return for it . I have rather not begin that game , and indeed I be too old for parliament . I do not take it up early enough to believe in it . " all this make the very angry , and from these thing they go on to worse thing . when question again as to the future , scowl , and at last declare that it be he idea to live abroad in the summer for he wife 's recreation , and somewhere down in the shire during the winter for he own . he would admit of no purpose higher than recreation , and when he father again talk to he of a nobleman 's duty , he say that he know of no other special duty than that of not exceed he income . then he father make a longer speech than before , and at the end of it simply wish he good night . " it be get late , and I have promise to see Violet before I go to bed . good - bye . " then he be off , and be leave there , stand with he back to the fire . after that have a discussion with , which last nearly half the night ; and during the discussion she tell he more than once that he be wrong . " such as I be you must take I , or leave I , " he say , in anger . " Nay ; there be no choice now , " she answer . " I have take you , and I will stick by you ,-- whether you be right or wrong . but when I think you wrong , I shall say so . " he swore to she as he press she to he heart that she be the finest , grandest , sweetest woman that ever the world have produce . but still there be present on he palate , when he leave she , the bitter taste of she reprimand . what the in , when the session begin , be still hard at work upon he bill , and in he work find some relief for he broken back . he go into the matter with all he energy , and before the debate come on , know much more about the seven thousand inhabitant of some hundred of thousand of square mile at the back of , than he do of the people of or of . and he find some consolation also in the good - nature of , whose draw - room be always open to he . he could talk freely now to about , and have even venture to tell she that once , in old day , he have think of love . he spoke of those day as be very old ; and then he perhaps say some word to she about dear little . I think that there be not much in he career of which he do not say something to , and that he receive from she a good deal of excellent advice and encouragement in the direction of he political ambition . " a man should work , " she say , -- " and you do work . a woman can only look on , and admire and long . what be there that I can do ? I can learn to care
care for these , just because you care for they . if it be the beavers that you tell I of , I should have to care for the beaver . " then Phineas of course tell she that such sympathy from she be all and all to he . but the reader must not on this account suppose that he be untrue in he love to . he back be altogether break by he fall , and he be quite aware that such be the fact . not as yet , at least , have come to he any remotest idea that a cure be possible . Early in he hear that be up in town , and of course he be bound to go to she . the information be give to he by himself , who tell he that he have be to to fetch she . in these day there be a acknowledge friendship between these two , but there be no intimacy . indeed , be a man who be hardly intimate with any other man . with Phineas he now and then exchange a few word in the lobby of the , and when they chance to meet each other , they meet as friend . have no strong wish to see again in he house the man respect whom he have venture to caution he wife ; but he be thoughtful ; and think over it all , he find it better to ask he there . no one must know that there be any reason why Phineas should not come to he house ; especially as all the world know that have protect he from the garrotter . " be in town now , " he say ; " you must go and see she before long . " Phinea of course promise that he would go . in these day be begin to be aware that he have enemy , -- though he could not understand why anybody should be he enemy now that have decide against he . there be poor , indeed , whom he have supersed at the , but , to give merit where merit be due , feel no animosity against he at all . " you be welcome , I boy ; you be welcome , -- as far as yourself go . but as for the party , bedad , it be rote to the core , and will not stand another session . mind , it be I who tell you so . " and the poor idle , in so speak , speak the truth as well as he know it . but the Ratler and the be 's bitter foe , and do not scruple to let he know that such be the case . have scruple on the subject , and in a certain mildly apologetic way still speak well of the young man , whom he have himself first introduce into political life only four year since ; -- but there be no earnestness or cordiality in 's manner , and know that he first staunch friend could no longer be regard as a pillar of support . but there be a set of man , quite as influential , -- so Phineas think , -- as the busy politician of the club , who be very friendly to he . these be man , generally of high position , of steady character , -- hard worker , -- who think quite as much of what a man do in he office as what he say in the house . , , and be of this class , -- and they be all very courteous to . Envious man begin to say of he that he care little now for any one of the party who have not a handle to he name , and that he preferre to live with lord and lordling . this be hard upon he , as the great political ambition of he life be to call he friend ; and he would sooner have act with than with any other man in the cabinet . but though have not desert he , there have come to be little of late in common between the two . he life be become that of a parliamentary official rather than that of a politician ;--wherea , though be in office , he public life be purely political . have great idea of he own which he intend to hold , whether by hold they he might remain in office or be force out of office ; and he be indifferent as to the direction which thing in this respect might take with he . but , who have achieve he declare object in get into place , feel that he be almost constrain to adopt the view of other , let they be what they might . speak to he , as though he parliamentary career be wholly at the disposal of the government , -- as though he be like a proxy in 's pocket , -- with this difference , that when direct to get up and speak on a subject he be bound to do so . this annoye he , and he complain to ; but only shrug he shoulders and tell he that he must make he choice . he soon discover 's meaning . " if you choose to make parliament a profession , -- as you have chosen , -- you can have no right even to think of independence . if the country find you out when you be in parliament , and then invite you to office , of course the thing be different . but the latter be a slow career , and probably would not have suite you . " that be the meaning of what say to he . after all , these official and
and parliamentary honour be greater when see at a distance than he find they to be now that he possess they . work ten hour a day , and could rarely call a day he own ; but , after all , with all this work , be less of a slave , and more independent , than be he , , under - Secretary of , the friend of cabinet ministers , and of parliament since he twenty - fifth year ! he begin to dislike the house , and to think it a bore to sit on the Treasury bench ; -- he , who a few year since have regard parliament as the british heaven on earth , and who , since he have be in parliament , have look at that bench with longing envious eye . , who seem to have as much to eat and drink as ever , and a bed also to lie on , could come and go in the house as he please , since he -- resignation . and there be a new trouble come . the for have pass ; but now there be to be another for . let they pass what bill they might , this would not render necessary a new irish election till the entire house should be dissolve . but he fear that he would be call upon to vote for the abolition of he own borough , -- and for other point almost equally distasteful to he . he know that he would not be consult , -- but would be call upon to vote , and perhaps to speak ; and be certain that if he do so , there would be war between he and he constituent . have already communicate to he he idea that , for certain excellent reason , ought to be spare . but this evil be , he hope , a distant one . it be generally think that , as the have be pass last year , and as the irish bill , if carry , could not be immediately operative , the doing of the thing might probably be postpone to the next session . when he first see he be strike by the great change in she look and manner . she seem to he to be old and worn , and he judge she to be wretch , -- as she be . she have write to he to say that she would be at she father 's house on such and such a morning , and he have go to she there . " it be of no use you come to , " she say . " I see nobody there , and the house be like a prison . " later in the interview she tell he not to come and dine there , even though should ask he . " and why not ? " he demand . " because everything would be stiff , and cold , and uncomfortable . I suppose you do not wish to make you way into a lady 's house if she ask you not . " there be a sort of smile on she face as she say this , but he could perceive that it be a very bitter smile . " you can easily excuse yourself . " " yes , I can excuse myself . " " then do so . if you be particularly anxious to dine with , you can easily do so at you club . " in the tone of she voice , and the word she use , she hardly attempt to conceal she dislike of she husband . " and now tell I about , " he say . " there be nothing for I to tell . " " yes there be ;-- much to tell . you need not spare I . I do not pretend to deny to you that I have be hit hard , -- so hard , that I have be nearly knock down ; but it will not hurt I now to hear of it all . do she always love he ? " " I can not say . I think she do after she own fashion . " " I sometimes think woman would be less cruel , " he say , " if they know how great be the anguish they can cause . " " have she be cruel to you ? " " I have nothing to complain off . but if she love , why do she not tell he so at once ? and why -- " " this be complain , . " " I will not complain . I would not even think of it , if I could help it . be they to be marry soon ? " " in ; -- so they now say . " " and where will they live ? " " ah ! no one can tell . I do not think that they agree as yet as to that . but if she have a strong wish Oswald will yield to it . he be always generous . " " I would not even have have a wish ,-- except to have she with I . " there be a pause for a moment , and then answer he with a touch of scorn in she voice , -- and with some scorn , too , in she eye :-- " that be all very well , ; but the season will not be over before there be some one else . " " there you wrong I . " " they tell I that you be already at 's foot . " " ! " " what matter who it be as long as she be young and pretty , and have the interest attach to
to she of something more than ordinary position ? when men tell I of the cruelty of woman , I think that no woman can be really cruel because no man be capable of suffer . a woman , if she be throw aside , do suffer . " " do you mean to tell I , then , that I be indifferent to ? " when he thus speak , I wonder whether he have forgote that he have ever declare to this very woman to whom he be speak , a passion for herself . " ! " " it suit you , , to be harsh to I , but you be not speak you thought . " then she lose all control of herself , and pour out to he the real truth that be in she . " and whose thought do you speak when you and I be on the brae of ? be I wrong in say that change be easy to you , or have I grow to be so old that you can talk to I as though those far - away folly ought to be forgote ? be it so long ago ? talk of love ! I tell you , sir , that you heart be one in which love can have no durable hold . ! there may be a dozen Violet after she , and you will be no the worse . " then she walk away from he to the window , and he stand still , dumb , on the spot that he have occupi . " you have better go now , " she say , " and forget what have pass between we . I know that you be a gentleman , and that you will forget it . " the strong idea of he mind when he hear all this be the injustice of she attack , -- of the attack as come from she , who have all but openly acknowledge that she have marry a man whom she have not love because it suit she to escape from a man whom she do love . she be reproach he now for he fickleness in have venture to set he heart upon another woman , when she herself have be so much worse than fickle , -- so profoundly false ! and yet he could not defend himself by accuse she . what would she have have of he ? what would she have propose to he , have he question she as to he future , when they be together on the brae of ? would she not have bid he to find some one else whom he could love ? would she then have suggest to he the propriety of nurse he love for herself , -- for she who be about to become another man 's wife , -- for she after she should have become another man 's wife ? and yet because he have not do so , and because she have make herself wretch by marry a man whom she do not love , she reproach he ! he could not tell she of all this , so he fall back for he defence on word which have pass between they since the day when they have meet on the brae . " , " he say , " it be only a month or two since you speak to I as though you wish that might be my wife . " " I never wish it . I never say that I wish it . there be moment in which we try to give a child any brick on the chimney top for which it may whimper . " then there be another silence which she be the first to break . " you have better go , " she say . " I know that I have commit myself , and of course I would rather be alone . " " and what would you wish that I should do ? " " do ? " she say . " what you do can be nothing to I . " " must we be stranger , you and I , because there be a time in which we be almost more than friend ? " " I have speak nothing about myself , sir , -- only as I have be draw to do so by you pretence of be love -sick . you can do nothing for I , -- nothing ,-- nothing . what be it possible that you should do for I ? you be not my father , or my brother . " it be not to be suppose that she want he to fall at she foot . it be to be suppose that have he do so she reproach would have be hot and heavy on he ; but yet it almost see to he as though he have no other alternative . no !-- he be not she father or she brother ; -- nor could he be she husband . and at this very moment , as she know , he heart be sore with love for another woman . and yet he hardly know how not to throw himself at she foot , and swear , that he would return now and for ever to he old passion , hopeless , sinful , degrad as it would be . " I wish it be possible for I to do something , " he say , draw near to she . " there be nothing to be do , " she say , clasp she hand together . " for I nothing . I have before I no escape , no hope , no prospect of relief , no place of consolation . you have everything before you . you complain of a wound ! you
you have at least show that such wound with you be capable of cure . you can not but feel that when I hear you wailing , I must be impatient . you have better leave I now , if you please . " " and be we to be no longer friend ? " he ask . " as far as friendship can go without intercourse , I shall always be you friend . " then he go , and as he walk down to he office , so intent be he on that which have just pass that he hardly see the people as he meet they , or be aware of the street through which he way lead he . there have be something in the later word which have speak that have make he feel almost unconsciously that the injustice of she reproach be not so great as he have at first feel it to be , and that she have some cause for she scorn . if she case be such as she have so plainly describe it , what be he plight as compare with hers ? he have lose he Violet , and be in pain . there must be much of suffer before he . but though Violet be lose , the world be not all blank before he eye . he have not tell himself , even in he dreariest moment , that there be before he " no escape , no hope , no prospect of relief , no place of consolation . " and then he begin to think whether this must in truth be the case with . what if be to die ? what in such case as that would he do ? in ten or perhaps in five year time might it not be possible for he to go through the ceremony of fall upon he knee , with stiffen joint indeed , but still with something left of the ardour of he old love , of he oldest love of all ? as he be think of this he be bring up short in he walk as he be enter the beneath the 's figure , by . " how dare you not be in you office at such a hour as this , , I boy , -- or , at least , not in the , -- or serve you master after some fashion ? " say the late - . " so I be . I have be on a message to , to find what the people there think about the Canadas . " " and what do they think about the in ? " " not one man in a thousand care whether the prosper or fail to prosper . they care that should not go to the , because , -- though they do not love the , they do hate the . that be about the feeling in , -- and it be astonish how like the be to the rest of the world . " " dear I , what a fellow you be for a - ! you have hear the news about little . " " what news ? " " she have quarrell with , you know . " " who say so ? " " never mind who say so , but they tell I it be true . take a old friend 's advice , and strike while the iron 's hot . " do not believe what he have hear , but though he do not believe it , still the tiding set he heart beat . he would have believe it less perhaps have he know that have just receive the news from . the top of the be a lady who know that in fight the battle which fall to she lot , in arrange the social difficulty which she find in she way , in do the work of the world which come to she share , very much more care be necessary , -- and care too about thing apparently trifl , -- than be demand by the affair of people in general . and this be not the case so much on account of any special disadvantage under which she laboure , as because she be ambitious of do the very uttermost with those advantages which she possess . she own birth have not be high , and that of she husband , we may perhaps say , have be very low . he have be old when she have marry he , and she have have little power of make any progress till he have leave she a widow . then she find herself possess of money , certainly ; of wit , -- as she believe ; and of a something in she personal appearance which , as she plainly tell herself , she might perhaps palm off upon the world as beauty . she be a woman who do not flatter herself , who do not strongly believe in herself , who could even bring herself to wonder that man and woman in high position should condescmend to notice such a one as she . with all she ambition , there be a something of genuine humility about she ; and with all the hardness she have learn there be a touch of womanly softness which would sometimes obtrude itself upon she heart . when she find a woman really kind to she , she would be very kind in return . and though she prize wealth , and know that she money be she only rock of strength , she could be lavish with it , as though it be dirt . but she be highly ambitious , and she play she game with great skill and great caution . she door be not open to all caller ; -- be shut even
even to some who find but few door close against they ; -- be shut occasionally to those whom she must specially wish to see within they . she know how to allure by denying , and to make the gift rich by delay it . we be tell by the Latin proverb that he who give quickly give twice ; but I say that she who give quickly seldom give more than half . when in the early spring the of first knock at 's door , he be inform that she be not at home . the feel very cross as he hand he card out from he dark green brougham , -- on the panel of which there be no blazon to tell the owner 's rank . he be very cross . she have tell he that she be always at home between four and six on a . he have condescende to remember the information , and have act upon it , -- and now she be not at home ! she be not at home , though he have come on a at the very hour she have name to he . any duke would have be cross , but the of be particularly cross . no ;--he certainly would give himself no further trouble by go to the cottage in . and yet have be in she own drawing - room , while the be hand out he card from the brougham below . on the next morning there come to he a note from the cottage , -- such a pretty note !-- so penitent , so full of remorse , -- and , which be better still , so laden with disappointment , that he forgave she . my , I hardly know how to apologise to you , after have tell you that I be always at home on ; and I be at home yesterday when you call . but I be unwell , and I have tell the servant to deny I , not think how much I might be lose . indeed , indeed , I would not have give way to a silly headache , have I think that you would have be here . I suppose that now I must not even hope for the photograph . yours penitently , . . the note - paper be very pretty note - paper , hardly scent , and yet convey a sense of something sweet , and the monogram be small and new , and fantastic without be grotesque , and the writing be of that sort which the , have much experience , have learn to like , -- and there be something in the signature which please he . so he write a reply ,-- , I will call again next , or , if prevent , will let you know . yours faithfully , o . when the green brougham draw up at the door of the cottage on the next , be at home , and have no headache . she be not at all penitent now . she have probably study the subject , and have resolve that penitence be more alluring in a letter than when act in person . she receive she guest with perfect ease , and apologise for the injury do to he in the preceding week , with much self - complacency . " I be so sorry when I get you card , " she say ; " and yet I be so glad now that you be refuse . " " if you be ill , " say the , " it be better . " " I be horribly ill , to tell the truth ; -- as pale as a death 's head , and without a word to say for myself . I be fit to see no one . " " then of course you be right . " " but it flash upon I immediately that I have name a day , and that you have be kind enough to remember it . but I do not think you come to till the wind be over . " " the wind blow everywhere in this wretch island , , and there be no escape they . may prevail against they ; but on I they be so potent that I think they will succeed in drive I out of my country . I doubt whether a old man should ever live in if he can help it . " the certainly be a old man , if a man turn of seventy be old ; -- and he be a man too who do not bear he year with hearty strength . he move slowly , and turn he limb , when he do turn they , as though the joint be stiff in they socket . but there be nevertheless about he a dignity of demeanour , a majesty of person , and a upright carriage which do not leave a idea of old age as the first impress on the mind of those who encounter the of . he be tall and move without a stoop ; and though he move slowly , he have learn to seem so to do because it be the proper kind of movement for one so high up in the world as himself . and perhaps he tailor do something for he . he have not be long under 's eye before she perceive that he tailor have do a good deal for he . when he allude to he own age and to she youth , she say some pleasant little word as to the difference between oak - tree and currant - bushes ; and by that time she be seat comfortably on she sofa , and the be on a chair before she , -- just as might have
have be any man who be not a Duke . after a little time the photograph be bring forth from he 's pocket . that bring out and give of photograph , with the demand for counter photograph , be the most absurd practice of the day . " I do not think I look very nice , do I ? " " oh yes , -- very nice , but a little too old ; and certainly you have not get those spot all over you forehead . these be the remark which on such occasion be the most common . it may be say that to give a photograph or to take a photograph without the utterance of some word which would be feel by a bystander to be absurd , be almost a impossibility . at this moment there be no bystander , and therefore the and the lady have no need for caution . word be speak that be very absurd . protest that the 's photograph be more to she than the photograph of all the world beside ; and the declare that he would carry the lady 's picture next to he heart ,-- I be afraid he say for ever and ever . then he take she hand and press it , and be conscious that for a man over seventy year of age he do that kind of thing very well . " you will come and dine with I , ? " she say , when he begin to talk of go . " I never dine out . " " that be just the reason you should dine with I . you shall meet nobody you do not wish to meet . " " I would so much rather see you in this way , -- I would indeed . I do dine out occasionally , but it be at big formal party , which I can not escape without give offence . " " and you can not escape my little not formal party ,-- without give offence . " she look into he face as she speak , and he know that she mean it . and he look into hers , and think that she eye be brighter than any he be in the habit of see in these latter day . " name you own day , . will a suit you ? " " if I must come -- " " you must come . " as she speak she eye sparkle more and more , and she colour go and come , and she shook she curl till they emit through the air the same soft feeling of a perfume that she note have produce . then she foot pee out from beneath the black and yellow drapery of she dress , and the see that it be perfect . and she put out she finger and touch he arm as she speak . she hand be very fair , and she finger be bright with rich gem . to man such as the , a hand , to be quite fair , should be bright with rich gem . " you must come , " she say , -- not implor he now but command he . " then I will come , " he answer , and a certain be fix . the arranging of the guest be a little difficulty , till beg the to bring with he , he nephew 's wife . this at last he agree to do . as the wife of he nephew and heir , be to the all that a woman could be . she be everything that be proper as to she own conduct , and not obtrusive as to he . she do not bear he , and yet she be attentive . although in she husband 's house she be a fierce politician , in he house she be simply a attractive woman . " ah ; she be very clever , " the once say , " she adapt herself . if she be to go from any one place to any other , she would be at home in both . " and the movement of he 's hand as he speak seem to indicate the widest possible sphere for travelling and the widest possible scope for adaptation . the dinner be arrange , and go off very pleasantly . 's eye be not quite so bright as they be during that morning visit , nor do she touch she guest 's arm in a manner so allur . she be very quiet , allow she guest to do most of the talking . but the dinner and the flower and the wine be excellent , and the whole thing be so quiet that the like it . " and now you must come and dine with I , " the say as he take he leave . " a command to that effect will be one which I certainly shall not disobey , " whisper . " I be afraid he be go to get fond of that woman . " these word be speak early on the follow morning by to she husband , . " he be always get fond of some woman , and he will to the end , " say . " but this be very clever . " " so they tell I . I have generally think that my uncle like talk to a fool the best . " " every man like a clever woman the best , " say , " if the clever woman only know how to use she cleverness . " " I be sure I hope he will be amuse , " say innocently . " a little amusement be all that he care for now . " " suppose you be tell some day that
that he be go -- to be marry ? " say . " my uncle marry ! " " why not he as well as another ? " " and to ? " " if he be ever marry it will be to some such woman . " " there be not a man in all who think more of he own position than my uncle , " say somewhat proudly ,-- almost with a touch of anger . " that be all very well , , and true enough in a kind of way . but a child will sacrifice all that it have for the top brick of the chimney , and old man sometimes become child . you would not like to be tell some morning that there be a little in the world . " now the eldest son of the of , when the of have a son , be call the of ; and Palliser , when this question be ask he , become very pale . know well how thoroughly the cunning of the serpent be join to the purity of the dove in the person of he wife , and he be sure that there be cause for fear when she hint at danger . " perhaps you have better keep you eye upon he , " he say to he wife . " and upon she , " say . when dine at the 's house in 's there be a large party , and know that there be no need for apprehension then . indeed be no more than any other guest , and the hardly speak to she . there be a Duchess there , -- the Duchess of , and old , who be a dowager marchioness , -- a old lady who pester the very sorely , -- and receive she reward , and know that she be receive it , in be ask to meet these people . would not all these name , include she own , be blazon to the world in the column of the next day 's _Morning post_ ? there be no absolute danger here , as know ; and , who be tolerant and begrudge nothing to except the one thing , be quite willing to meet the lady at such a grand affair as this . but the , even should he become ever so childish a child in he old age , still would have that plain green brougham at he command , and could go anywhere in that at any hour in the day . and then be so manifestly a clever woman . a Duchess of might be say to fill , -- in the estimation , at any rate , of English people , -- the highest position in the world short of royalty . and the reader will remember that intend to be a Duchess of herself ,--unless some very unexpected event should intrude itself . she intend also that she little boy , she fair - hair , curly - pat , bold - face little boy , should be of when the sand of the old man should have run itself out . Heavens , what a blow would it be , should some little wizen - cheek half - monkey baby , with black brows , and yellow skin , be bring forward and show to she some day as the heir ! what a blow to herself ; -- and what a blow to all ! " we can not prevent it if he choose to do it , " say she husband , who have he budget to bring forward that very night , and who in truth car more for he budget than he do for he heirship at that moment . " but we must prevent it , " say . " if I stick to he by the tail of he coat , I will prevent it . " at the time when she thus speak , the dark green brougham have be twice again bring up at the door in . and the brougham be stand there a third time . it be now , the latter end of , and the park opposite be beautiful with green thing , and the air be soft and balmy , as it will be sometimes even in , and the flower in the balcony be full of perfume , and the charm of , -- what can be to the rich , -- be at its height . the be sit in 's drawing - room , at some distance from she , for she have retreate . the have a habit of take she hand , which she never would permit for above a few seconds . at such time she would show no anger , but would retreat . " , " say the , " you will go abroad when the summer be over . " as a old man he have take the privilege of call she , and she have not forbide it . yes , probably ; to . I have property in you know , which must be look after . " do not mind to this year . come to . " " what ; in summer , ? " " the lakes be charme in . I have a villa on which be empty now , and I think I shall go there . if you do not know the italian lakes , I shall be so happy to show they to you . " " I know they well , my lord . when I be young I be on the Maggiore almost alone . some day I will tell you a history of what I be in those day . " " you shall tell it I there . " " no , my lord , I
I fear not . I have no villa there . " " will you not accept the loan of mine ? it shall be all you own while you use it . " " my own , -- to deny the right of entrance to its owner ? " " if it so please you . " " it would not please I . it would so far from please I that I will never put myself in a position that might make it possible for I to require to do so . no , ; it behove I to live in house of my own . woman of whom more be know can afford to be you guest . " " , I would have no other guest than you . " " it can not be so , . " " and why not ? " " why not ? be I to be put to the blush by be make to answer such a question as that ? because the world would say that the of have a new mistress , and that be the woman . do you think that I would be any man 's mistress ;--even yours ? or do you believe that for the sake of the softness of a summer evening on a italian lake , I would give cause to the tongue of the woman here to say that I be such a thing ? you would have I lose all that I have gain by steady year of sober work for the sake of a week or two of dalliance such as that ! no , ; not for you dukedom ! " how he might have get through he difficulty have they be leave alone , can not be tell . for at this moment the door be open , and be announce . in " and see the country and judge for yourself , " say . " I should like nothing better , " say . " it have often seem to I that man in parliament know less about than they do of the interior of , " say . " it be seldom that we know anything accurately on any subject that we have not make matter of careful study , " say , " and very often do not do so even then . we be very apt to think that we man and woman understand one another ; but most probably you know nothing even of the mode of thought of the man who live next door to you . " " I suppose not . " " there be general law current in the world as to morality . ' thou shal not steal , ' for instance . that have necessarily be current as a law through all nation . but the first man you meet in the street will have idea about theft so different from yours , that , if you know they as you know you own , you would say that this law and yours be not even found on the same principle . it be compatible with this man 's honesty to cheat you in a matter of horseflesh , with that man 's in a traffic of railway share , with that other man 's as to a woman 's fortune ; with a fourth 's anything may be do for a seat in parliament , while the fifth man , who stand high among we , and who implore he every to write that law on he heart , spend every hour of he daily toil in a system of fraud , and be regard as a pattern of the national commerce ! " and be dine together at 's house , and the elder politician of the two in this little speech have recur to certain matters which have already be discuss between they . be become somewhat sick of he place in the cabinet , though he have not as yet whisper a word of he sickness to any liive ear ; and he have begin to pine for the lost freedom of a seat below the gangway . he have be discuss political honesty with , and hence have come the sermon of which I have venture to reproduce the concluding denunciation . be fond of such discussion and fond of hold they with , -- in this matter flutter like a moth round a candle . he would not perceive that as he have make up he mind to be a servant of the public in parliament , he must abandon all idea of independent action ; and unless he do so he could be neither successful as regard himself , or useful to the public whom he serve . could a man be honest in parliament , and yet abandon all idea of independence ? when he put such question to he do not get a direct answer . and indeed the question be never put directly . but the teaching which he receive be ever of a nature to make he uneasy . it be always to this effect : " you have take up the trade now , and seem to be fit for success in it . you have better give up think about its special honesty . " and yet would on a occasion preach to he such a sermon as that which he have just utter ! perhaps there be no question more difficult to a man 's mind than that of the expediency or inexpediency of scruple in political life . whether would a candidate for office be more liable to rejection from a leader because he be know to be scrupulous , or because he be know to be the reverse ? " but put aside the fourth commandment and all the theories , you will come to ? " say . "
" I shall be delighted . " " I do not live in a castle , you know . " " I think everybody do live in a castle in , " say . " they seem to do when I be there twenty year ago . but for myself , I prefer a cottage . " this trip to have be propose in consequence of certain idea respect tenant - right which be begin to adopt , and as to which the mind of politician be become move . it have be all very well to put down , and , and , -- and everything that have be put down in in the way of rebellion for the last seventy - five year . and have be apparently join together by law of nature so fix , that even politician liberal as be ,-- liberal as be , -- could not trust themselves to think that disunion could be for the good of the irish . they have teach themselves that it certainly could not be good for the . but if it be incumbent on to force upon the maintenance of the union for she own sake , and for 's sake , because could not afford independence establish so close against she own rib , -- it be at any rate necessary to 's character that the bride thus bound in a compulsory wedlock should be endow with all the best privileges that a wife can enjoy . let she at least not be a keep mistress . let it be bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh , if we be to live together in the married state . between husband and wife a warm word now and then matter but little , if there be a thoroughly good understanding at bottom . but let there be that good understanding at bottom . what about this ; and what about this tenant - right ? have be ask himself these question for some time past . in regard to the Church , he have long make up he mind that the establishment in be a crying sin . a man have marry a woman whom he know to be of a religion different from he own , and then insist that he wife should say that she believe those thing which he know very well that she do not believe . but , as well know , the subject of the in be so difficult that it would require almost more than human wisdom to adjust it . it be one of those matter which almost seem to require the interposition of some higher power , -- the coming of some apparently chance event , -- to clear away the evil ; as a fire come , and pestilential alley be remove ; as a famine come , and man be drive from want and ignorance and dirt to seek new home and new thought across the broad water ; as a war come , and slavery be banish from the face of the earth . but in regard to tenant - right , to some arrangement by which a tenant in might be at least encourage to lay out what little capital he might have in labour or money without be at once call upon to pay rent for that outlay which be he own , as well as for the land which be not he own ,-- . think that it be possible that if a man would look hard enough he might perhaps be able to see he way as to that . he have speak to two of he colleague on the subject , the two man in the cabinet whom he believe to be the most thoroughly honest in they idea as public servants , the and . there be so much to be do ; -- and then so little be know upon the subject ! " I will endeaavor to study it , " say . " if you can see you way , do ; " say , -- " but of course we can not bind ourselves . " " I should be glad to see it name in the 's speech at the beginning of the next session , " say . " that be a long way off as yet , " say , laugh . " who will be in then , and who will be out ? " so the matter be dispose of at the time , but do not abandon he idea . he rather feel himself the more bound to cling to it because he receive so little encouragement . what be a seat in the cabinet to he that he should on that account omin a duty ? he have not take up politics as a trade . he have sit far behind the Treasury bench or below the gangway for many a year , without owe any man a shilling , -- and could afford to do so again . but it be different with , as himself understand ; -- and , understand this , he feel himself bound to caution he young friend . but it may be a question whether he caution do not do more harm than good . " I shall be delighted , " he say , " to go over with you in , but I do not think that if I be you , I would take up this matter . " " and why not ? you do not want to fight the battle singlehand ? " " no ; I desire no such glory , and would wish to have no better lieutenant than you . but you have a subject of which you be really fond , which you be begin to understand , and in regard to which you can make yourself useful .
. " " you mean this business ? " " yes ; -- and that will grow to other matter as regard the colony . there be nothing so important to a public man as that he should have he own subject ;-- the thing which he understand , and in respect of which he can make himself really useful . " " then there come a change . " " yes ; -- and the man who have half learn how to have a ship build without waste be send into opposition , and be then bring back to look after regiment , or perhaps have to take up that beautiful subject , a study of the career of . but , nevertheless , if you have a subject , stick to it at any rate as long as it will stick to you . " " but , " say , " if a man take up he own subject , independent of the government , no man can drive he from it . " " and how often do he do anything ? look at the annual motion which come forward in the hand of private men,-- Maynooth and the ballot for instance . it be become more and more apparent every day that all legislation must be carry by the government , and must be carry in obedience to the expressed wish of the people . the truest democracy that ever have a chance of living be that which we be now establish in . " " then leave tenant - right to the people and the cabinet . why should you take it up ? " pause a moment or two before he reply . " if I choose to run a -muck , there be no reason why you should follow I . I be old and you be young . I want nothing from politics as a profession , and you do . moreover , you have a congenial subject where you be , and need not disturb yourself . for myself , I tell you , in confidence , that I can not speak so comfortably of my own position . " " we will go and see , at any rate , " say . " yes , " say , " we will go and see . " and thus , in the month of , it be settle between they that , as soon as the session should be over , and the incidental work of he office should allow to pack up and be off , they two should start together for . feel rather proud as he write to he father and ask permission to bring home with he a as a visitor . at this time the reputation of at , as well in the minds of the generally as in those of the inhabitant of the paternal house , stand very high indeed . how could a father think that a son have do badly when before he be thirty year of age he be earn L2,000 a year ? and how could a father not think well of a son who have absolutely pay back certain money into the paternal coffer ? the money so repaid have not be much ; but the repayment of any such money at have be regard as little short of miraculous . the news of 's come flew about the town , about the county , about the diocese , and all people begin to say all good thing about the old doctor 's only son . . have long since be quite sure that a real black swan have be send forth out of she nest . and the sister , for some time past , have felt in all social gathering they stand quite on a different footing than formerly because of they brother . they be ask about in the county , and two of they have be stay only last Easter with the , -- the of ! how should a father and a mother and sister not be grateful to such a son , to such a brother , to such a veritable black swan out of the nest ! and as for dear little , she eye become suffused with tear as in she solitude she think how much out of she reach this swan be fly . and yet she take joy in he swanhood , and swore that she would love he still ; -- that she would love he always . might he bring home with he to , , the ! of course he might . when . first heard of this august arrival , she feel as though she would like to expend herself in entertaining , though but a hour , the whole cabinet . , during the spring , have , of course , meet frequently in and about the , and have become aware that 's husband , from time to time , make little overture of civility to he , -- take he now and again by the button - hole , walk home with he as far as they jous not pat allow , and ask he once or twice to come and dine in . these little advances towards a repetition of the old friendship Phineas would have avoid altogether , have it be possible . the invitation to 's house he do refuse , feel himself positively bound to do so by 's command , let the consequence be what they might . when he do refuse , would assume a look of displeasure and leave he , and would hope that the work be done . then there would come another encounter , and the invitation would be repeat . at last , about the middle of , there come another note . " dear , will you dine with
with we on , the 28th ? I give you a long notice , because you seem to have so many appointment . yours always , . " he have no alternative . he must refuse , even though double the notice have be give . he could only think that be a very obtuse man and one who would not take a hint , and hope that he might succeed at last . so he write a answer , not intend to be conciliatory . " my dear , I be sorry to say that I be engage on the 28th . yours always , . " at this period he do he best to keep out of 's way , and would be very cunning in he manoeuvr that they should not be alone together . it be difficult , as they sit on the same bench in the house , and consequently see each other almost every day of they life . nevertheless , he think that with a little cunning he might prevail , especially as he be not unwilling to give so much of offence as might assist he own object . but when call upon he at he office the day after he have write the above note , he have no means of escape . " I be sorry you can not come to we on the 28th , " say , as soon as he be seat . be take so much by surprise that all he cunning fail he . " well , yes , " say he ; " I be very sorry ; -- very sorry indeed . " " it seem to I , , that you have have some reason for avoid I of late . I do not know that I have do anything to offend you . " " nothing on earth , " say . " I be wrong , then , in suppose that anything beyond mere chance have prevent you from come to my house ? " feel that he be in a terrible difficulty , and he feel also that he be be rather ill - use in be thus cross -examined as to he reason for not go to a gentleman 's dinner . he think that a man ought to be allow to choose where he would go and where he would not go , and that question such as these be very uncommon . be sit opposite to he , look more grave and more sour than usual ; -- and now he own countenance also become a little solemn . it be impossible that he should use 's name , and yet he must , in some way , let he persecut friend know that no further invitation would be of any use ; -- that there be something beyond mere chance in he not go to . but how be he to do this ? the difficulty be so great that he could not see he way out of it . so he sit silent with a solemn face . then ask he another question , which make the difficulty ten time greater . " have my wife ask you not to come to we house ? " it be necessary now that he should make a rush and get out of he trouble in some way . " to tell you the truth , , I do not think she want to see I there . " " that do not answer my question . have she ask you not to come ? " " she say that which leave on my mind a impression that she would sooner that I do not come . " " what do she say ? " " how can I answer such a question as that , ? be it fair to ask it ? " " quite fair ,-- I think . " " I think it quite unfair , and I must decline to answer it . I can not imagine what you expect to gain by cross -question I in this way . of course no man like to go to a house if he do not believe that everybody there will make he welcome . " " you and use to be great friend . " " I hope we be not enemy now . but thing will occur that cause friendship to grow cool . " " have you quarrell with she father ? " " with ?-- no . " " or with she brother , -- since the duel I mean ? " " upon my word and honour I can not stand this , and I will not . I have not as yet quarrell with anybody ; but I must quarrel with you , if you go on in this way . it be quite unusual that a man should be put through he facing after such a fashion , and I must beg that there may be a end of it . " " then I must ask . " " you can say what you like to you own wife of course . I can not hinder you . " upon that formally shook hand with he , in token that there be no positive breach between they , -- as two nation may still maintain they alliance , though they have make up they minds to hate each other , and thwart each other at every turn , -- and take he leave . Phinea , as he sit at he window , look out into the park , and think of what have pass , could not but reflect that , disagreeable as have be to he , he would probably make himself much more disagreeable to he wife . and , for himself , he think that he have get out of the scrape very
very well by the exhibition of a little mock anger . the 's the reader may remember that a rumour have be convey to , -- a rumour indeed which reach he from a source which he regard as very untrustworthy , -- that have quarrell with she lover . he would probably have pay no attention to the rumour , beyond that which necessarily attach itself to any tiding as to a matter so full of interest to he , have it not be repeat to he in another quarter . " a bird have tell I that you have break with she lover , " say to he one day . " what bird ? " he ask . " ah , that I can not tell you . but this I will confess to you , that these bird which tell we news be seldom very credible , -- and be often not very creditable , you must take a bird 's word for what it may be worth . it be say that they have quarrell . I daresay , if the truth be know , they be bill and cooe in each other 's arm at this moment . " do not like to be tell of they billing and cooe , -- do not like to be tell even of they quarrelling . though they be to quarrel , it would do he no good . he would rather that nobody should mention they name to he ; -- so that he back , which have be so utterly break , might in process of time get itself cure . from what he know of he think it very improbable that , even be she to quarrel with one lover , she would at once throw herself into the arm of another . and he do feel , too , that there would be some meanness in take she , be she willing to be so take . but , nevertheless , these rumours , come to he in this way from different source , almost make it incumbent on he to find out the truth . he begin to think that he break back be not cure ; -- that perhaps , after all , it be not in the way of be cure , and be it not possible that there might be explanations ? then he go to work and build castle in the air , so constructed as to admit of the possibility of become he wife . this have be in , and at that time all that he know of be , that she be not yet in . and he think that he know the same as to . the have tell he that be not in town , nor expect in town as yet ; and in say so have seem to express displeasure against he son . Phineas have meet Lady Baldock at some house which he frequent , and have be quite surprised to find himself graciously receive by the old woman . she have say not a word of , but have speak of ,-- mention he name in bitter wrath . " but he be a friend of mine , " say , smile . " a friend indeed ! . I know what sort of a friend . I do not believe that you be he friend . I be afraid he be not worthy of have any friend . " do not quite understand from this that be signify to he that , badly as she have think of he as a suitor for she niece , she would have prefer he ,-- especially now when people be begin to speak well of he , -- to that terrible young man , who , from he youth upwards , have be to she a cause of fear and trembl . of course it be desirable that should marry a elder son , and a peer 's heir . all that kind of thing , in 's eye , be most desirable . but , nevertheless , anything be better than . if would not take or , in heaven 's name let she take this young man , who be kind , worthy , and steady , who be civilise in he manners , and would no doubt be amenable in regard to settlements . have so far fall in the world that she would have consent to make a bargain with she niece ,-- almost any bargain , so long as be exclude . do not quite understand all this ; but when ask he to come to , he perceive that help be be proffer to he where he certainly have not look for help . he be frequently with , who talk to he constantly on matter connect with he parliamentary life . after have be the intimate friend of the daughter and of the son , it now seem to be he lot to be the intimate friend of the father . the have constantly discuss with he he arrangement with he son , and have lately express himself as only half satisfied with such reconciliation as have take place . and could perceive that from day to day the be less and less satisfied . he would complain bitterly of he son , -- complain of he silence , complain of he not come to , complain of he conduct to , complain of he idle indifference to anything like proper occupation ; but he have never as yet say a word to show that there have be any quarrel between and she lover , and have feel that he could not ask the question . " , " say the to he one morning , as soon as he enter the room , " I have just hear a story which have almost see to
to I to be incredible . " the nobleman 's manner be very stern , and the fact that he call he young friend " " , show at once that something be wrong . " what be it you have hear , my lord ? " say . " that you and go over ,-- last year to ,-- , and fight , -- a duel there ! " now it must have be the case that , in the set among which they all liv , -- and he son and daughter and , -- the old lord be the only man who have not hear of the duel before this . it have even penetrate to the dull ear of , remind he , as it do so , that he wife have , -- tell he a lie ! but it be the fact that no rumour of the duel have reach the till this morning . " it be true , " say . " I have never be so much shocke in my life ;-- never . I have no idea that you have any thought of aspiring to the hand of . " the lord 's voice as he say this be very stern . " as I aspire in vain , and as have be successful , that need not now be make a reproach against I . " " I do not know what to think of it , . I be so much surprise that I hardly know what to say . I must declare my opinion at once , that you behave , -- very badly . " " I do not know how much you know , my lord , and how much you do not know ; and the circumstance of the little affair do not permit I to be explicit about they ; but , as you have express you opinion so openly you must allow I to express mine , and to say that , as far as I can judge of my own action , I do not behave badly at all . " " do you intend to defend duelling , sir ? " " no . if you mean to tell I that a duel be of itself sinful , I have nothing to say . I suppose it be . my defence of myself merely go to the manner in which this duel be fight , and the fact that I fight it with you son . " " I can not conceive how you can have come to my house as my guest , and stand upon my interest for my borough , when you at the time be do you very best to interpose yourself between and the lady whom you so well know I wish to become he wife . " be aware that the must have be very much move indeed when he thus permit himself to speak of " he " borough . he say nothing now , however , though the pause ; -- and then the angry lord go on . " I must say that there be something , -- something almost approach to duplicity in such conduct . " " if i be to defend myself by evidence , , I should have to go back to exact date , -- and dates not of fact which I could verify , but date as to my feeling which could not be verify , -- and that would be useless . I can only say that I believe I know what the honour and truth of a gentleman demand , -- even to the verge of self - sacrifice , and that I have do nothing that ought to place my character as a gentleman in jeopardy . if you will ask you son , I think he will tell you the same . " " I have ask he . it be he who tell I of the duel . " " when do he tell you , my lord ? " " just now ; this morning . " thus Phineas learn that be at this moment in the house , -- or at least in . " and do he complain of my conduct ? " " I complain of it , sir . I complain of it very bitterly . I place the greatest confidence in you , especially in regard to my son 's affair , and you deceive I . " the be very angry , and be more angry from the fact that this young man who have offend he , to whom he have give such vital assistance when assistance be need , have use that assistance to its utmost before he sin be find out . have Phinea still be sit for , so that the could have say to he , " you be now bound to retreat from this borough because you have offend I , you patron , " I think that he would have forgive the offender and allow he to remain in he seat . there would have be a scene , and the would have be pacify . but now the offender be beyond he reach altogether , have use the borough as a most convenient stepping - stone over he difficulty , and have so use it just at the time when he be commit this sin . there be a good fortune about Phineas which add greatly to the lord 's wrath . and then , to tell the truth , he have not that rich consolation for which give he credit . have tell he that morning that the engagement between he and be at a end . " you have so preach to she , my lord , about my duty , " the son have say to he father , " that she find
find herself oblige to give I you sermon at second hand , till I can bear they no longer . " but of this know nothing as yet . the , however , be so imprudent in he anger that before this interview be over he have tell the whole story . " yes ; -- you deceive I , " he continue ; " and I can never trust you again . " " be it for I , my lord , to tell you of that which would have increase you anger against you own son ? when he want I to fight be I to come , like a sneak at school , and tell you the story ? I know what you would have think of I have I do so . and when it be over be I to come and tell you then ? think what you yourself would have do when you be young , and you may be quite sure that I do the same . what have I gain ? he have get all that he want ; and you have also get all that you want ; -- and I have help you both . , I can put my hand on my heart and say that I have be honest to you . " " I have get nothing that I want , " say the in he despair . " and will be man and wife . " " no ; -- they will not . he have quarrell with she . he be so obstinate that she will not bear with he . " then it be all true , even though the rumours have reach he through and . " at any rate , my lord , that have not be my fault , " he say , after a moment 's hesitation . the be walk up and down the room , angry with himself at he own mistake in have tell the story , and not know what further to say to he visitor . he have be in the habit of talk so freely to about he son that he could hardly resist the temptation of do so still ; and yet it be impossible that he could swallow he anger and continue in the same strain . " my lord , " say , after a while , " I can assure you that I grieve that you should be grieve . I have receive so much undeserved favour from you family , that I owe you a debt which I can never pay . I be sorry that you should be angry with I now ; but I hope that a time may come when you will think less severely of my conduct . " he be about to leave the room when the stop he . " will you give I you word , " say the , " that you will think no more of ? " Phineas stand silent , consider how he might answer this proposal , resolve that nothing should bring he to such a pledge as that suggest while there be yet a ledge for hope to stand on . " say that , , and I will forgive everything . " " I can not acknowledge that I have do anything to be forgive . " " say that , " repeat the , " and everything shall be forget . " " there need be no cause for alarm , my lord , " say . " you may be sure that will not think of I . " " will you give I you word ? " " no , my lord ; -- certainly not . you have no right to ask it , and the pursuit be open to I as to any other man who may choose to follow it . I have hardly a vestige of a hope of success . it be barely possible that I should succeed . but if it be true that be disengage , I shall endeaavor to find a opportunity of urge my suit . I would give up everything that I have , my seat in parliament , all the ambition of my life , for the barest chance of success . when she have accept you son , I desiste , -- of course . I have now hear , from more source than one , that she or he or both of they have change they mind . if this be so , I be free to try again . " the stand opposite to he , scowl at he , but say nothing . " good morning , my lord . " " good morning , sir . " " I be afraid it must be good - bye , for some long day to come . " " good morning , sir , " and the Earl as he speak ring the bell . then take up he hat and depart . as he walk away he mind fill itself gradually with various idea , all spring from the word which have speak . what account have give to he father of the duel ? we hero be a man very sensitive as to the good opinion of other , and in spite of he bold assertion of he own knowledge of what become a gentleman , be beyond measure solicitous that other should acknowledge he claim at any rate to that title . he think that he have be generous to ; and as he go back in he memory over almost every word that have be speak in the interview that have just pass , he fancie that he be able to collect evidence that he antagonist at have not speak ill of he . as to the charge of deceit which the have make against
against he , he tell himself that the have make it in anger . he would not even think hardly of the who have be so good a friend to he , but he believe in he heart that the have make the accusation out of he wrath and not out of he judgment . " he can not think that I have be false to he , " say to himself . but it be very sad to he that he should have to quarrel with all the family of the Standish , as he could not but feel that it be they who have put he on he foot . it seem as though he be never to see again except when they chance to meet in company , -- on which occasion he simply bow to she . now the have almost turn he out of he house . and though there have been to a certain extent a reconciliation between he and , he in these day never see the friend who have once put he upon ; and now , -- now that be again free , -- how be it possible to avoid some renewal of enmity between they ? he would , however , endeaavor to see at once . and then he think of , -- of again free , of as again a possible wife for himself , of to whom he might address himself at any rate without any scruple as to he own unworthiness . everybody concerned , and many who be not concerned at all , be aware that he have be among she lover , and he think that he could perceive that those who interest themselves on the subject , have regard he as the only horse in the race likely to run with success against . she herself have receive he offer without scorn , and have always treat he as though he be a favoured friend , though not favour as a lover . and now even be smile upon he , and ask he to she house as though the red -faced porter in the hall in have never be order to refuse he a moment 's admission inside the door . he have be very humble in speaking of he own hope to the , but surely there might be a chance . what if after all the little strain which he have have in he back be to be cure after such a fashion as this ! when he get to he lodging , he find a card from , inform he that would be at home on a certain night , and that there would be music . he could not go to 's on the night name , as it would be necessary that he should be in the house ; -- nor do he much care to go there , as be not in town . but he would call and explain , and endeavou to curry favour in that way . he at once write a note to , which he address to . " as you be in town , can we not meet ? come and dine with I at the ---- club on . " that be the note . after a few day he receive the follow answer , date from the at . why on earth should be stay at the at in ? the old shop at -- -- , . , I can not dine with you , because I be down here , look after the cripples , and write a sporting novel . they tell I I ought to do something , so I be go to do that . I hope you do not think I turn informer against you in tell the of we pleasant little meeting on the sand . it have become necessary , and you be too much of a man to care much for any truth be tell . he be terribly angry both with I and with you ; but the fact be , he be so blindly unreasonable that one can not regard he anger . I endeavoure to tell the story truly , and , so tell , it certainly should not have injure you in he estimation . but it do . very sorry , old fellow , and I hope you will get over it . it be a good deal more important to I than to you . yours , . there be not a word about . but then it be hardly to be expect that there should be word about . it be not likely that a man should write to he rival of he own failure . but yet there be a flavour of Violet in the letter which would not have be there , so Phineas think , if the writer have be despondent . the pleasant little meeting on the sand have be conven altogether in respect of . and the telling of the story to the must have arisen from discussion about . must have tell he father that be he rival . could the rejected suitor have write on such a subject in such a strain to such a correspondent if he have believe he own rejection to be certain ? but then be not like anybody else in the world , and it be impossible to judge of he by one 's experience of the motives of other . shortly afterwards do call in , and be show up at once into 's drawing - room . the whole aspect of the porter 's countenance be change towards he , and from this , too , he gather good augury this have surprise he ; but he surprise be far greater , when , on enter the room , he find there alone . a little fresh colour come
come to she face as she greet he , though it can not be say that she blush . she behave herself admirably , not endeavour to conceal some little emotion at thus meet he , but betraie none that be injuriious to she composure . " I be so glad to see you , , " she say . " my aunt have just leave I , and will be back directly . " he be by no mean she equal in he management of himself on the occasion ; but perhaps it may be acknowledge that he position be the more difficult of the two . he have not see she since she engagement have be proclaim to the world , and now he have hear from a source which be not to be doubt , that it have be break off . of course there be nothing to be say on that matter . he could not have congratulate she in the one case , nor could he either congratulate she or condeal with she on the other . and yet he do not know how to speak to she as though no such event have occur . " I do not know that you be in town , " he say . " I only come yesterday . I have be , you know , at with the ; and since that I have be -- ; but , indeed , I have be such a vagrant that I can not tell you of all my comings and goings . and you , -- you be hard at work ! " " oh yes ;-- always . " " that be right . I wish I could be something , if it be only a stick in waiting , or a door - keeper . it be so good to be something . " be it some such teaching as this that have jar against 's susceptibility , and have seem to he to be a repetition of he father 's sermon ? " a man should try to be something , " say . " and a woman must be content to be nothing ,-- unless can pull we through ! and now , tell I , -- have you see ? " " not lately . " " ? " " I sometimes see he in the house . " the visit to the of which the reader have be make aware have not at that time as yet be make . " I be sorry for all that , " she say . upon which smile and shake he head . " I be very sorry that there should be a quarrel between you two . " " there be no quarrel . " " I use to think that you and he might do so much for each other , -- that be , of course , if you could make a friend of he . " " he be a man of whom it be very hard to make a friend , " say , feel that he be dishonest to in say so , but think that such dishonesty be justifi by what he owed to . " yes ; -- he be hard , and what I call ungenial . we will not say anything about he , -- will we ? have you see much of the ? " this she ask as though such a question have no reference whatever to . " oh dear , -- ala , ala ! " " you have not quarrell with he too ? " " he have quarrell with I . he have hear , , of what happen last year , and he think that I be wrong . " " of course you be wrong , . " " very likely . to he I choose to defend myself , but I certainly shall not do so to you . at any rate , you do not think it necessary to quarrel with I . " " I ought to have do so . I wonder why my aunt do not come . " then she ring the bell . " now I have tell you all about myself , " say he ; " you should tell I something of yourself . " " about I ? I be like the knife - grinder , who have no story to tell , -- no at least to be tell . we have all , no doubt , get we little story , interesting enough to ourselves . " " but you story , , " he say , " be of such intense interest to I . " at that moment , luckily , come into the room , and be save from the necessity of make a declaration at a moment which would have be most inopportune . be exceedingly gracious to he , bid use she influence to persuade he to come to the gathering . " persuade he to desert he work to come and hear some fiddler ! " say . " indeed I shall not , aunt . who can tell but what the colony might suffer from it through centurie , and that such a lapse of duty might drive a province or two into the arm of we mortal enemie ? " " be come , " say , " and so be , and , who , they say , be the greatest man live on the flageolet . have you ever hear Pjinskt , ? " Phineas never have hear Pjinskt . " and as for , there be nothing equal to he , this year , at least . " have take up music this season , but all she enthusiasm be unable to shake the conscientious zeal of the young under - Secretary of . at
at such a gathering he would have be unable to say a word in private to Violet . 's Politics it may be remember that when be show into 's room , have just explain somewhat forcibly to the of she reason for refuse the loan of he 's villa at . she have tell the in so many word that she do not mean to give the world a opportunity of malign she , and it would then have be leave to the to decide whether any other arrangement might have be make for take to , have he not be interrupt . that he be very anxious to take she be certain . the green brougham have already be often enough at the door in to make he feel that 's company be very desirable , -- be , perhaps , of all thing leave for he enjoyment , the one thing the most desirable . have speak to she husband of child cry for the top brick of the chimney . now it have come to this , that in the eyes of the of be the top brick of the chimney . she have more wit for he than other woman , -- more of that sort of wit which he be capable of enjoie . she have a beauty which he have learn to think more alluring than other beauty . he be sick of fair face , and fat arm , and free neck . 's eye sparkle as other eye do not sparkle , and there be something of the vagueness of mystery in the very blackness and gloss and abundance of she hair , -- as though she beauty be the beauty of some world which he have not yet know . and there be a quickness and yet a grace of motion about she which be quite new to he . the lady upon whom the have of late most often smiled have be somewhat slow ,-- perhaps almost heavy , -- though , no doubt , graceful withal . in he early youth he remember to have see , somewhere in , such a houri as be this . the houri in that case have run off with the captain of a russian vessel engage in the tallow trade ; but not the less be there leave on he 's mind some dreamy memory of charms which have impress he very strongly when he be simply a young , and have have at he command not so convenient a mode of sudden abduction as the 's tallow ship . press hard by such circumstance as these , there be no know how the might have get out of he difficulty have not appear upon the scene . since the future little have be bear , the have be very constant in he worship of , and as , from year to year , a little brother be add , thus make the family very strong and stable , he act of worship have increase ; but with he worship there have come of late something almost of dread , -- something almost of obedience , which have make those who be immediately about the declare that he be a good deal change . for , , whatever may have be the 's weakness , he certainly have know no master . he heir , , have be always subject to he . he other relation have be keep at such a distance as hardly to be more than recognise ; and though he no doubt have have he intimacy , they who have be intimate with he have either never try to obtain ascendancy , or have fail . , whether with or without a struggle , have succeed , and people about the say that the be much change . , -- who be he 's man of business , and who be not a favourite with , -- say that he be very much change indeed . find he so much change , have make a little attempt at dictation himself , but have reced with finger very much scorch in the attempt . it be indeed possible that the be become in the slightest degree weary of 's thraldom , and that he think that might be more tender with he . , however , intend to be tender only on one condition . when enter the room , receive she beautifully . " how lucky that you should have come just when he be here ! " she say . " I see my uncle 's carriage , and of course I know it , " say . " then the favour be to he , " say , smile . " no , indeed ; I be come . if my word be to be doubt in that point , I must insist on have the servant up ; I must , certainly . I tell he to drive to this door , as far back as . do I not , ? " Planty be the little as be to be , if nothing unfortunate intervene , who be now sit on he granduncle 's knee . " Dou say to the little house in , " say the boy . " yes , -- because I forget the number . " " and it be the smallest house in , so the evidence be complete , " say . have not care much for evidence to convince , but she have not wish she uncle to think that he be watch and hunt down . it might be necessary that he should know that he be watch , but thing have not come to that as yet . " how be ? " ask the . " answer for papa , " say to she child . " be very well , but he
he almost never come home . " " he be work for he country , " say the . " you papa be a busy , useful man , and can not afford time to play with a little boy as I can . " " but papa be not a duke . " " he will be some day , and that probably before long , my boy . he will be a duke quite as soon as he want to be a duke . he like the house of Commons better than the strawberry leave , I fancy . there be not a man in less in a hurry than he be . " " no , indeed , " say . " how nice that be , " say . " and I be not in a hurry either , -- be I , ? " say the little future . " you be a wick little monkey , " say he grand - uncle , kiss he . at this moment be , no doubt , think how necessary it be that she should be careful to see that thing do turn out in the manner propose ,-- so that people who have wait should not be disappoint ; and the be perhaps think that he be not absolutely bound to he nephew by any law of or man ; and , -- I wonder whether she thought be injuriious to the prospect of that handsome bold - face little boy . rise to take she leave first . it be not for she to show any anxiety to force the out of the lady 's presence . if the be resolve to make a fool of himself , nothing that she could do would prevent it . but she think that this little inspection might possibly be of service , and that she uncle 's ardour would be cool by the interruption to which he have be subject . so she go , and immediately afterward the follow she . the interruption have , at any rate , save he on that occasion from make the highest bid for the pleasure of 's company at . the go down with the little boy in he hand , so that there be not a opportunity for a single word of interest between the gentleman and the lady . , when she be alone , seat herself on she sofa , tuck she foot up under she as though she be seat somewhere in the , push she ringlet back roughly from she face , and then place she two hand to she side so that she thumb rest lightly on she girdle . when alone with something weighty on she mind she would sit in this form for the hour together , resolve , or try to resolve , what should be she conduct . she do few thing without much thinking , and though she walk very boldly , she walk warily . she often tell herself that such success as she have achieve could not have be achieve without much caution . and yet she be ever discontent with herself , tell herself that all that she have do be nothing , or worse than nothing . what be it all , to have a duke and to have lord dining with she , to dine with lord or with a duke itself , if life be dull with she , and the hour hang heavy ! Life with she be dull , and the hour do hang heavy . and what if she catch this old man , and become herself a duchess , -- catch he by means of he weakness , to the inexpressible dismay of all those who be bound to he by tie of blood ,-- would that make she life happier , or she hour less tedious ? that prospect of a life on the italian lakes with a old man tie to she side be not so charme in she eye as it be in those of the . be she to succeed , and to be blazon forth to the world as of , what would she have gai ? she perfectly understand the motive of 's visit , and think that she would at any rate gain something in the very triumph of baffle the manoeuvre of so clever a woman . let throw she aegis before the , and it would be something to carry off he from beneath the protection of so thick a shield . the very flavour of the contest be pleasing to . but , the victory gain , what then would remain to she ? money she have already ; position , too , she have of she own . she be free as air , and should it suit she at any time to go off to some lake of in society that would personally be more agreeable to she than that of the of , there be nothing to hinder she for a moment . and then come a smile over she face , -- but the saddest smile , -- as she think of one with whom it might be pleasant to look at the colour of italian sky and feel the softness of italian breeze . in feigning to like to do this with a old man , in act the rapture of love on behalf of a worn - our duke who at the best would scarce believe in she acting , there would not be much delight for she . she have never yet know what it be to have anything of the pleasure of love . she have grow , as she often tell herself , to be a hard , cautious , selfish , successful woman , without any interference or assistance from such pleasure . might there not be yet time
time leave for she to try it without selfishness , -- with a absolute devotion of self , -- if only she could find the right companion ? there be one who might be such a companion , but the of certainly could not be such a one . but to be of ! after all , success in this world be everything ; -- be at any rate the only thing the pleasure of which will endure . there be the name of many a woman write in a black list within 's breast , -- write there because of scorn , because of reject overture , because of deep social injury ; and tell herself often that it would be a pleasure to she to use the list , and to be revenge on those who have ill - used and scornfully treat she . she do not readily forgive those who have injure she . as of she think that probably she might use that list with efficacy . have treat she well , and she have no such feeling against . as of she would accept as she dearest friend , if would admit it . but if it should be necessary that there should be a little duel between they , as to which of they should take the in hand , the duel must of course be fight . in a matter so important , one woman would of course expect no false sentiment from another . she and would understand each other ; -- and no doubt , respect each other . I have say that she would sit there resolve , or try to resolve . there be nothing in the world so difficult as that task of make up one 's mind . who be there that have not long that the power and privilege of selection among alternative should be take away from he in some important crisis of he life , and that he conduct should be arrange for he , either this way or that , by some divine power if it be possible , -- by some patriarchal power in the absence of divinity , -- or by chance even , if nothing better than chance could be find to do it ? but no one dare to cast the die , and to go honestly by the hazard . there must be the actual necessity of obey the die , before even the die can be of any use . as it be , when have sit there for a hour , till she leg be tired beneath she , she have not resolve . it must be as she impulse should direct she when the important moment come . there be not a soul on earth to whom she could go for counsel , and when she ask herself for counsel , the counsel would not come . two day afterwards the call again . he would come generally on a ,-- early , so that he might be there before other visitor ; and he have already quite learn that when he be there other visitor would probably be refuse admittance . how have make she way in , tel the servant that she uncle be there , he have not understand . that visit have be make on the , but now he come on the , -- have , I regret to say , send down some early fruit from he own hot - house , -- or from , -- with a little note on the previous day . the grape might have be pretty well , but the note be injudicious . there be three line about the grape , as to which there be some special history , the vine have be bring from the garden of some villa in which some ill - use queen have liv and die ; and then there be a postscript in one line to say that the would call on the follow morning . I do not think that he have mean to add this when he begin he note ; but then child , who want the top brick , want it so badly , and cry for it so perversely ! of course be at home . but even then she have not make up she mind . she have make up she mind only to this , -- that he should be make to speak plainly , and that she would take time for she reply . not even with such a gem as the 's coronet before she eyes , would she jump at it . where there be so much doubt , there need at least be no impatience . " you run away the other day , , because you could not resist the charm of that little boy , " she say , laugh . " he be a dear little boy , -- but it be not that , " he answer . " then what be it ? you niece carry you off in a whirl - wind . she be come and go , take you with she , in half a minute . " " she have disturb I when I be think of something , " say the . " thing should not be think of , -- not so deeply as that . " be play with a bunch of he grape now , eat one or two from a small china plate which have stand upon the table , and he think that he have never see a woman so graceful and yet so natural . " will you not eat you own grape with I ? they be deliciious ;-- flavoure with the poor queen 's sorrow . " he shook he head , know that it do not suit he gastric juice to have to deal with
with fruit eat at odd time . " never think , . I be convince that it do no good . it simply mean doubting , and doubt always lead to error . the safest way in the world be to do nothing . " " I believe so , " say the . " Much the safest . but if you have not sufficient command over yourself to enable you to sit in repose , always quiet , never commit yourself to the chance of any danger , -- then take a leap in the dark ; or rather many leap . a stumbling horse regain he footing by persevering in he onward course . as for move cautiously , that I detest . " " and yet one must think ; -- for instance , whether one will succeed or not . " " take that for grant always . remember , I do not recommend motion at all . Repose be my idea of life ;-- repose and grape . " the sit for a while silent , take he repose as far as the outer man be concerned , look at he top brick of the chimney , as from time to time she eat one of he grape . probably she do not eat above half - a - dozen of they altogether , but he think that the grape must have be make for the woman , she be so pretty in the eating of they . but it be necessary that he should speak at last . " have you be think of come to ? " he say . " I tell you that I never think . " " but I want a answer to my proposition . " " I think I have answer you on that question . " then she put down the grape , and move herself on she chair , so that she sit with she face turn away from he . " but a request to a lady may be make twice . " " oh , yes . and I be grateful , know how far it be from you intention to do I any harm . and I be somewhat asham of my warmth on the other day . but still there can be but one answer . there be delight which a woman must deny herself , let they be ever so delightful . " " I have think , -- " the , and then he stop himself . " you be say that you think , -- " " , a man at my age do not like to be deny . " " what man like to be deny anything by a woman at any age ? a woman who deny anything be call cruel at once , -- even though it be she very soul . " she have turn round upon he now , and be lean forward towards he from she chair , so that he could touch she if he put out he hand . he put out he hand and touch she . " , " he say , " will you deny I if I ask ? " " Nay , my lord ; how shall I say ? there be many a trifle I would deny you . there be many a great gift I would give you willingly . " " but the greatest gift of all ? " " my lord , if you have anything to say , you must say it plainly . there never be a woman worse than I be at the reading of riddle . " " could you endure to live in the quietude of a italian lake with a old man ? " now he touche she again , and have take she hand . " no , my lord ; -- nor with a young one , -- for all my day . but I do not know that age would guide I . " then the rise and make he proposition in form . " , you know that I love you . why it be that I at my age should feel so sore a love , I can not say . " " so sore a love ! " " so sore , if it be not gratify . , I ask you to be my wife . " " of , this from you ! " " yes , from I . my coronet be at you foot . if you will allow I to raise it , I will place it on you brow . " then she go away from he , and seat herself at a distance . after a moment or two he follow she , and stand with he arm upon she shoulder . " you will give I a answer , ? " " you can not have think of this , my lord . " " Nay ; I have think of it much . " " and you friend ? " " my dear , I may venture to please myself in this , -- as in everything . will you not answer I ? " " certainly not on the spur of the moment , my lord . think how high be the position you offer I , and how immense be the change you propose to I . allow I two day , and I will answer you by letter . I be so flutter now that I must leave you . " then he come to she , take she hand , kiss she brow , and open the door for she . it happen that there be at this time certain matter of business to be settle between the of and he nephew , respect which the latter call upon he uncle on the morning after the
the have commit himself by he offer . have come by appointment make with , the 's man of business , and have expect to meet . , however , be not with the , and the uncle tell the nephew that the business have be postpone . then ask some question as to the reason of such postponement , not mean much by he question , -- and the , after a moment 's hesitation , answer he , mean very much by he answer . " the truth be , , that it be possible that I may marry , and if so this arrangement would not suit I . " " be you go to be marry ? " ask the astonished nephew . " it be not exactly that , -- but it be possible that I may do so . since I propose this matter to , I have be think over it , and I have change my mind . it will make but little difference to you ; and after all you be a far richer man than I be . " " I be not think of money , , " say . " of what then be you think ? " " simply of what you tell I . I do not in the least mean to interfere . " " I hope not , . " " but I could not hear such a statement from you without some surprise . whatever you do I hope will tend to make you happy . " so much pass between the uncle and the nephew , and what the uncle tell to the nephew , the nephew of course tell to he wife . " he be with she again , yesterday , " say , " for more than a hour . and he have be half the morning dress himself before he go to she . " " he be not engage to she , or he would have tell I , " say . " I think he would , but there be no knowing . at the present moment I have only one doubt ,-- whether to act upon he or upon she . " " I do not see that you can do good by go to either . " " well , we will see . if she be the woman I take she to be , I think I could do something with she . I have never suppose she to be a bad woman ,-- never . I will think of it . " then leave she husband , and do not consult he afterwards as to the course she would pursue . he have he budget to manage , and he speech to make . the little affair of the and , she think it best to take into she own hand without any assistance from he . " what a fool I be , " she say to herself , " to have she down there when the be at matching ! " , when she be leave alone , feel that now indeed she must make up she mind . she have ask for two day . the intervening day be a , and on the she must send she answer . she might doubt at any rate for this one night , -- the night , -- and sit play , as it be , with the coronet of a duchess in she lap . she have be bear the daughter of a small country attorney , and now a duke have ask she to be he wife , -- and a duke who be acknowledge to stand above other duke ! nothing at any rate could rob she of that satisfaction . whatever resolution she might form at last , she have by she own resource reach a point of success in remembering which there would always be a keen gratification . it would be much to be of ; but it would be something also to have refuse to be a Duchess of . during that evening , that night , and the next morning , she remain play with the coronet in she lap . she would not go to church . what good could any sermon do she while that bauble be dangling before she eye ? after church - time , about two o'clock , come to she . just at this period Phinea would come to she often ;-- sometimes full of a new decision to forget altogether , at other minde to continue he siege let the hope of success be ever so small . he have now hear that and have in truth quarrelled , and be of course anxious to be advise to continue the siege . when he first come in and speak a word or two , in which there be no reference to , there come upon a strong wish to decide at once that she would play no longer with the coronet , that the gem be not worth the cost she would be call upon to pay for it . there be something in the world better for she than the coronet , -- if only it might be have . but within ten minute he have tell she the whole tale about , and how he have see Violet at 's , -- and how there might yet be hope for he . what would she advise he to do ? " go home , , " she say , " and write a sonnet to she eyebrow . see if that will have any effect . " " ah , well ! it be natural that you should laugh at I ; but somehow , I do not expect it from you . " " do not be angry with I . what I mean
mean be that such little thing seem to influence this Violet of yours . " " do they ? I have not find that they do so . " " if she have love she would not have quarrell with he for a few word . if she have love you , she would not have accept . if she love neither of you , she should say so . I be lose my respect for she . " " do not say that , . I respect she as strongly as I love she . " then almost make up she mind that she would have the coronet . there be a substance about the coronet that would not elude she grasp . late that afternoon , while she be still hesitate , there come another caller to the cottage in . she be still hesitate , feel that she have as yet another night before she . should she be of or not ? all that she wish to be , she could not be ; -- but to be of be within she reach . then she begin to ask herself various question . would the Queen refuse to accept she in she new rank ? refuse ! how could any Queen refuse to accept she ? she have not do atch amiss in life . there be no slur on she name ; no stain on she character . what though she father have be a small attorney , and she first husband a banker ! she have break no law of or man , have be accuse of break no law , which break or which accusation need stand in the way of she be as good a duchess as any other woman ! she be sit thinking of this , almost angry with herself at the awe with which the propose rank inspire she , when be announce to she . " , " say , " I be very glad to find you . " " and I more than equally so , to be find , " say , smile with all she grace . " my uncle have be with you since I see you last ? " " oh yes ; -- more than once if I remember right . he be here yesterday at any rate . " " he come often to you then ? " " not so often as I would wish , . the be one of my dearest friend . " " it have be a quick friendship . " " yes ;-- a quick friendship , " say . then there be a pause for some moment which Madame be determined that she would not break . it be clear to she now on what ground have come to she , and she be fully mind that if she could bear the full light of the himself in all he glory , she would not allow herself to be scorch by any reflecte heat come from the 's niece . she think she could endure anything that might say ; but she would wait and hear what might be say . " I think , , that I have better hurry on to my subject at once , " say , almost hesitat as she speak , and feel that the colour be rush up to she cheek and cover she brow . " of course what I have to say will be disagreeable . of course I shall offend you . and yet I do not mean it . " " I shall be offen at nothing , , unless I think that you mean to offend I . " " I protest that I do not . you have see my little boy . " " yes , indeed . the sweetest child ! never give I anything half so precious as that . " " he be the 's heir . " " so I understand . " " for myself , by my honour as a woman , I care nothing . I be rich and have all that the world can give I . for my husband , in this matter , I care nothing . he career he will make for himself , and it will depend on no title . " " why all this to I , ? what have I to do with you husband 's title ? " " Much ; -- if it be true that there be a idea of marriage between you and the of . " " ! " say , with all the scorn of which she be mistress . " it be untrue , then ? " ask . " no ; -- it be not untrue . there be a idea of such a marriage . " " and you be engage to he ? " " no ;-- I be not engage to he . " " have he ask you ? " " , I really must say that such a cross-questioning from one lady to another be very unusual . I have promise not to be offend , unless I think that you wish to offend I . but do not drive I too far . " " , if you will tell I that I be mistaken , I will beg you pardon , and offer to you the most sincere friendship which one woman can give another . " " , I can tell you nothing of the kind . " " then it be to be so ! and have you think what you would gain ? " " I have think much of what I should gain :-- and something also of what I should lose . " " you have money . " " yes , indeed ; plenty , -- for want so moderate as mine . "
" " and position . " " well , yes ; a sort of position . not such as yours , . that , if it be not bear to a woman , can only come to she from a husband . she can not win it for herself . " " you be free as air , go where you like , and do what you like . " " too free , sometimes , " say . " and what will you gain by change all this simply for a title ? " " but for such a title , ! it may be little to you to be of , but think what it must be to I ! " " and for this you will not hesitate to rob he of all he friend , to embitter he future life , to degrade he among he peer , -- " " Degrade he ! who dar say that I shall degrade he ? he will exal I , but I shall no whit degrade he . you forget yourself , . " " ask any one . it be not that I despise you . if I do , would I offer you my hand in friendship ? but a old man , over seventy , carry the weight and burden of such rank as he , will degrade himself in the eyes of he fellows , if he marry a young woman without rank , let she be ever so clever , ever so beautiful . a of may not do as he pleasis , as may another man . " " it may be well , , for other duke , and for the daughter and heir and cousin of other duke , that he should try that question . I will , if you wish it , argue this matter with you on many point , but I will not allow you to say that I should degrade any man whom I might marry . my name be as unstained as you own . " " I mean nothing of that , " say . " for he ; -- I certainly would not willingly injure he . who wish to injure a friend ? and , in truth , I have so little to gain , that the temptation to do he a injury , if I think it one , be not strong . for you little boy , , I think you fear be premature . " as she say this , there come a smile over she face , which threaten to break from control and almost become laughter . " but , if you will allow I to say so , my mind will not be turn against this marriage half so strongly by any argument you can use as by those which I can adduce myself . you have nearly drive I into it by tell I I should degrade he house . it be almost incumbent on I to prove that you be wrong . but you have better leave I to settle the matter in my own bosom . you have indeed . " after a while do leave she , -- to settle the matter within she own bosom , -- have no other alternative . the letter that be send to morning come and have as yet write no answer to the of . have not go to Lane on the afternoon , I think the letter would have be write on that day ; but , whatever may have be the effect of 's visit , it so far disturb Madame Goesler as to keep she from she writing - table . there be yet another night for think , and then the letter should be write on the morning . when leave she go at once to the 's house . it be she custom to see she husband 's uncle on a , and she would most frequently find he just at this hour , -- before he go up - stair to dress for dinner . she usually take she boy with she , but on this occasion she go alone . she have try what she could do with , and she find that she have fail . she must now make she attempt upon the . but the , perhaps anticipate some attack of the kind , have fle . " where be he , ? " say to the porter . " we do not know , you ladyship . he go away yesterday evening with nobody but . " Lapoule be the 's french valet . could only return home and consider in she own mind what battery might yet be bring to bear upon the , towards stop the marriage , even after the engagement should have be make , -- if it be to be make . feel that such batterie might still be bring up as would not improbably have a effect on a proud , weak old man . if all other resource fail , royately in some of its branch might be induce to make a request , and every august relation in the peerage should interfere . the no doubt might persevere and marry whom he please , -- if he be strong enough . but it require much personal strength , -- that stand alone against the well - armed batterie of all one 's friend . have once try such a battle on she own behalf , and have fail . she have wish to be imprudent when she be young ; but she friend have be too strong for she . she have be reduce , and keep in order , and make to run in a groove , -- and be now , when she sit look at she little boy with he bold face ,
, almost inclin to think that the world be right , and that grooves be best . but if she have be controlle when she be young , so ought the to be control now that he be old . it be all very well for a man or woman to boast that he , -- or she ,-- may do what he like with he own , -- or with she own . but there be circumstance in which such self - action be ruinous to so many that coercion from the outside become absolutely need . nobody have feel the injustice of such coercion when apply to herself more sharply than have . but she have liv to acknowledge that such coercion might be proper , and be now prepare to use it in any shape in which it might be make available . it be all very well for to laugh and exclaim , " ! " when declare she real trouble . but should it ever come to pass that a black - browed baby with a yellow skin should be show to the world as , know that she peace of mind would be go for ever . she have begin the world desire one thing , and have miss it . she have suffer much , and have then reconcile herself to other hope . if those other hope be also to be cut away from she , the world would not be worth a pinch of snuff to she . the have fle , and she could do nothing to - day ; but to - morrow she would begin with she battery . and she herself have do the mischief ! she have invite this woman down to ! and !-- that such a man as the should be such a fool !-- the widow of a banker ! he , the of , -- and thus to cut away from himself , for the rest of he life , all honour , all peace of mind , all the grace of a noble end to a career which , if not very noble in itself , have receive the praise of nobility ! and to do this for a thing , black - browed , yellow - visaged woman with ringlet and 's eye , and a beard on she upper lip ,-- a Jewess , -- a creature of whose habits of life and manners of think they all be absolutely ignorant ; who drank , possibly ; who might have be a forger , for what any one knew ; a adventuress who have find she way into society by she art and perseverance , -- and who do not even pretend to have a relation in the world ! that such a one should have influence enough to intrude herself into the house of , and blot the scutcheon , and , -- what be worst of all , -- perhaps be the mother of future duke ! , in she anger , be very unjust to , think all evil of she , accuse she in she mind of every crime , deny she all charm , all beauty . have the forget himself and he position for the sake of some fair girl with a pink complexion and grey eye , and smooth hair , and a father , think that she would have forgive it better . it might be that would win she way to the coronet ; but when she come to put it on , she should find that there be sharp thorn inside the lining of it . not a woman worth the know in all should speak to she ;-- nor a man either of those man with whom a Duchess of would wish to hold converse . she should find she husband rate as a do fool , and herself rate as a scheme female adventuress . and it should go hard with , if the be not separate from he new Duchess before the end of the first year ! in she anger be very unjust . the , when he leave he house without tell he household whither he be go , do send he address to , -- the top brick of the chimney . he note , which be deliver at 's house late on the evening , be as follow :--" I be to have you answer on . I shall be at . send it by a private messenger to the there . I need not tell you with what expectation , with what hope , with what fear I shall await it .-- o . " poor old man ! he have run through all the pleasure of life too quickly , and have not much leave with which to amuse himself . at length he have set he eye on a top brick , and be tired of everything else , want it very sorely . poor old man ! how should it do he any good , even if he get it ? , when she receive the note , sit with it in she hand , think of he great want . " and he would be tired of he new plaything after a month , " she say to herself . but she have give herself to the next morning , and she would not make up she mind that night . she would sleep once more with the coronet of a duchess within she reach . she do do so ; and wake in the morning with she mind absolutely in doubt . when she walk down to breakfast , all doubt be at a end . the time have come when it be necessary that she should resolve , and while she maid be brush she hair for she she do make she resolution . " what
what a thing it be to be a great lady , " say the maid , who may probably have reflecte that the of do not come here so often for nothing . " what do you mean by that , ? " " the woman I know , madame , talk so much of they countess , and ladyship , and duchess . I would never rest till I have a title in this country , if I be a lady , -- and rich and beautiful . " " and can the countess , and the ladyship , and the duchess do as they please ? " " ah , madame ; -- I know not that . " " but I know . that will do , . now leave I . " then have make up she mind ; but I do not know whether that doubt as to have she own way have much to do with it . as the wife of a old man she would probably have have much of she own way . immediately after breakfast she write she answer to the , which be as follow :-- , . my of , I find so great a difficulty in express myself to you in a write letter , that since you leave I I have never cease to wish that I have be less nervous , less doubt , and less foolish when you be present with I here in my room . I might then have say in one word what will take so many awkward word to explain . great as be the honour you propose to confer on I , rich as be the gift you offer I , I can not accept it . I can not be you 's wife . I may almost say that I know it be so when you part from I ; but the surprise of the situation take away from I a part of my judgment , and make I unable to answer you as I should have do . my lord , the truth be , that I be not fit to be the wife of the of . I should injure you ; and though I should raise myself in name , I should injure myself in character . but you must not think , because I say this , that there be any reason why I should not be a honest man 's wife . there be none . I have nothing on my conscience which I could not tell you , -- or to another man ; nothing that I need fear to tell to all the world . indeed , my lord , there be nothing to tell but this , -- that I be not fit by birth and position to be the wife of the of . you would have to blush for I , and that no man shall ever have to do on my account . I will own that I have be ambitious , too ambitious , and have be pleased to think that one so exalt as you be , one whose high position be so rife in the eyes of all man , should have take pleasure in my company . I will confess to a foolish woman 's silly vanity in have wish to be know to be the friend of the of . I be like the other moth that flutter near the light and have they wing burn . but I be wiser than they in this , that have be scorch , I know that I must keep my distance . you will easily believe that a woman , such as I be , do not refuse to ride in a carriage with you 's arm on the panel without a regret . I be no philosopher . I do not pretend to despise the rich thing of the world , or the high thing . accord to my way of think a woman ought to wish to be of ; -- but she ought to wish also to be able to carry she coronet with a proper grace . as I can live , even among my superior , at my ease . as you 's wife , I should be easy no longer ; -- nor would you . you will think perhaps that what I write be heartless , that I speak altogether of you rank , and not at all of the affection you have show I , or of that which I might possibly bear towards you . I think that when the first flush of passion be over in early youth man and woman should strive to regulate they love , as they do they other desire , by they reason . I could love you , fondly , as you wife , if I think it well for you or for myself that we should be man and wife . as I think it would be ill for both of we , I will restrain that feel , and remember you ever with the purest feeling of true friendship . before I close this letter , I must utter a word of gratitude . in the kind of life which I have lead as a widow , a life which have be very isolated as regard true fellowship , it have be my greatest effort to obtain the good opinion of those among whom I have attempt to make my way . I may , perhaps , own to you now that I have have many difficulty . a woman who be alone in the world be ever regard with suspicion . in this country a woman with a foreign name , with mean derive from foreign source , with a foreign history , be specially suspect . I have strive to live that down , and
and I have succeed . but in my wildest dream I never dream of such success as this , -- that the of should think I the worthiest of the worthy . you may be sure that I be not ungrateful , -- that I never will be ungrateful . and I trust it will not derogate from you opinion of my worth , that I have know what be due to you 's highness . I have the honour to be , my , you most obliged and faithful servant , . " how many unmarried woman in be there would do the same ? " she say to herself , as she fold the paper , and put it into a envelope , and seal the cover . the moment that the letter be complete she send it off , as she be direct to send it , so that there might be no possibility of repentance and subsequend hesitation . she have at last make up she mind , and she would stand by the making . she know that there would come moment in which she would deeply regret the opportunity that she have lost , -- the chance of greatness that she have fling away from she . but so would she have often regret it , also , have she accept the greatness . she position be one in which there must be regret , let she decision have be what it might . but she have decide , and the thing be done . she would still be free ,-- ,--unless in abandon she freedom she would obtain something that she might in truth prefer to it . when the letter be go she sit disconsolate , at the window of a up - stair room in which she have write , think much of the coronet , much of the name , much of the rank , much of that position in society which she have flatter herself she might have win for herself as of by she beauty , she grace , and she wit . it have not be simply she ambition to be a duchess , without further aim or object . she have fancie that she might have be such a duchess as there be never another , so that she fame might have be great throughout , as a woman charme at all point . and she would have have friend , then ,-- real friend , and would not have live alone as it be now she fate to do . and she would have love she ducal husband , old though he be , and stiff with pomp and ceremony . she would have love he , and do she best to add something of brightness to he life . it be indeed true that there be one whom she love better ; but of what avail be it to love a man who , when he come to she , would speak to she of nothing but of the charms which he find in another woman ! she have be sit thus at she window , with a book in she hand , at which she never look , gaze over the park which be now beautiful with its verdure , when on a sudden a thought strike she . have come to she , try to enlist she sympathy for the little heir , behave , indeed , not very well , as have think , but still with a earnest purpose which be in itself good . she would write to and put she out of she misery . perhaps there be some feeling of triumph in she mind as she return to the desk from which she epistle have be send to the ; -- not of that triumph which would have find its gratification in boasting of the offer that have be make to she , but arise from a feeling that she could now show the proud mother of the bold - face boy that though she would not pledge herself to any woman as to what she might do or not do , she be nevertheless capable of resist such a temptation as would have be irresistible to many . of the 's offer to she she would have speak to no human being , have not this woman show that the 's purpose be know at least to she , and now , in she letter , she would write no plain word of that offer . she would not state , in word intelligible to any one who might read , that the have offer she he hand and he coronet . but she would write so that should understand she . and she would be careful that there should be no word in the letter to make think that she suppose herself to be unfit for the rank offer to she . she have be very humble in what she have write to the , but she would not be at all humble in what she be about to write to the mother of the bold - faced boy . and this be the letter when it be write :-- my , I venture to send you a line to put you out of you misery ; -- for you be very miserable when you be so good as to come here yesterday . you dear little boy be safe from I ; -- and , what be more to the purpose , so be you and you husband , -- and you uncle , whom , in truth , I love . you ask I a downright question which I do not then choose to answer by a downright answer . the downright answer be not at that time due to you . it have since be give , and as I like you too
too well to wish you to be in torment , I send you a line to say that I shall never be in the way of you or you boy . and now , dear , one word more . should it ever again appear to you to be necessary to use you zeal for the protection of you husband or you child , do not endeaavor to dissuade a woman by try to make she think that she , by she alliance , would bring degradation into any house , or to any man . if there could have be a argument powerful with I , to make I do that which you wish to prevent , it be the argument which you use . but my own comfort , and the happiness of another person whom I value almost as much as myself , be too important to be sacrifice even to a woman 's revenge . I take mine by writing to you and tell you that I be better and more rational and wiser than you take I to be . if , after this , you choose to be on good term with I , I shall be happy to be you friend . I shall want no further revenge . you owe I some little apology ; but whether you make it or not , I will be contente , and will never do more than ask whether you darling 's prospect be still safe . there be more woman than one in the world , you know , and you must not consider yourself to be out of the wood because you have escape from a single danger . if there arise another , come to I , and we will consult together . dear , yours always sincerely , . . there be a thing or two besides which she long to say , laugh as she think of they . but she refrain , and she letter , when finish , be as it be give above . on the day follow , be again in . when she first read 's letter , she feel herself to be annoyed and angry , but she anger be with herself rather than with she correspondent . ever since she last interview with the woman whom she have fear , she have be conscious of have be indiscreet . all she feeling have be too violent , and it might well have be that she should have drive this woman to do the very thing that she be so anxious to avoid . " you owe I some little apology , " have say . it be true , -- and she would apologise . Undue pride be not a part of 's character . indeed , there be not enough of pride in she composition . she have be quite ready to hate this woman , and to fight she on every point as long as the danger exist ; but she be equally willing to take the woman to she heart now that the danger be over . Apologise ! of course she would apologise . and she would make a friend of the woman if the woman wish it . but she would not have the woman and the at together again , lest , after all , there might be a mistake . she do not show 's letter to she husband , or tell he anything of the relief she have receive . he have care but little for the danger , think more of he budget than of the danger ; and would be sufficiently at he ease if he hear no more rumour of he uncle 's marriage . go to early on the morning , but she do not take she boy with she . she understand that might perhaps indulge in a little gentle raillery at the child 's expense , and the mother feel that this might be borne the more easily if the child be not present . " I have come to thank you for you letter , , " say , before she sit down . " oh , come ye in peace here , or come ye in war , or to dance at we bridal ? " say , stand up from she chair and laugh , as she sang the line . " certainly not to dance at you bridal , " say . " ! no . you have forbide the banns too effectually for that , and I sit here wear the willow all alone . why should not I be allow to get married as well as another woman , I wonder ? I think you have be very hard upon I among you . but sit down , . at any rate you come in peace . " " certainly in peace , and with much admiration , -- and a great deal of love and affection , and all that kind of thing , if you will only accept it . " " I shall be too proud , ; -- for the 's sake , if for no other reason . " " and I have to make my apology . " " it be make as soon as you carriage stop at my door with friendly wheel . of course I understand . I can know how terrible it all be to you ,-- even though the dear little Plantagenet might not have be in much danger . fancy what it would be to disturb the career of a Plantagenet ! I be far too well read in history , I can assure you . " " I say a word for which I be sorry , and which I should not have say . " " never mind the word . after all , it be a true word .
. I do not hesitate to say so now myself , though I will allow no other woman to say it , -- and no man either . I should have degrad he , -- and disgrac he . " now have drop the bantering tone which she have assume , and be speak in sober earnest . " I , for myself , have nothing about I of which I be asham . I have no history to hide , no story to be bring to light to my discredit . but I have not be so bear , or so place by circumstance , as make I fit to be the wife of the of . I should not have be happy , you know . " " you want nothing , dear . you have all that society can give you . " " I do not know about that . I have much give to I by society , but there be many thing that I want ;-- a bright - face little boy , for instance , to go about with I in my carriage . why do you not bring he , ? " " I come out in my penitential sheet , and when one go in that guise , one go alone . I have half a mind to walk . " " you will bring he soon ? " " oh , yes . he be very anxious to know the other day who be the beautiful lady with the black hair . " " you do not tell he that the beautiful lady with the black hair be a possible aunt , be a possible -- ? but we will not think any more of thing so horrible . " " I tell he nothing of my fear , you may be sure . " " some day , when I be a very old woman , and when he father be quite a old duke , and when he have a dozen little boy and girl of he own , you will tell he the story . then he will reflect what a madman he great - uncle must have be , to have think of make a duchess out of such a wizen old woman as that . " they part the best of friend , but be still of opinion that if the lady and the be to be bring together at , or elsewhere , there might still be danger . how the the barrister , who have give so many lecture to we friend , lecture that ought to have be useful , be now himself in the of , have reach it in the legitimate course of he profession . at a certain point of he career , suppose he career to have be sufficiently prosperous , it become natural to a barrister to stand for some constituency , and natural for he also to form he politics at that period of he life with a view to he further advancement , look , as he do so , carefully at the age and standing of the various candidate for high legal office . when a man have work as have work , he begin to regard the bench wistfully , and to calculate the profit of a two year 's run in the Attorney - Generalship . it be the way of the profession , and thus a proper and sufficient number of real barrister find its way into the house . have be angry with Phineas because he , be a barrister , have climb into it after another fashion , have take up politics , not in the proper way as a assistance to he great profession , but as a profession in itself . have be quite sure that he pupil have be wrong in this , and that the error would at last show itself , to he pupil 's cost . and . have be more sure than , have not unnaturally be jealous that a young whipper - snapper of a pupil , -- as she have once call Phineas ,-- should become a parliament man before she husband , who have work he way up gallantly , in the usual course . she would not give way a jot even now , -- not even when she hear that be go to marry this and that heiress . for at this period of he life such rumours be afloat about he , originate probably in he hope as to and he intimacy with . " oh , heiress ! " say . " I do not believe in heiress 's money till I see it . three or four hundr a year be a great fortune for a woman , but it do not go far in keep a house in . and when a woman have get a little money she generally know how to spend it . he have begin at the wrong end , and they who do that never get themselves right at the last . " at this time have become somewhat of a fine gentleman , which make . low the more angry with he . he show himself willing enough to go to . 's house , but when there he seem to she to give himself air . I think that she be unjust to he , and that it be natural that he should not bear himself beneath she remark exactly as he have do when he be nobody . he have certainly be very successful . he be always listen to in the house , and rarely speak except on subject which belong to he , or have be allot to he as part of he business . he live quite at he ease with people of the highest rank , -- and those of he own
own mode of life who dislike he do so simply because they regard with envy he too rapid rise . he ride upon a pretty horse in the park , and be careful in he dress , and have about he a air of comfortable wealth which . think he have not earn . when she husband tell she of he sufficient salary , she would shake she head and express she opinion that a good time be come . by which she perhaps mean to imply a belief that a time be come in which she husband would have a salary much better than that now enjoy by , and much more likely to be permanent . the radical be not to have office for ever , and when they be gone , what then ? " I do not suppose he save a shilling , " say . " how can he , keep a horse in the park , and hunt down in the country , and live with lord ? I should not wonder if he be not find to be over head and ear in debt when thing come to be look into . " . be fond of a assure prosperity , of money in the fund , and be proud to think that she husband live in a house of he own . " l19 10s . ground - rent to the estate be what we pay , , " she once say to that gallant , " and that come of beginning at the right end . have nothing when he begin the world , and I have just what make we decend the day we marry . but he begin at the right end , and let thing go as they may he can not get a fall . " and , though they differ much in politics , sympathise in reference to . " I never believe , ma 'am , in nobody do any good by get a place , " say . " of course I do not mean judge and they like , which must be . but when a young man have ever so much a year for sit in a big room down at , and read a newspaper with he foot up on a chair , I do not think it honest , whether he be a parliament man or whether he be not . " have get he notion as to the way in which official at Whitehall pass they time , I can not say ; but he notion be very common notion . the british world at large be slow to believe that the great british housekeeper keep no more cat than what kill mouse . , who be now frequently in the habit of see Phineas at the , have somewhat change he opinion , and be not so eager in condemning as be he wife . he have begin to think that perhaps have show some knowledge of he own aptitude in the career which he have seek , and be aware , at any rate , that he late pupil be somebody in the of . a man will almost always respect he whom those around he respect , and will generally look up to one who be evidently above himself in he own daily avocation . now be certainly above in parliamentary reputation . he sit on a front bench . he know the leader of party . he be at home amidst the form of the House . he enjoy something of the prestige of government power . and he walk about familiarly with the son of duke and the brother of earl in a manner which have it be effect even on . see these thing could not maintain he old opinion as stoutly as do he wife . it be almost a privilege to low to be intimate with . how then could he look down upon he ? he be surprised , therefore , one day when discuss the matter with he fully . Phineas have ask he what would be he chance of success if even now he be to give up politics and take to the as the means of earn he livelihood . " you would have uphill work at first , as a matter of course , " say . " but it might be do , I suppose . to have be in office would not be fatal to I ? " " no , not fatal , nothing of the kind need be fatal . have succeed , and have sit on the bench afterwards , who do not begin till they be past forty . you would have to live down a prejudice create against yourself ; that be all . the attorney do not like barrister who be anything else but barrister . " " the attorney be very arbitrary , I know , " say . " yes ; -- and there would be this against you -- that it be so difficult for a man to go back to the verdure and malleability of pupildom , who have once escape from the necessary humility of its condition . you will find it difficult to sit and wait for business in a Vice - 's , after have have Vice - Chancellor , or man as big as Vice - Chancellors , to wait upon you . " " I do not think much of that . " " but other would think of it , and you would find that there be difficulty . but you be not think of it in earnest ? " " yes , in earnest . " " why so ? I should have think that every day have remove you further and further from any such idea . " " the ground I be on at present be
be so slippery . " " well , yes . I can understand that . but yet it be less slippery than it use to be . " " ah ;-- you do not exactly see . what if I be to lose my seat ? " " you be safe at least for the next four year , I should say . " " ah ; -- no one can tell . and suppose I take it into my head to differ from the government ? " " you must not do that . you have put yourself into a boat with these man , and you must remain in the boat . I should have think all that be easy to you . " " it be not so easy as it seem . the very necessity of sit still in the boat be in itself irksome , -- very irksome . and then there come some crisis in which a man can not sit still . " " be there any such crisis at hand now ? " " I can not say that ; -- but I be begin to find that sit still be very disagreeable to I . when I hear those fellow below have they own way , and say just what they like , it make I furious . there be . he try office for a couple of year , and have break away ; and now , by , there be no man they think so much of as they do of . he be twice the man he be when he sit on the . " " he be a man of fortune ; -- be he not ? " " I suppose so . of course he be , because he live . he never earn anything . he wife have money . " " my dear , that make all the difference . when a man have mean of he own he can please himself . do you marry a wife with money , and then you may kick up you heel , and do as you like about the . when a man have not money , of course he must fit himself to the circumstance of a profession . " " though he profession may require he to be dishonest . " " I do not say that . " " but I say it , my dear low . a man who be ready to vote black white because somebody tell he , be dishonest . never mind , old fellow . I shall pull through , I daresay . do not go and tell you wife all this , or she will be harder upon I than ever when she see I . " after that begin to think that he wife 's judgment in this matter have be better than he own . could do as he like because he have marry a woman with money . tell himself that that game be also open to he . he , too , might marry money . have money ;-- quite enough to make he independent be he marry to she . and have money ; -- plenty of money . and a idea have begin to creep upon he that would take he be he to offer himself . but he would sooner go back to the as the lowest pupil , sooner clean boot for barrister , -- so he tell himself , -- than marry a woman simply because she have money , than marry any other woman as long as there be a chance that might be win . but it be very desirable that he should know whether might be win or not . it be now , and everybody would be go in another month . before would be over he be to start for with , and he know that word would be speak in which might make it indispensable for he to be , at any rate , able to throw up he office . in these day he become more anxious than he use to be about 's fortune . he have never speak as yet to since the day on which the have quarrell with he , nor have he ever be at the house in . he meet occasionally , and have always spoken to she . she be gracious to he , but there have be no renewal of they intimacy . rumours have reach he that thing be go badly with she and she husband ; but when man repeat such rumour in he presence , he say little or nothing on the subject . it be not for he , at any rate , to speak of 's unhappiness . he have see once or twice during the last month , and they have meet cordially as friend . of course he could ask no question from as to ; but he do learn that he friend have again patch up some reconciliation with he father . " he have quarrell with I , you know , " say . " I be very sorry , but what could I do ? as thing go , I be obliged to tell he . " " do not suppose for a moment that I be blame you . it be , no doubt , much better that he should know it all . " " and it can not make much difference to you , I should say . " " one do not like to quarrel with those who have be kind to one , " say . " but it be not you do . he will come right again after a time . when I can get my own affair settle , you may be sure I will do my best to bring he round . but what
what be the reason you never see now ? " " what be the reason that everything go awry ? " say , bitterly . " when I mention you name to Kennedy the other day , he look as black as thunder . but it be not od that any one should quarrel with he . I can not stand he . do you know , I sometimes think that will have to give it up . then there will be another mess in the family ! " this be all very well as come from ; but there be no word about , and do not know how to get a word from any one . could have tell he everything , but he could not go to . he do go to 's house as often as he think he could with propriety , and occasionally he see . but he could do no more than see she , and the day and week be pass by , and the time be come in which he would have to go away , and be with she no more . the end of the season , which be always to other man , -- to other work man such as we hero , -- a period of pleasurable anticipation , to he be a time of sadness , in which he feel that he be not exactly like to , or even equal to , the man with whom he live in . in the old day , in which he be allow to go to or to , when all man and woman be go to they Loughlinter and they , it be very well with he ; but there be something melancholy to he in he yearly journey to . he love he father and mother and sister as well as due other man ; but there be a fall off in the manner of he life which make he feel that he have be in some sort out of he own element in . he would have like to have shot grouse at , or pheasant at , or to have hunt down at , -- or better still , to have make love to might have place herself . but all this be close to he now ; and there would be nothing for he but to remain at , or to return to he work in , from to . , indeed , be go with he for a few week ; but even this association do not make up for that sort of society which he would have prefer . the session go on very quietly . the question of the be postpone till the next year , which be a great thing gai . he carry he bill about the , with sundry other small bill appertain to it , through the house in a manner which redound infinitely to he credit . there be just enough of opposition to give a zest to the work , and to make the affair conspicuous among the affair of the year . as he chief be in the other house , the work fall altogether into he hand , so that he come to be conspicuous among under - secretaries . it be only when he say a word to any leader of he party about other matter ,-- about irish - right , for instance , which be begin to loom very large , that he find himself to be snub . but there be no room for action this year in reference to irish Tenant - right , and therefore any deep consideration of that discomfort might be legitimately postpone . if he do by chance open he mouth on the subject to , even discourage he . in the early day of , when the weather be very hot , and people be begin to complain of the Thames , and member be become thirsty after grouse , and the remain day of parliamentary work be be count up , there come to he news , -- news that be soon know throughout the fashionable world , -- that the of be go to give a garden party at a certain villa residence on the bank of the above . it be to be such a garden party as have never be see before . and it would be the more remarkable because the have never be know to do such a thing . the villa be call the Horns , and have , indeed , be give by the to on she marriage ; but the party be to be the 's party , and the Horn , with all its garden , conservatory , lawn , shrubbery , paddock , boat - house , and boat , be to be make bright and beautiful for the occasion . score of workman be about the place through the three first week of . the world at large do not at all know why the be do so unwonted a thing , -- why he should undertake so new a trouble . but know , and shrewdly guess , the riddle . when 's unexpected refusal have reach he , he feel that he must either accept the lady 's refusal , or persevere . after a day 's consideration , he resolve that he would accept it . the top brick of the chimney be very desirable ; but perhaps it might be well that he should endeaavor to live without it . then , accept this refusal , he must either stand he ground and bear the blow , -- or he must run away to that villa at , or elsewhere . the run away seem to he at first to be the better , or at least the more pleasant , course ; but at last he
he determine that he would stand he ground and bear the blow . therefore he give he garden party at the . who be to be invite ? before the first week in be over , many a bosom in be flutter with anxiety on that subject . the , in give he short word of instruction to , make she understand that he would wish she to be particular in she invitation . she the princess , and he the , have both be so gracious as to say that they would honour he fete . the himself have make out a short list , with not more than a dozen name . be employ to select the real crowd , -- the five hundr out of the ten thousand who be to be bless . on the 's own private list be the name of . understand it all . when get she card , she think that she understand it too . and she think also that the be behave in a gallant way . there be , no doubt , much difficulty about the invitation , and a considerable amount of ill - will be create . and they who consider themselves entitle to be ask , and be not ask , be full of wrath against they more fortunate friend , instead of be angry with the or with , who have neglect they . it be soon know that be the real dispenser of the favour , and I fancy that she ladyship be tired of she task before it be complete . the party be to take place on , the 27th of , and before the day have come , man and woman have become so hardy in the combat that personal application be make with unflinching importunity ; and letter be write to put forward this claim and that claim with a piteous clamour . " no , that be too bad , " say to she particular friend , . , when a letter come from , state all that she husband have ever do towards support in , -- and all that he ever would do . " she sha not have it , even though she could put into a minority to - morrow . " do not get a card ; and when she hear that have receive one , she wrath against be very great . he be " a irish adventurer , " and she regrett deeply that Bonteen have ever interest himself in bring such a upstart forward in the world of politics . but as never have do anything towards bring Phineas forward , there be not much cause for regret on this head . Phineas , however , get he card , and , of course , accept the invitation . the grounds be open at four . there be to be a early dinner out in tent at five ; and after dinner man and woman be to walk about , or dance , or make love -- or hay , as sui they . the haycock , however , be ready prepare , while it be expect that they should bring the love with they . Phineas , know that he should meet , take a great deal with he ready make . for a hour and a half keep she position in a saloon through which the guest pass to the grounds , and to every comer she impart the information that the be on the lawn ; -- to every comer but one . to she say no such word . " so glad to see you , my dear , " she say , as she press she friend 's hand : " if I be not kill by this work , I will make you out again by - and - by . " then pass on , and soon find herself amidst a throng of acquaintance . after a few minute she see the seate in a arm -chair , close to the river - bank , and she bravely go up to he , and thanke he for the invitation . " the thanks be due to you for grac we entertainment , " say the , rise to greet she . there be a dozen people stand round , and so the thing be do without difficulty . at that moment there come a notice that they royal highness be on the ground , and the , of course , go off to meet they . there be not a word more speak between the and on that afternoon . do not come till late , -- till seven , when the banquet be over . I think he be right in this , as the banqueting in tent lose in comfort almost more than it gain in romance . a small picnic may be very well , and the distance previously travel may give to a dinner on the ground the see excuse of necessity . Frail human nature must be support , -- and human nature , have go so far in pursuit of the beautiful , be entitled to what best support the unaccustomed circumstance will allow . therefore , out with the cold pies , out with the salad , and the chicken , and the champagne . since no better may be , let we recruit human nature sit upon this moss , and forget we discomfort in the glory of the verdure around we . and dear , see that the cushion from the waggonet be small , and not wish to accept the too generous offer that she should take it all for she own use , will admit a contact somewhat closer than the ordinary chair of a dining - room render necessary . that in its way be very well ; -- but I hold
hold that a banquet on narrow table in a tent be displease . stroll into the grounds when the tent be nearly empty , and when , almost sinke beneath she exertion , be take rest in a inner room . the at this time be dine with they royal highness , and three or four other , specially select , very comfortably within door . out of door the world have begin to dance , -- and the world be begin to say that it would be much nicer to go and dance upon the board inside as soon as possible . for , though of all party a garden party be the nicest , everybody be always anxious to get out of the garden as quick as may be . a few ardent lover of suburban picturesque effect be sit beneath the haycock , and four forlorn damsel be vainly endeavour to excite the sympathy of manly youth by play croquet in a corner . I be not sure , however , that the lover beneath the haycock and the player at croquet be not actors hire by for the occasion . Phineas have not be long on the lawn before he see . she be stand with another lady , and be with they . " so you have be successful ? " say , greet he . " successful in what ? " " in what ? in get a ticket . I have have to promise three tide- waitership , and to give deep hint about a bishopric expect to be vacant , before I get in . but what matter ? success pay for everything . my only trouble now be how I be to get back to . " shook hand with , and then as he be pass on , follow he for a step and whisper a word to he . " , " she say , " if you be not go yet , come back to I presently . I have something to say to you . I shall not be far from the river , and shall stay here for about a hour . " say that he would , and then go on , not know exactly where he be go . he have one desire , -- to find , but when he should find she he could not carry she off , and sit with she beneath a haycock . the while look for , encounter , among a crowd of people who be watch the adventurous embarkation of certain daring spirit in a pleasure - boat . there be waterman there in the 's livery , ready to take such spirits down to or up to lock , and many daring spirit do take such trip , -- to the great peril of muslin , ribbon , and starch , to the peril also of ornamental summer white garment , so that when the thing be over , the boat be vote to have be a bore . " be you go to venture ? " say Phineas to the lady . " I should like it of all thing if I be not afraid for my clothes . will you come ? " " I be never good upon the water . I should be sea -sick to a certainty . they be go down beneath the bridge too , and we should be splash by the steamer . I do not think my courage be high enough . " thus Phineas excuse himself , be still intent on prosecut he search for . " then neither will I , " say . " one dash from a peccant oar would destroy the whole symmetry of my dress . look . that green young lady have already be sprinkle . " " but the blue young gentleman have be sprinkle also , " say , " and they will be happy in a joint baptism . " then they stroll along the river path together , and be soon alone . " you will be leave town soon , ? " " Almost immediately . " " and where do you go ? " " oh , -- to . I be there for a couple of month every year , minde my business . I wonder whether you would know I , if you see I ;-- sometimes sit on a stool in a counting - house , sometimes go about among old house , settle what must be do to save they from tumbl down . I dress so differently at such time , and talk so differently , and look so much older , that I almost fancy myself to be another person . " " be it a great trouble to you ? " " no ,-- I rather like it . it make I feel that I do something in the world . " " do you go alone ? " " quite alone . I take a german maid with I , and never speak a word to any one else on the journey . " " that must be very bad , " say . " yes ; it be the worst of it . but then I be so much accustom to be alone . you see I in society , and in society only , and therefore naturally look upon I as one of a gregarious herd ; but I be in truth a animal that feed alone and live alone . take the hour of the year all through , and I be a solitary during four -fifth of they . and what do you intend to do ? " " I go to . " " home to you own people . how nice ! I have no people to go to . I have one sister , who live with she husband
husband at . she be my only relation , and I never see she . " " but you have thousand of friend in . " " yes , -- as you see they , " -- and she turn and spread out she hand towards the crowded lawn , which be behind they . " what be such friend worth ? what would they do for I ? " " I do not know that the would do much , " say Phineas laugh . laugh also . " the be not so bad , " she say . " the would do as much as any one else . I will not have the abuse . " " he may be you particular friend , for what I know , " say . " ah ;-- no . I have no particular friend . and be I to wish to choose one , I should think the a little above I . " " oh , yes ; -- and too stiff , and too old , and too pompous , and too cold , and too make - believe , and too gingerbread . " " ! " " the be all buckram , you know . " " then why do you come to he house ? " " to see you , . " " be that true , ? " " yes ; -- it be true in its way . one go about to meet those whom one likes , not always for the pleasure of the host 's society . I hope I be not wrong because I go to house at which I like neither the host nor the hostess . " Phineas as he say this be think of , to whom of late he have be exceedingly civil , -- but he certainly do not like . " I think you have be too hard upon the of . do you know he well ? " " personally ? certainly not . do you ? do anybody ? " " I think he be a gracious gentleman , " say , " and though I can not boast of know he well , I do not like to hear he call buckram . I do not think he be buckram . it be not very easy for a man in he position to live so as to please all people . he have to maintain the prestige of the highest aristocracy in . " " look at he nephew , who will be the next , and who work as hard as any man in the country . will he not maintain it better ? what good do the present man ever do ? " " you believe only in motion , ; -- and not at all in quiescence . a express train at full speed be grander to you than a mountain with heap of snow . I own that to I there be something glorious in the dignity of a man too high to do anything , -- if only he know how to carry that dignity with a proper grace . I think that there should be breast make to carry star . " " star which they have never earn , " say . " ah ;-- well ; we will not fight about it . go and earn you star , and I will say that it become you better than any glitter on the coat of the of . " this she say with a earnestness which he could not pretend not to notice or not to understand . " I too may be able to see that the express train be really greater than the mountain . " " though , for you own life , you would prefer to sit and gaze upon the snowy peak ? " " no ; -- that be not so . for myself , I would prefer to be of use somewhere , -- to some one , if it be possible . I strive sometimes . " " and I be sure successfully . " " never mind . I hate to talk about myself . you and the be fair subject for conversation ; you as the express train , who will probably do you sixty mile a hour in safety , but may possibly go down a bank with a crash . " " certainly I may , " say . " and the , as the mountain , which be fix in its stateliness , short of the power of some earthquake , which shall be grander and more terrible than any earthquake yet know . here we be at the house again . I will go in and sit down for a while . " " if I leave you , , I will say good - bye till next winter . " " I shall be in town again before , you know . you will come and see I ? " " of course I will . " " and then this love trouble of course will be over , -- one way or the other ; -- will it not ? " " ah !-- who can say ? " " Faint heart never win fair lady . but you heart be never faint . farewell . " then he leave she . up to this moment he have not see Violet , and yet he know that she be to be there . she have herself tell he that she be to accompany , whom he have already meet . have not be invite , and have express great animosity against the in consequence . she have go so far as to say that the be a man at whose house a young lady such as she niece ought not to be see . but have
have laugh at this , and declare she intention of accept the invitation . " go , " she have say ; " of course I shall go . I should have break my heart if I could not have get there . " Phineas therefore be sure that she must be in the place . he have keep he eye ever on the alert , and yet he have not find she . and now he must keep he appointment with . so he go down to the path by the river , and there he find she seat close by the water 's edge . she cousin be still with she , but as soon as join they , go away . " I have tell he , " say , " that I wish to speak to you , and he stay with I till you come . there be worse man than a great deal . " " I be sure of that . " " be you and he still friend , ? " " I hope so . I do not see so much of he as I do when I have less to do . " " he say that you have get into altogether a different set . " " I do not know that . I have go as circumstance have direct I , but I have certainly not intend to throw over so old and good a friend as . " " oh ,-- he do not blame you . he tell I that you have find you way among what he call the work man of the party , and he think you will do very well , -- if you can only be patient enough . we all expect a different line from you , you know , -- more of word and less of deeds , if I may say so ;--more of liberal oratory and less of government action ; but I do not doubt that you be right . " " I think that I have be wrong , " say . " I be become heartily sick of officiality . " " that come from the fickleness about which papa be so fond of quote he . the ox desire the saddle . the charger want to plough . " " and which be I ? " " you career may combine the dignity of the one with the utility of the other . at any rate you must not think of change now . have you see lately ? " she ask the question abruptly , show that she be anxious to get to the matter respect which she have summon he to she side , and that all that she have say hithertoo have be utter as it be in preparation of that subject . " see he ? yes ; I see he daily . but we hardly do more than speak , " " why not ? " stand for a moment in silence , hesitat . " why be it that he and you do not speak ? " " how can I answer that question , ? " " do you know any reason ? sit down , or , if you please , I will get up and walk with you . he tell I that you have choose to quarrel with he , and that I have make you do so . he say that you have confess to he that I have ask you to quarrel with he . " " he can hardly have say that . " " but he have say it , -- in so many word . do you think that I would tell you such a story falsely ? " " be he here now ? " " no ; -- he be not here . he would not come . I come alone . " " be not with you ? " " no ; -- she be to come with my father later . she be here no doubt , now . but answer my question , Finn ;--unless you find that you can not answer it . what be it that you do say to my husband ? " " nothing to justify what he have tell you . " " do you mean to say that he have speak falsely ? " " I mean to use no harsh word , -- but I think that when trouble in he spirit look at thing gloomily , and put meane upon word which they should not bear . " " and what have troublead he spirit ? " " you must know that better than I can do , . I will tell you all that I can tell you . he invite I to he house and I would not go , because you have forbide I . then he ask I some question about you . do I refuse because of you , -- or of anything that you have say ? if I remember right , I tell he that I do fancy that you would not be glad to see I , -- and that therefore I would rather stay away . what be I to say ? " " you should have say nothing . " " nothing with he would have be worse than what I do say . remember that he ask I the question point - blank , and that no reply would have be equal to a affirmation . I should have confess that he suggestion be true . " " he could not then have twit I with you word . " " if I have er , , and bring any sorrow on you , I be indeed grieve . " " it be all sorrow . there be nothing but sorrow . I have make
make up my mind to leave he . " " oh , ! " " it be very bad , -- but not so bad , I think , as the life I be now lead . he have accuse I --, of what do you think ? he say that you be my lover ! " " he do not say that , -- in those word ? " " he say it in word which make I feel that I must part from he . " " and how do you answer he ? " " I would not answer he at all . if he have come to I like a man , -- not accuse I , but ask I ,-- I would have tell he everything . and what be there to tell ? I should have break my faith to you , in speaking of that scene at , but woman always tell such story to they husband when they husband be good to they , and true , and just . and it be well that they should be tell . but to I can tell nothing . he do not believe my word . " " not believe you , ? " " no ! because I do not blurt out to he all that story about you foolish duel , -- because I think it best to keep my brother 's secret , as long as there be a secret to be keep , he tell I that I have , -- lie to he ! " " what !-- with that word ? " " yes , -- with that very word . he be not particular about he word , when he think it necessary to express himself strongly . and he have tell I since that because of that he could never believe I again . how be it possible that a woman should live with such a man ? " but why do she come to he with this story , -- to he whom she have be accuse of entertaining as a lover ; -- to he who of all she friend be the last whom she should have choose as the recipient for such a tale ? Phineas as he think how he might best answer she , with what word he might try to comfort she , could not but ask himself this question . " the moment that the word be out of he mouth , " she go on to say , " I resolve that I would tell you . the accusation be against you as it be against I , and be equally false to both . I have write to he , and there be my letter . " " but you will see he again ? " " no ;-- I will go to my father 's house . I have already arrange it . have my letter by this time , and I go from hence home with my father . " " do you wish that I should read the letter ? " " yes , -- certainly . I wish that you should read it . should I ever meet he again , I shall tell he that you see it . " they be now stand close upon the river 's bank , at a corner of the grounds , and , though the voice of people sound near to they , they be alone . Phineas have no alternative but to read the letter , which be as follow :-- after what you have say to I it be impossible that I should return to you house . I shall meet my father at the of 's , and have already ask he to give I a asylum . it be my wish to remain wherever he may be , either in town or in the country . should I change my purpose in this , and change my residence , I will not fail to let you know where I go and what I propose to do . you I think must have forgote that I be you wife ; but I will never forget it . you have accuse I of have a lover . you can not have expect that I should continue to live with you after such a accusation . for myself I can not understand how any man can have bring himself to bring such a charge against he wife . even have it be true the accusation should not have be make by you mouth to my ear . that it be untrue I believe you must be as well aware as I be myself . how intimate I be with . , and what be the limit of my intimacy with he you know before I marry you . after we marriage I encourage he friendship till I find that there be something in it that displease you , -- and , after learn that , I discourage it . you have say that he be my lover , but you have probably not define for yourself that word very clearly . you have feel yourself slighte because he name have be mention with praise ; -- and you jealousy have be wounded because you have think that I have regard he as in some way superior to yourself . you have never really think that he be my lover , -- that he speak word to I which other might not hear , that he claim from I atch that a wife may not give , that he receive atch which a friend should not receive . the accusation have be a coward 's accusation . I shall be at my father 's to - night , and to - morrow I will get you to let my servant bring to I such thing as
as be my own , -- my clothes , namely , and desk , and a few book . she will know what I want . I trust you may be happier without a wife , than ever you have be with I . I have feel almost daily since we be marry that you be a man who would have be happier without a wife than with one . yours affectionately , . " it be at any rate true , " she say , when Phineas have read the letter . " true ! Doubtless it be true , " say , " except that I do not suppose he be ever really angry with I , or jealous , or anything of the sort , -- because I get on well . it seem absurd even to think it . " " there be nothing too absurd for some man . I remember you tell I that he be weak , and poor , and unworthy . I remember you say so when I first think that he might become my husband . I wish I have believe you when you tell I so . I should not have make such a shipwreck of myself as I have do . that be all I have to say to you . after what have pass between we I do not choose that you should hear how I be separate from my husband from any lip but my own . I will go now and find papa . do not come with I . I prefer be alone . " then he be leave stand by himself , look down upon the river as it glide by . how would it have be with both of they if have accept he three year ago , when she consent to join she lot with that of , and have reject he ? as he stand he hear the sound of music from the house , and remember that he have come there with the one sole object of see . he have know that he would meet , and it have be in he mind to break through that law of silence which she have impos upon he , and once more to ask she to assist he , -- to implore she for the sake of they old friendship to tell he whether there might yet be for he any chance of success . but in the interview which have just take place it have be impossible for he to speak a word of himself or of Violet . to she , in she great desolation , he could address himself on no other subject than that of she own misery . but not the less when she be talk to he of she own sorrow , of she regret that she have not listen to he when in year past he have speak slightingly of , be he think of . have certainly mistaken the sign of thing when he have accuse he wife by say that be she lover . Phineas have soon got over that early feeling ; and as far as he himself be concerned have never regret 's marriage . he remain down by the water for a few minute , give time to escape , and then he wander across the grounds towards the house . it be now about nine o'clock , and though there be still many walk about the grounds , the crowd of people be in the room . the musician be range out on a verandah , so that they music might have be available for dancing within or without ; but the dancer have find the board pleasanter than the lawn , and the 's be become a mere ball , with privilege for the dancer to stroll about the lawn between the dance . and in this respect the fun be better than at a ball , -- that let the engagement make for partner be what they might , they could always be break with ease . no lady feel herself bound to dance with a cavalier who be displease to she ; and some gentleman be leave sadly in the lurch . feel himself to be very much in the lurch , even after he have discover stand up to dance with . he bid he time patiently , and at last he find he opportunity . " would she dance with he ? " she declare that she intend to dance no more , and that she have promise to be ready to return home with before ten o'clock . " I have pledge myself not to be after ten , " she say , laugh . then she put she hand upon he arm , and they step out upon the terrace together . " have you hear anything ? " she ask he , almost in a whisper . " yes , " he say . " I have hear what you mean . I have hear it all . " " be it not dreadful ? " " I fear it be the best thing she can do . she have never be happy with he . " " but to be accuse after that fashion , -- by she husband ! " say . " one can hardly believe it in these day . and of all woman she be the last to deserve such accusation . " " the very last , " say , feel that the subject be one upon which it be not easy for he to speak . " I can not conceive to whom he can have allude , " say . then begin to understand that have not hear the whole story ; but the difficulty of speaking be still very great . " it have be the result of ungovernable temper ,
, " he say . " but a man do not usually strive to dishonour himself because he be in a rage . and this man be incapable of rage . he must be curse with one of those dark gloomy mind in which love always lead to jealousy . she will never return to he . " " one can not say . in many respects it would be better that she should , " say . " she will never return to he , " repeat , -- " never . would you advise she to do so ? " " how can I say ? if one be call upon for advice , one would think so much before one spoke . " " I would not , -- not for a minute . what ! to be accuse of that ! how be a man and woman to live together after there have be such word between they ? poor ! what a terrible end to all she high hope ! do you not grieve for she ? " they be now at some distance from the house , and could not but feel that chance have be very good to he in give he he opportunity . she be lean on he arm , and they be alone , and she be speak to he with all the familiarity of old friendship . " I wonder whether I may change the subject , " say he , " and ask you a word about yourself ? " " what word ? " she say sharply . " I have hear -- " " what have you hear ? " " simply this , -- that you be not now as you be six month ago . you marriage be then fix for . " " it have be unfix since then , " she say . " yes ; -- it have be unfixed . I know it . , you will not be angry with I if I say that when I hear it be so , something of a hope , -- no , I must not call it a hope , -- something that long to form itself into hope return to my breast , and from that hour to this have be the only subject on which I have care to think . " " be you friend , ? " " he be so , and I do not think that I have ever be untrue to my friendship for he . " " he say that no man have ever have a truer friend . he will swear to that in all company . and I , when it be allow to I to swear with he , swore it too . as he friend , let I tell you one thing , -- one thing which I would never tell to any other man , -- one thing which I know I may tell you in confidence . you be a gentleman , and will not break my confidence ? " " I think I will not . " " I know you will not , because you be a gentleman . I tell in the autumn of last year that I love he . and I do love he . I shall never have the same confession to make to another man . that he and I be not now , -- on those loving term ,-- which once exist , can make no difference in that . a woman can not transfer she heart . there have be thing which have make I feel , -- that I be perhaps mistaken , -- in say that I would be , -- he wife . but I say so , and can not now give myself to another . here be , and we will join he . " there be with on he arm , very gloomy , -- resolve on what way he might be avenge on the man who have insult he daughter . he take but little notice of Phineas as he resume he charge of ; but the two lady wish he good night . " good night , , " say , stand with he hat in he hand , -- " good night , . " then he be alone , -- quite alone . would it not be well for he to go down to the bottom of the garden , and fl himself into the quiet river , so that there might be a end of he ? or would it not be better still that he should create for himself some quiet river of life , away from , away from politics , away from lord , and title lady , and fashionable square , and the party give by duke , and the disappointment incident to a small man in attempting to make for himself a career among big man ? there have frequently be in the mind of this young man a idea that there be something almost false in he own position , -- that he life be a pretence , and that he would ultimately be subject to that ruin which always come , sooner or later , on thing which be false ; and now as he wander alone about 's garden , this feeling be very strong within he bosom , and rob he altogether of the honour and glory of have be one of the of 's guest . the at do not throw himself into the river from the 's garden ; and be ready , in spite of , to start for with at the end of the first week in . the close of that season in certainly be not a happy period of he life . Violet have speak to he after such a fashion that he
he could not bring himself not to believe she . she have give he no hint whether it be likely or unlikely that she and would be reconcile ; but she have convince he that he could not be allow to take 's place . " a woman can not transfer she heart , " she have say . be well aware that many woman do transfer they heart ; but he have go to this woman too soon after the wrench which she love have receive ; he have be too sudden with he proposal for a transfer ; and the punishment for such ill judgment must be that success would now be impossible to he . and yet how could he have wait , feel that , if she be at all like other girl whom he have know , might have promise herself to some other lover before she would return within he reach in the succeeding spring ? but she be not like some other girl . ah ; -- he know that now , and repent he of he haste . but he be ready for on the 7th of , and they start together . something less than twenty hour take they from to , and during four or five of those twenty hour be unfitted for any conversation by the uncomfortable feeling incidental to the passage from to . nevertheless , there be a great deal of conversation between they during the journey . have almost make up he mind to leave the cabinet . " it be sad to I to have to confess it , " he say , " but the truth be that my old rival , , be right . a man who begin he political life as I begin mine , be not the man of whom a should be form . I be inclin to think that ministers of government require almost as much education in they trade as shoemaker or tallow - chandler . I doubt whether you can make a good public servant of a man simply because he have get the ear of the of . " " then you mean to say , " say , " that we be altogether wrong from begin to end , in we way of arrange these thing ? " " I do not say that at all . look at the man who have be lead statesman since we present mode of government be form , -- from the day in which it be form itself , say from down , and you will find that all who have be of real use have early training as public servants . " " be we never to get out of the old groove ? " " not if the groove be good , " say , " those who have be efficient as ministers suck in they efficacy with they mother 's milk . do so , and , and . they seat themselves in office chair the moment they leave college . be in office before he be eight - and - twenty . the of be at work as a private Secretary when he be three - and - twenty . you , luckily for yourself , have do the same . " " and regret it every hour of my life . " " you have no cause for regret , but it be not so with I . if there be any man unfit by he previous career for office , it be he who have become , or who have endeavoure to become , a popular politician , -- a exponent , if I may say so , of public opinion . as far as I can see , office be offer to such man with one view only , -- that of clipp they wing . " " and of obtain they help . " " it be the same thing . help from would mean the withdrawal of all power of opposition from he . he could not give other help for any long term , as the very fact of he accepting power and patronage would take from he he popular leadership . the mass outside require to have they minister as the have hers ; but the same man can not be minister to both . if the people 's minister choose to change he master , and to take the 's shilling , something of temporary relief may be gain by government in the fact that the other place will for a time be vacant . but there be candidate enough for such place , and the vacancy be not a vacancy long . of course the have this pull , that it pay wage , and the people do not . " " I do not think that that influence you , " say . " it do not influence I . to you I will make bold to state so much positively , though it would be foolish , perhaps , to do so to other . I do not go for the shilling , though I be so poor a man that the shilling be more to I than it would be to almost any man in the house . I take the shilling , much doubt , but guide in part by this , that I be asham of be afraid to take it . they tell I ,-- and the , -- that I could earn it to the benefit of the country . I have not earn it , and the country have not be benefite ,-- unless it be for the good of the country that my voice in the house should be silenced . if I believe that , I ought to hold my tongue without take a salary for hold it . I have make a mistake ,
, my friend . such mistake make at my time of life can not be wholly rectify ; but , be convince of my error , I must do the best in my power to put myself right again . " there be a bitterness in all this to himself of which he could not but make plaint to he companion . " the truth be , " he say , " that a man in office must be a slave , and that slavery be distasteful . " " there I think you be wrong . if you mean that you can not do joi nt work with other man altogether after you own fashion the same may be say of all work . if you have stuck to the you must have plead you cause in conformity with instruction from the attorney . " " I should have be guide by my own light in advise those attorney . " " I can not see that you suffer anything that ought to go against the grain with you . you be begin young , and it be you first adopt career . with I it be otherwise . if by my tell you this I shall have lead you astray , I shall regret my openness with you . could I begin again , I would willingly begin as you begin . " it be a great day in , that on which arrive with at the doctor 's house . in , perhaps , a bishop inspire more awe than a . in , where a bishop might be see walk about every day , the mir dignitary of the , though much love , be think of , I fear , but lightly ; whereas a come to stay in the house of a townsman be a thing to be wonder at , to be talk about , to be afraid of , to be a fruitful source of conversation for a year to come . there be many in , especially among the elder lady , who have shake they head and express the saddest doubt when young have first become a parliament man . and though by degrees they have be half bring round , have be drive to acknowledge that he have be wonderfully successful as a parliament man , still they have continue to shake they head among themselves , and to fear something in the future ,-- until he appear at he old home lead a by the hand . there be such assurance in this that even old , at the brewery , give way , and begin to say all manner of good thing , and to praise the doctor 's luck in that he have a son gift with part so excellent . there be a great desire to see the in the flesh , to be with he when he eat and drank , to watch the gait and countenance of the man , and to drink water from this fountain of state lore which have be so wonderfully bring among they by they young townsman . . be aware that it behove she to be chary of she invitation , but the lady from the brewery have say such good thing of . 's black swan , that she carry she point , and be invite to meet the at dinner on the day after he arrival . and she daughter be invite also to be of the party . when Phineas have be last at , , as the reader may remember , have remain with she daughter at , -- feel it to be she duty to keep she daughter away from the danger of a unrequited attachment . but it seem that she purpose be change now , or that she no longer fear the danger , -- for both and she mother be now again live in , and be at the doctor 's house as much as ever . a day or two before the coming of the and the demigod to the little town , and she friend have thus come to understand each other as they walk along the side . " I be sure , my dear , that he be engage to nobody , " say . " and I be sure , my dear , " say , " that I do not care whether he be or be not . " " what do you mean , ? " " I mean what I say . why should I care ? five year ago I have a foolish dream , and now I be awake again . think how old I have get to be ! " " yes ; -- you be twenty - three . what have that to do with it ? " " it have this to do with it ;-- that I be old enough to know better . and I quite understand each other . she use to be angry with he , but she have get over all that foolishness now . it always make I so vex ; -- the idea of be angry with a man because , -- because -- ! you know one can not talk about it , it be so foolish . but that be all over now . " " do you mean to say you do not care for he , ? do you remember what you use to swear to I less than two year ago ? " " I remember it all very well , and I remember what a goose I be . as for caring for he , of course I do , -- because he be you brother , and because I have know he all my life . but if he be go to be marry to - morrow , you would see that it
it would make no difference to I . " walk on for a couple of minute in silence before she reply . " , " she say at last , " I do not believe a word of it . " " very well ; -- then all that I shall ask of you be , that we may not talk about he any more . believe it , and that be enough for I . " nevertheless , they do talk about Phineas during the whole of that day , and very often talk about he afterwards , as long as remain at . there be a large dinner party at the doctor 's on the day after 's arrival . the bishop be not there , though he be on term sufficientely friendly with the doctor 's family to have be invite on so grand a occasion ; but he be not there , because Mrs . be determine that she would be take out to dinner by a in the face of all she friend . she be aware that have the bishop be there , she must have take the bishop 's arm . and though there would have be glory in that , the other glory be more to she taste . it be the first time in she life that she have ever see a , and I think that she be a little disappointed at find he so like other middle - aged gentleman . she have hope that would have assume something of the dignity of he position ; but he assume nothing . now the bishop , though he be a very mild man , do assume something by the very fact of he apron and knee - breech . " I be sure , sir , it be very good of you to come and put up with we humble way of living , " say . to she guest , as they sit down at table . and yet she have resolve that she would not make any speech of the kind , -- that she would condescmend to no apology , -- that she would bear herself as though a dine with she at least once a year . but when the moment come , she break down , and make this apology with almost abject meekness , and then hate herself because she have do so . " my dear madam , " say , " I live myself so much like a hermit that you house be a palace of luxury to I . " then he feel that he have make a foolish speech , and he also hate himself . he find it very difficult to talk to he hostess upon any subject , until by chance he mention he young friend Phineas . then she tongue be unloosed . " you son , madam , " he say , " be go with I to and back to . it be a shame , I know , take he so soon away from home , but I should not know how to get on without he . " " oh , , it be such a blessing for he , and such a honour for we , that you should be so good to he . " then the mother speak out all she past fear and all she present hope , and acknowledge the great glory which it be to she to have a son sit in parliament , hold a office with a stately name and a great salary , and bless with the friendship of such a man as . after that get on better with she . " I do not know any young man , " say he , " in whose career I have take so strong a interest . " " he be always good , " say , with a tear force itself into the corner of each eye . " I be he mother , and of course I ought not to say so , -- not in this way ; but it be true , . " and then the poor lady be oblige to raise she handkerchief and wipe away the drop . Phinea on this occasion have take out to dinner the mother of he devote , . " what a pleasure it must be to the doctor and Mr . Finn to see you come back in this way , " say . " with all my bone unbroken ? " say he , laugh . " yes ; with all you bone unbroken . you know , , when we first hear that you be to sit in parliament , we be afraid that you might break a rib or two , -- since you choose to talk about the breaking of bone . " " yes , I know . everybody think I should come to grief ; but nobody feel so sure of it as I do myself . " " but you have not come to grief . " " I be not out of the wood yet , you know , . there be plenty of possibility for grief in my way still . " " as far as I can understand it , you be out of the wood . all that you friend here want to see now be , that you should marry some nice English girl , with a little money , if possible . rumours have reach we , you know . " " rumours always lie , " say . " sometimes they do , of course ; and I be not go to ask any indiscreet question . but that be what we all hope . be say , only the other day , that if you be once married , we should all feel quite safe about you
you . and you know we all take the most lively interest in you welfare . it be not every day that a man from get on as you have do , and therefore we be bound to think of you . " thus signify to that she have forgive he the thoughtlessness of he early youth , -- even though there have be something of treachery in that thoughtlessness to she own daughter ; and show he , also , that whatever Mary 's feeling might have be once , they be not now of a nature to trouble she . " of course you will marry ? " say . " I should think very likely not , " say , who perhaps look farther into the mind of the lady than the lady intend . " oh , do , " say the lady . " every man should marry as soon as he can , and especially a man in you position . " when the lady meet together in the draw - room after dinner , it be impossible but that they should discuss . there be from the brewery there , and old , of , -- who on ordinary occasion would hardly admit that she be on dining - out term with any one in except the bishop , but who have find it impossible to decline to meet a , -- and there be Mrs . Stackpoole from , a far - away cousin of the , who hat with a true provincial hatred . " I do not see anything particularly uncommon in he , after all , " say . " I think he be very nice indeed , " say . " so very quiet , my dear , and just like other people , " say , mean to pronounce a strong eulogium on the . " very like other people indeed , " say . " and what would you expect , ? " say . " man and woman in walk upon two leg , just as they do in . " now herself have be bear and breed in , whereas Mrs . have come from , which be a much more considerable town , and therefore there be a satire in this allusion to the habits of the man of Ennis which understand thoroughly . " my dear Mr . , I know how the people walk in quite as well as you do . " have once pass three month in while have be alive , whereas Mrs . Stackpoole have never do more than visit the metropolis for a day or two . " oh , no doubt , " say ; " but I never can understand what it be that people expect . I suppose ought to have come with he star on the breast of he coat , to have pleased . " " my dear , do not have stars , " say . " I never say they do , " say . " he be so nice and gentle to talk to , " say . " you may say what you will , but men who be high up do very often give themselves air . now I must say that this friend of my son 's do not do anything of that kind . " " not the least , " say . " quite the contrary , " say . " I dare say he be a wonderful man , " say . " all I say be , that I do not hear anything wonderful come out of he mouth ; and as for people in Ennis walk on two leg , I have see donkey in do just the same thing . " now it be well know that . have two son live in , as to neither of whom be it expect that he would set the Shannion on fire . after this little speech there be no further mention of , as it become necessary that all the good - nature of . and all the tact of and all the energy of should be use , to prevent the raging of a internecine battle between and . 's holiday programme allow he a week at , and from thence he be to go to , and from to , in order that , at both place , he might be entertain at a public dinner and make a speech about tenant - right . Foresee that might commit himself if he attend these meeting , have counsel he to remain at . but have refuse to subject himself to such cautious abstinence . have come to as he friend , and he would see he through he travels . " I shall not , probably , be ask to speak , " say , " and if I be ask , I need not say more than a few word . and what if I do speak out ? " " you might find it disadvantageous to you in . " " I must take my chance of that . I be not go to tie myself down for ever and ever for the sake of be under - Secretary to the Colony . " say very much to he on the subject , -- be constantly say very much to he about it ; but in spite of all that Monk say , do make the journey to and . he have not , since he arrival at , be a moment alone with till the evening before he start with . she have keep out of he way successfully , though she have constantly be with he in company , and be begin to plume herself on the strength and valour of she conduct . but she self - praise have in it nothing of joy
joy , and she glory be very sad . of course she would care for he no more , -- more especially as it be so very evident that he care not at all for she . but the very fact of she keep out of he way , make she acknowledge to herself that she position be very miserable . she have declare to she mother that she might certainly go to Killaloe with safety , -- that it would be better for she to put herself in the way of meet he as a old friend , -- that the idea of the necessity of shutting herself up because of he approach , be the one thing that give she real pain . therefore she mother have bring she to and she have meet he ; but she fancie security have desert she , and she find herself to be miserable , hope for something she do not know what , still dream of possibility , feel during every moment of he presence with she that some special conduct be necessary on she part . she could not make further confession to she mother and ask to be carry back to ; but she know that she be very wretched at . as for , he have feel that he old friend be very cold to he . he be in that humour with reference to which seem especially to require consolation . he know now that all hope be over there . could never be he wife . even be she not to marry for the next five year , she would not , during those five year , marry any other man . be we hero 's conviction ; and , suffer under this conviction , he be in want of the comfort of feminine sympathy . have know all this , and have it suit she to play such a part , I think she might have have Phineas at she foot before he have be a week at home . but she have keep aloon from he and have hear nothing of he sorrow . as a natural consequence of this , be more in love with she than ever . on the evening before he start with for , he manage to be alone with she for a few minute . may probably have assist in bring about this arrangement , and have , perhaps , be guilty of some treachery ,-- sister in such circumstance will sometimes be very treacherous to they friend . I feel sure , however , that herself be quite innocent of any guile in the matter . " , " say to she suddenly , " it seem to I that you have avoid I purposly ever since I have be at home . " she smile and blush , and stammer and say nothing . " have there be any reason for it , ? " " no reason at all that I know of , " she say . " we use to be such great friend . " " that be before you be a great man , Phineas . it must necessarily be different now . you know so many people now , and people of such a different sort , that of course I fall a little into the background . " " when you talk in that way , , I know that you be laugh at I . " " indeed , indeed I be not . " " I believe there be no one in the whole world , " he say , after a pause , " whose friendship be more to I than yours be . I think of it so often , . say that when we come back it shall be between we as it use to be . " then he put out he hand for hers , and she could not help give it to he . " of course there will be people , " he say , " who talk nonsense , and one can not help it ; but I will not put up with it from you . " " I do not mean to talk nonsense , ! " then there come some one across they , and the conversation be end ; but the sound of he voice remain on she ear , and she could not help but remember that he have declare that she friendship be dearer to he than the friendship of any one else . go with first to and then to , and find himself at both place to be regard as a hero only second to the great hero . at both place the one subject of debate be tenant - right ;-- could anything be do to make it profitable for man with capital to put they capital into irish land ? the fertility of the soil be question by no one , -- nor the sufficiency of external circumstance , such as railroad and the like ; -- nor the abundance of labour ;-- nor even security for the wealth to be produce . the only difficulty be in this , that the man who be to produce the wealth have no guarantee that it would be theirs when it be create . in and elsewhere such guarantee be in existence . might it not be possible to introduce they into ? that be the question which have in hand ; and in various speech which he make both before and after the dinner give to he , he pledge himself to keep it well in hand when parliament should meet . of course speak also . it be impossible that he should be silent when he friend and leader be pour out he eloquence . of course he speak , and of course he pledge himself . something like
like the old pleasure of the debating society return to he , as stand upon a platform before a listen multitude , he give full vent to he word . in the of , of late he have be so cabin , crib , and confin by office as to have enjoy nothing of this . indeed , from the commencement of he career , he have fall so thoroughly into the decorum of government way , as to have miss altogether the delight of that wild irresponsible oratory of which have speak to he so often . he have envy man below the gangway , who , though support the government on main question , could get up on they leg whenever the house be full enough to make it worth their while , and say almost whatever they please . there be that , who literally do say just what come uppermost ; and the thing that come uppermost be often ill - natured , often unbecom the gravity of the , be always start ; but man listen to he and like he to speak . but have -- marry a woman with money . oh , why , -- why , have not be kinder to he ? he might even yet , perhaps , marry a woman with money . but he could not bring himself to do so unless he love she . the upshot of the meeting be that he also positively pledge himself to support during the next session of parliament a bill advocat tenant - right . " I be sorry you go so far as that , " say to he almost as soon as the meeting be over . they be stand on the pier at , and be prepare to return to . " and why not I as far as you ? " " because I have think about it , and I do not think that you have . I be prepare to resign my office to - morrow ; and directly that I can see and explain to he what I have do , I shall offer to do so . " " he will not accept you resignation . " " he must accept it , unless he be prepared to instruct the irish Secretary to bring in such a bill as I can support . " " I shall be exactly in the same boat . " " but you ought not to be in the same boat ;-- nor need you . my advice to you be to say nothing about it till you get back to , and then speak to . tell he that you will not say anything on the subject in the house , but that in the event of there be a division you hope to be allow to vote as on a open question . it may be that I shall get 's assent , and if so we shall be all right . if I do not , and if they choose to make it a point with you , you must resign also . " " of course I shall , " say . " but I do not think they will . you have be too useful , and they will wish to avoid the weakness which come to a ministry from change its team . good - bye , my dear fellow ; and remember this , -- my last word of advice to you be to stick by the ship . I be quite sure it be a career which will suit you . I do not begin it soon enough . " be rather melancholy as he return alone to . it be all very well to bid he stick to the ship , and he know as well as any one could tell he how material the ship be to he ; but there be circumstance in which a man can not stick to he ship ,-- can not stick , at least , to this special government ship . he know that whither go , in this session , he must follow . he have considerable hope that when explain he purpose to the , the would feel himself oblige to give way . in that case would not only be able to keep he office , but would have such a opportunity of make a speech in parliament as circumstance have never yet give to he . when he be again at home he say nothing to he father or to the as to the danger of he position . of what use wwould it be to make he mother and sister miserable , or to incur the useless counsel of the doctor ? they seem to think he speech at very fine , and be never tired of talk of what and be go to do ; but the idea have not come home to they that if or choose to do anything on they own account , they must give up the place which they hold under the . it be when find himself back at , and he be due to be at he office in in . the excitement of 's company be now over , and he have nothing to do but to receive pouch full of official papers from the , and study all the statistic which come within he reach in reference to the propose new law for tenant - right . in the meantime be still live with she mother at , and still keep herself somewhat aloon from the man she love . how could it be possible for he not to give way in such circumstance as those ? one day he find himself talk to she about himself , and speak to she of he own position with more frankness than he ever use with he own
own family . he have begin by remind she of that conversation which they have have before he go away with , and by remind she also that she have promise to return to she old friendly way with he . " Nay , ; there be no promise , " she say . " and be we not to be friend ? " " I only say that I make no particular promise . of course we be friend . we have always be friend . " " what would you say if you hear that I have resign my office and give up my seat ? " he ask . of course she express she surprise , almost she horror , at such a idea , and then he tell she everything . it take long in the telling , because it be necessary that he should explain to she the working of the system which make it impossible for he , as a member of the government , to entertain a opinion of he own . " and do you mean that you would lose you salary ? " she ask . " certainly I should . " " would not that be very dreadful ? " he laugh as he acknowledge that it would be dreadful . " it be very dreadful , , to have nothing to eat and drink . but what be a man to do ? would you recommend I to say that black be white ? " " I be sure you will never do that . " " you see , , it be very nice to be call by a big name and to have a salary , and it be very comfortable to be envy by one 's friend and enemy ; -- but there be drawback . there be this especial drawback . " then he pause for a moment before he go on . " what especial drawback , ? " " a man can not do what he please with himself . how can a man marry , so circumstance as I be ? " she hesitat for a moment , and then she answer he ,-- " a man may be very happy without marrying , I suppose . " he also pause for many moment before he speak again , and she then make a faint attempt to escape from he . but before she succeed he have ask she a question which arrest she . " I wonder whether you would listen to I if I be to tell you a history ? " of course she listen , and the history he tell she be the tale of he love for . " and she have money of she own ? " ask . " yes ; -- she be rich . she have a large fortune . " " then , , you must seek some one else who be equally bless . " " , that be untrue , -- that be ill - natured . you do not mean that . say that you do not mean it . you have not believe that I love because she be rich . " " but you have tell I that you could love no one who be not rich . " " I have say nothing of the kind . love be involuntary . it do not often run in a yoke with prudence . I have tell you my history as far as it be concerned with . I do love she very dearly . " " do love she , ? " " yes ; -- do love she . be there any inconstancy in ceasing to love when one be not love ? be there inconstancy in change one 's love , and in loving again ? " " I do not know , " say , to whom the occasion be become so embarrassing that she no longer be able to reply with word that have a meaning in they . " if there be , dear , I be inconstant . " he pause , but of course she have not a syllable to say . " I have change my love . but I could not speak of a new passion till I have tell the story of that which have pass away . you have hear it all now , . can you try to love I , after that ? " it have come at last , -- the thing for which she have be ever wish . it have come in spite of she imprudence , and in spite of she prudence . when she have hear he to the end she be not a whit angry with he , -- she be not in the least aggrieved , -- because he have be lose to she in he love for this , while she have be so nearly lose by she love for he . for woman such episode in the live of they lover have a excitement which be almost pleasurable , whereas each man be anxious to hear he lady swear that until he appear upon the scene she heart have be fancy free . , upon the whole , have like the story , -- have think that it have be finely tell , and be well pleased with the final catastrophe . but , nevertheless , she be not prepare with she reply . " have you no answer to give I , ? " he say , look up into she eye . I be afraid that he do not doubt what would be she answer , -- as it would be good that all lover should do . " you must vouchsafe I some word , . " when she essay to speak she find that she be dumb . she could not get
get she voice to give she the assistance of a single word . she do not cry , but there be a motion as of sobbing in she throat which imped all utterance . she be as happy as earth , -- as heaven could make she ; but she do not know how to tell he that she be happy . and yet she longe to tell it , that he might know how thankful she be to he for he goodness . he still sit look at she , and now by degree he have get she hand in he . " , " he say , " will you be my wife , -- my own wife ? " when half a hour have pass , they be still together , and now she have find the use of she tongue . " do whatever you like best , " she say . " I do not care which you do . if you come to I to - morrow and tell I you have no income , it would make no difference . though to love you and to have you love be all the world to I , -- though it make all the difference between misery and happiness , -- I would sooner give up that than be a clog on you . " then he take she in he arm and kiss she . " oh , ! " she say , " I do love you so entirely ! " " my own one ! " " yes ; you own one . but if you have know it always ! never mind . now you be my own , -- be you not ? " " indeed yes , dearest . " " oh , what a thing it be to be victorious at last . " " what on earth be you two do here these two hour together ? " say , burst into the room . " what be we do ? " say . " yes ; -- what be you do ? " " nothing in particular , " say . " nothing at all in particular , " say . " only this , -- that we have engage ourselves to marry each other . it be quite a trifle , -- be it not , ? " " oh , ! " say the joyful girl , spring forward into she friend 's arm ; " I do believe I be the happiest creature on the face of this earth ! " 's have return to he engagement with be know to all he family , be know to , and be indeed know generally to all . that other secret of he , which have reference to the probability of he be oblige to throw up he office , be know only to herself . he think that he have do all that honou require of he in tell she of he position before he have propose ; -- so that she might on that ground refuse he if she be so minded . and yet he have know very well that such prudence on she part be not to be expect . if she love he , of course she would say so when she be ask . and he have know that she love he . " there may be delay , , " he say to she as he be go ; " nay , there must be delay , if I be oblige to resign . " " I do not care a straw for delay if you will be true to I , " she say . " do you doubt my truth , dearest ? " " not in the least . I will swear by it as the one thing that be truest in the world . " " you may , dearest . and if this should come to pass I must go to work and put my shoulder to the wheel , and earn a income for you by my old profession before I can make you my wife . with such a motive before I I know that I shall earn a income . " and thus they parte . , though of course she would have prefer that she future husband should remain in he high office , that he should be a member of parliament and a under - Secretary of , admit no doubt into she mind to disturb she happiness ; and , though he have many misgiving as to the prudence of what he have do , be not the less strong in he resolution of constancy and endurance . he would throw up he position , resign he seat , and go to work at the instantly , if he find that he independence as a man require he to do so . and , above all , let come what might , he would be true to . be half over before he see . " yes , -- yes ; " say , when the under - begin to tell he story ; " I see what you be about . I wish I have be at you elbow . " " if you know the country as I know it , you would be as eager about it as I be . " " then I can only say that I be very glad that I do not know the country as you know it . you see , , it be my idea that if a man want to make himself useful he should stick to some special kind of work . with you it be a thousand pity that you should not do so . " " you think , then , I ought to resign ? " " I do not say
say anything about that . as you wish it , of course I will speak to . , I believe , have resign already . " " he have write to I , and tell I so , " say . " I always feel afraid of he for you sake , . be a clever man , and as honest a man as any in the , but I always think that he be a dangerous friend for you . however , we will see . I will speak to after . there be no hurry about it . " when parliament meet the first great subject of interest be the desertion of from the . he at once take he place below the gangway , sit as it happen exactly in front of , and there he make he explanation . some one opposite ask a question whether a certain right honourable gentleman have not leave the cabinet . then reply that to he infinite regret he right honourable friend , who lately preside at the board of trade , have resign ; and he go on to explain that this resignation have , accord to he idea , be quite unnecessary . he right honourable friend entertaine certain idea about irish tenant - right , as to which he himself and he right honourable friend the for could not exactly pledge themselves to be in unison with he ; but he have think that the motion might have rest at any rate over this session . then explain , make he first great speech on irish tenant - right . he find himself oblige to advocate some immediate measure for give security to the irish farmer ; and as he could not do so as a member of the cabinet , he be force to resign the honour of that position . he say something also as to the great doubt which have ever weigh on he own mind as to the inexpediency of a man at he time of life submit himself for the first time to the trammel of office . this call up , who take the opportunity of say that he now agree cordially with he old friend for the first time since that old friend have listen to the blandishment of the ministerial seducer , and that he welcome he old friend back to those independent benche with great satisfaction . in this way the debate be very exciting . nothing be say which make it then necessary for to get upon he leg or to declare himself ; but he perceive that the time would rapidly come in which he must do so . , though he strove to speak with gentle word , be evidently very angry with the late of the board of trade ; and , moreover , it be quite clear that a bill would be introduce by himself , which be determined to oppose . if all this come to pass and there should be a close division , Phineas feel that he fate would be seal . when he again speak to on the subject , the of shrug he shoulders and shake he head . " I can only advise you , " say , " to forget all that take place in . if you will do so , nobody else will remember it . " " as if it be possible to forget such thing , " he say in the letter which he write to Mary that night . " of course I shall go now . if it be not for you sake , I should not in the least regret it . " he have be with frequently in the winter , and have discuss with she so often the question of he official position that she have declare that she be come at last to understand the mystery of a english cabinet . " I think you be quite right , my friend , " she say , -- " quite right . what -- you be to be in parliament and say that this black thing be white , or that this white thing be black , because you like to take you salary ! that can not be honest ! " then , when he come to talk to she of money , -- that he must give up parliament itself , if he give up he place , -- she offer to lend he money . " why should you not treat I as a friend ? " she say . when he point out to she that there would never come a time in which he could pay such money back , she stampe she foot and tell he that he have better leave she . " you have high principle , " she say , " but not principle sufficiently high to understand that this thing could be do between you and I without disgrace to either of we . " then Phineas assure she with tear in he eye that such a arrangement be impossible without disgrace to he . but he whisper to this new friend no word of the engagement with he dear irish . he irish life , he would tell himself , be a thing quite apart and separate from he life in . he say not a word about to any of those with whom he live in . why should he , feel as he do that it would so soon be necessary that he should disappear from among they ? he have say much to . she have ask he whether he have abandon all hope . " that affair , then , be over ? " she have say . " yes ; -- it be all over now . " " and she will marry the red - headed , violent lord ? "
" " know . I think she will . but she be exactly the girl to remain unmarried if she take it into she head that the man she like be in any way unfitted for she . " " do she love this lord ? " " oh yes ; -- there be no doubt of that . " and Phineas , as he make this acknowledgment , seem to do so without much inward agony of soul . when he have be last in he could not speak of and together without show that he misery be almost too much for he . at this time he receive some counsel from two friend . one be , and the other be . Laurence have always be true to he after a fashion , and have never resent he intrusion at the . " Phinea , I boy , " he say , " if all this be thrue , you be about up a tree . " " it be true that I shall support 's motion . " " then , I boy , you be up a tree as far as office go . a place like that niver suite I , because , you see , that poker of a young lord expect so much of a man ; but you do not mind that kind of thing , and I think you be as snug as snug . " " Troubles will come , you see , . " " , yes . it be all throuble , I think , sometimes . but you have a way out of all you throuble . " " what way ? " " Pop the question to . the money be all thrue , you know . " " I do not doubt the money in the least , " say . " and it be my belief she will take you without a second word . anyways , thry it , , my boy . that be my advice . " Phinea so far agree with he friend Laurence that he think it possible that might accept he be he to propose marriage to she . he know , of course , that that mode of escape from he difficulty be out of the question for he , but he could not explain this to . " I be sorry to hear that you have take up a bad cause , " say to he . " it be a pity ; -- be it not ? " " and the worst of it be that you will sacrifice yourself and do no good to the cause . I never know a man break away in this fashion , and not feel afterwards that he have do it all for nothing . " " but what be a man to do , ? he can not smother he conviction . " " conviction ! there be nothing on earth that I be so much afraid of in a young member of parliament as conviction . there be ever so many rock against which man get break . one man can not keep he temper . another can not hold he tongue . a third can not say a word unless he have be prim himself half a session . a fourth be always think of himself , and want more than he can get . a fifth be idle , and will not be there when he be want . a sixth be always in the way . a seventh lie so that you never can trust he . I have have to do with they all , but a fellow with conviction be the worst of all . " " I do not see how a fellow be to help himself , " say . " when a fellow begin to meddle with politics they will come . " " why can not you grow into they gradually as you betters and elder have do before you ? it ought to be enough for any man , when he begin , to know that he be a . he understand which side of the house he be to vote , and who be to lead he . what be the meaning of have a leader to a party , if it be not that ? do you think that you and can go and make a government between you ? " " whatever I think , I be sure he do not . " " I be not so sure of that . but look here , , I do not care two straw about 's go . I always think that and the be wrong when they ask he to join . I know he would go over the trace ,-- unless , indeed , he take he money and do nothing for it , which be the way with some of those radical . I look upon he as gone . " " he have go . " " the go along with he , as you say in . but do not you be such a fool as to ruin yourself for a crotchet of 's . it be not too late yet for you to hold back . to tell you the truth , have say a word to I about it already . he be most anxious that you should stay , but of course you can not stay and vote against we . " " of course I can not . " " I look upon you , you know , as in some sort my own child . I have try to bring other fellow forward who seem to have something in they , but I have never succeed as I have with you . you have hit the thing off , and have get the ball at
at you foot . upon my honour , in the whole course of my experience I have never know such good fortune as yours . " " and I shall always remember how it begin , , " say , who be greatly move by the energy and solicitude of he friend . " but , for 's sake , do not go and destroy it all by such mad perversity as this . they mean to do something next session . be go to take it up . " be at this time for . " but of course we can not let a fellow like take the matter into he own hand just when he please . I call it would ---- d treachery . " " Monk be no traitor , . " " man will have they own opinion about that . it be generally understand that when a man be ask to take a seat in the cabinet he be expect to conform with he colleague , unless something very special turn up . but I be speak of you now , and not of . you be not a man of fortune . you can not afford to make duck and drake . you be excellently place , and you have plenty of time to hark back , if you will only listen to reason . all that irish stump balderdash will never be throw in you tooth by we , if you will just go on as though it have never be utter . " Phineas could only thank he friend for he advice , which be at least disinterest , and be good of its kind , and tell he that he would think of it . he do think of it very much . he almost think that , be it to do again , he would allow to go upon he tour alone , and keep himself from the utterance of anything that so good a judge as could call stump balderdash . as he sit in he arm - chair in he room at the , with despatch - box around he , and official papers spread before he , -- feel himself to be one of those who in truth manage and govern the affair of this great nation , feel also that if he relinquish he post now he could never regain it , -- he do wish that he have be a little less in love with independence , a little quieter in he boastings that no official consideration should ever silence he tongue . but all this be too late now . he know that he skin be not thick enough to bear the arrow of those archer who would bend they bow against he if he should now dare to vote against 's motion . he own party might be willing to forgive and forget ; but there would be other who would read those report , and would appear in the house with the odious tell - tale newspaper in they hand . then he receive a letter from he father . some good - natured person have enlighten the doctor as to the danger in which he son be place himself . , who in he own profession be a very excellent and well - instruct man , have be so ignorant of Parliamentary tactic , as to have be proud at he son 's success at the irish meeting . he have think that be carry on he trade as a public speaker with proper energy and continue success . he have care nothing himself for tenant - right , and have acknowledge to that he could not understand in what it be that the farmer be wrong . but he know that be a , and he think that be earn he salary . then there come some one who undeceive he , and the paternal bosom of the doctor be dismay . " I do not mean to interfere , " he say in he letter , " but I can hardly believe that you really intend to resign you place . yet I be tell that you must do so if you go on with this matter . my dear boy , pray think about it . I can not imagine you be dispose to lose all that you have win for nothing . " also write to he . . have be talk to she , and have teach herself to believe that after the many sweet conversation she have have with a man so high in office as , she really do understand something about the british government . have interrogate , and have be oblige to own that it be quite possible that Phineas would be call upon to resign . " but why , my dear ? and ! resign two thousand a year ! " " that he may maintain he independence , " say proudly . " ! " say . " how be he to maintain you , or himself either , if he go on in that way ? I should not wonder if he do not get himself all wrong , even now . " then begin to cry ; and could only write to she lover , point out to he how very anxious all he friend be that he should do nothing in a hurry . but what if the thing be do already ! Phineas in he great discomfort go to seek further counsel from . of all he counsellor , be the only one who applaude he for what he be about to do . " but , after all , what be it you give up ? may be out to - morrow , and then where will be you place ? " " there do not seem to be much chance of that at
at present . " " who can tell ? of course I do not understand , -- but it be only the other day when be there , and only the day before that when be there , and again only the day before that when be there . " endeavoure to make she understand that of the four whom she have name , three be man of the same party as himself , under whom it would have suit he to serve . " I would not serve under any man if I be a english gentleman in parliament , " say . " what be a poor fellow to do ? " say , laugh . " a poor fellow need not be a poor fellow unless he like , " say . immediately after this Phinea leave she , and as he go along the street he begin to question himself whether the prospects of he own darling Mary be at all endanger by he visit to ; and to reflect what sort of a blackguard he would be ,-- a blackguard of how deep a dye , -- be he to desert and marry . then he also ask himself as to the nature and quality of he own political honesty if he be to abandon in order that he might maintain he parliamentary independence . after all , if it should ever come to pass that he biography should be write , he biographer would say very much more about the manner in which he keep he seat in parliament than of the manner in which he keep he engagement with . half a dozen people who know he and she might think ill of he for he conduct to , but the world would not condemn he ! and when he thunder forth he liberal eloquence from below the gangway as a independent member , have the fortune of he charming wife to back he , give excellent dinner at the same time in , would not the world praise he very loudly ? when he get to he office he find a note from invite he to dine in . the attack the note from surprise we hero not a little . he have have no communication with the since the day on which he have be so savagely scold about the duel , when the have plainly tell he that he conduct have be as bad as it could be . Phineas have not on that account become at all ashamed of he conduct in reference to the duel , but he have conceive that any reconciliation between he and the have be out of the question . now there have come a civilly - worde invitation , ask he to dine with the offended nobleman . the note have be write by , but it have purport to come from himself . he send back word to say that he should be happy to have the honour of dining with . parliament at this time have be sit nearly a month , and it be already . Phineas have hear nothing of , and do not even know that she be in till he see she handwriting . he do not know that she have not go back to she husband , and that she have remain with she father all the winter at . he have also hear that have be at . all the world have be talk of the separation of from he wife , one half of the world declare that he wife , if not absolutely false to he , have neglect all she duty ; and the other half assert that 's treatment of he wife have be so bad that no woman could possibly have live with he . there have even be a rumour that have go off with a lover from the of 's , and some indiscreet tongue have hint that a certain unmarried under - Secretary of be missing at the same time . but upon this have show he tooth with so strong a propensity to do some real biting , that no one have venture to repeat that rumour . its untruth be soon establish by the fact that be live with she father at . of , have as yet see nothing since he have be up in town . that gentleman , though a member of the , have not be in at the opening of the session , nor have he attend the cabinet meeting during the recess . it have be state in the newspaper that he be ill , and state in private that he could not bear to show himself since he wife have leave he . at last , however , he come to , and see he in the house . then , when the first meeting of the be summon after he return , it become know that he also have resign he office . there be nothing say about he resignation in the house . he have resign on the score of ill - health , and that very worthy peer , , formerly , come back to the of in he place . a sometimes find great relief in the possession of a serviceable stick who can be make to go in and out as occasion may require ; only it generally happen that the stick will expect some reward when he be make to go out . immediately see he way to a viscount 's coronet , when he be once more summoned to the august councils of the . a few day after this have be arrange , in the interval between 's invitation and 's dinner , Phineas encounter so closely in one of the passage of the that it be impossible that they should not speak to each other , unless they be to
to avoid each other as people do who have palpably quarrell . see that be hesitat , and therefore take the bull by the horn . he greet he former friend in a friendly fashion , shak he by the hand , and then prepare to pass on . but , though he have hesitat at first , now detain he brother member . " , " he say , " if you be not engage I should like to speak to you for a moment . " be not engage , and allow himself to be lead out arm - in - arm by the late Chancellor of the into . " of course you know what a terrible thing have happene to I , " say . " yes ;-- I have hear of it , " say . " everybody have hear of it . that be one of the terrible crueltie of such a blow . " " all those thing be very bad of course . I be very much grieved , -- because you have both be intimate friend of mine . " " yes , -- yes ; we be . do you ever see she now ? " " not since last , -- at the 's party , you know . " " ah , yes ; the morning of that day be the last on which I speak to she . it be then she leave I . " " I be go to dine with to - morrow , and I dare say she will be there . " " yes ; -- she be in town . I see she yesterday in she father 's carriage . I think that she have no cause to leave I . " " of course I can not say anything about that . " " I think she have no cause to leave I . " Phineas as he hear this could not but remember all that have tell himself , and think that no woman have ever have a better reason for leave she husband . " there be thing I do not like , and I say so . " " I suppose that be generally the way , " reply . " but surely a wife should listen to a word of caution from she husband . " " I fancy they never like it , " say . " but be we all of we to have all that we like ? I have not find it so . or would it be good for we if we have ? " then he pause ; but as have no further remark to make , he continue speak after they have walk about a third of the length of the hall . " it be not of my own comfort I be think now so much as of she name and she future conduct . of course it will in every sense be best for she that she should come back to she husband 's roof . " " well ; yes ; -- perhaps it would , " say . " have she not accept that lot for better or for worse ? " say , solemnly . " but incompatibility of temper , you know , be always , -- always suppose -- . you understand I ? " " it be my intention that she should come back to I . I do not wish to make any legal demand ; -- at any rate , not as yet . will you consent to be the bearer of a message from I both to herself and to the ? " now it seem to that of all the messenger whom could have choose he be the most unsuited to be a in this cause , -- not perceive that he have be so select with some craft , in order that might understand that the accusation against she be , at any rate , withdrawn , which have name as she lover . he pause again before he answer . " of course , " he say , " I should be most willing to be of service , if it be possible . but I do not see how I can speak to the about it . though I be go to dine with he I do not know why he have ask I ; -- for he and I be on very bad term . he hear that stupid story about the duel , and have not speak to I since . " " I hear that , too , " say , frown blackly as he remember he wife 's duplicity . " everybody hear of it . but it have make such a difference between he and I , that I do not think I can meddle . send for , and speak to he . " " to ! never ! he would probably strike I on the head with he club . " " call on the yourself . " " I do , and he would not see I . " " write to he . " " I do , and he send back my letter unopen . " " write to she . " " I do ; -- and she answer I , say only thus ; ' indeed , indeed , it can not be so . ' but it must be so . the law of require it , and the law of man permit it . I want some one to point out that to they more softly than I could do if I be simply to write to that effect . to the , of course , I can not write again . " the conference end by a promise from Phineas that he would , if possible , say a word
word to . when he be show into 's drawing - room he find not only Lady there , but she brother . be not in the room . be there , and so also be and . " be not you father go to be here ? " he say to , after they first greeting . " we live in that hope , " say she , " and do not at all know why he should be late . what have become of he , ? " " he come in with I half a hour ago , and I suppose he do not dress as quickly as I do , " say ; upon which Phineas immediately understand that the father and the son be reconcile , and he rush to the conclusion that and she lover would also soon be reconcile , if such be not already the case . he feel some remnant of a soreness that it should be so , as a man feel where he headache have be when the real ache itself have leave he . then the host come in and make he apology . " keep I stand about , " he say , " till the east wind have chill I through and through . the only charm I recognise in youth be that it be impervious to the east wind . " feel quite sure now that and she lover be reconcile , and he have a distinct feeling of the place where the ache have be . dear Violet ! but , after all , lack that sweet , clinging , feminine softness which make so pre-eminently the most charming of she sex . the , when he have repeat he general apology , especially to , who be the only lady present except he daughter , come up to we hero and shake he kindly by the hand . he take he up to one of the window and then address he in a voice of mock solemnity . " to the colony , young man , " he say , " and never meddle with foreign affair ;--especially not at . " " never again , my ;-- never again . " " and leave all question of fire - arm to be arrange between the and the . I have hear a good deal about it since I see you , and I retract a part of what I say . but a duel be a foolish thing ,-- a very foolish thing . come ;-- here be dinner . " and the walk off with , and walk off with . follow , and have a opportunity of say a word to he friend , , as they go down together . " it be all right between you and you father ? " " yes ;-- after a fashion . there be no know how long it will last . he want I to do three thing , and I will not do any one of they . " " what be the three ? " " to go into parliament , to be a owner of sheep and oxen , and to hunt in he own county . I should never attend the first , I should ruin myself with the second , and I should never get a run in the third . " but there be not a word say about he marriage . there be only seven who sit down to dinner , and the six be all people with whom be or have be on most intimate term . be he official chief , and , since that connection have exist between they , have be very gracious to he . she quite understand the comfort which it be to she husband to have under he , as he representative in the of , a man whom he could thoroughly trust and like , and therefore she have use she woman 's art to bind Phineas to she lord in more than mere official bondage . she have try she skill also upon , -- but altogether in vain . he have eat she dinner and accept she courtesy , and have give for they no return whatever . but have possess a more grateful mind , and have do all that have be require of he ; -- have do all that have be require of he till there have come that terrible absurdity in . " I know very well what sort of thing would happen when they bring such a man as into the cabinet , " have say to she husband . but though the party be very small , and though the guest be all he intimate friend , Phineas suspect nothing special till a attack be make upon he as soon as the servants have leave the room . this be done in the presence of the two lady , and , no doubt , have be preconcert . there be Cantrip there , who have already say much to he , and who have say more even than . , himself a member of the , open the attack by ask whether it be actually true that mean to go on with he motion . assert that positively would do so . " and will oppose it ? " ask the . " of course he will , " say . " of course he will , " say . " I know what I should think of he if he do not , " say . " he be the last man in the world to be force into a thing , " say . then know pretty well what be come on he . begin again by ask how many supporter would have in the house . " that depend upon the amount of courage which the
the conservative may have , " say . " if they dare to vote for a thoroughly democratic measure , simply for the sake of turn we out , it be quite on the card that they may succeed . " " but of we own people ? " ask . " you have better inquire that of , " say . and then the attack be make . we hero have a bad half hour of it , though many word be say which must have gratify he much . they all want to keep he , -- so declare , " except one or two whom I could name , and who be particularly anxious to wear he shoe , " say , think that certain reminiscence of Phineas with regard to and other might operate as strongly as any other consideration to make he love he place . declare that he could not understand it , -- that he should find himself lose in amazement if such a man as he young friend allow himself to be lead into the outer wilderness by such a ignis - fatuus of light as this . lay down the unwritten traditional law of government official very plainly . a man in office , -- in a office which really impos upon he as much work as he could possibly do with credit to himself or he cause , -- be dispense from the necessity of a conscience with reference to other matters . it be for to have a conscience about irish tenant - right , as no doubt he have , -- just as have a conscience about , and , and the cape . be very strong about party in general , and paint the comfort of official position in glow colour . but I think that the two lady be more efficacious than even they male relative in the argument which they use . " we have be so happy to have you among we , " say , look at he with beseeching , almost loving eye . " know , " say , " that since he first come into parliament I have always believe in he success , and I have be very proud to see it . " " we shall weep over he , as over a fallen angel , if he leave we , " say . " I will not say that I will weep , " say , " but I do not know anything of the kind that would so truly make I unhappy . " what be he to say in answer to application so flatter and so press ? he would have say nothing , have that be possible , but he feel himself oblige to reply . he reply very weakly , -- of course , not justify himself , but declare that as he have go so far he must go further . he must vote for the measure now . both he chief and prove , or attempt to prove , that he be wrong in this . of course he would not speak on the measure , and he vote for he party would probably be allow to pass without notice . one or two newspaper might perhaps attack he ; but what public man care for such attack as those ? he whole party would hang by he , and in that he would find ample consolation . Phineas could only say that he would think of it ; -- and this he say in so irresolute a tone of voice that all the man then present believe that he be gai . the two lady , however , be of a different opinion . " in spite of anything that anybody may say , he will do what he think right when the time come , " say to she father afterwards . but then have be in love with he , -- be perhaps almost in love with he still . " I be afraid he be a mule , " say to she husband . " he be a good mule up a hill with a load on he back , " say he lordship . " but with a mule there always come a time when you can not manage he , " say . but have never be in love with . find a moment , before he leave 's house , to say a word to Lady as to the commission that have be give to he . " it can never be , " say , shudder ;-- " never , never , never ! " " you be not angry with I for speaking ? " " oh , no -- not if he tell you . " " he make I promise that I would . " " tell he it can not be . tell he that if he have any instruction to send I as to what he consider to be my duty , I will endeaavor to comply , if that duty can be do apart . I will recognize he so far , because of my vow . but not even for the sake of my vow , will I endeaavor to live with he . he presence would kill I ! " when Phineas repeat this , or as much of this as he judge to be necessary , to a day or two afterwards , that gentleman replie that in such case he would have no alternative but to seek redress at law . " I have do nothing to my wife , " say he , " of which I need be asham . it will be sad , no doubt , to have all we affair bandy about in court , and make the subject of comment in newspaper , but a man must go
go through that , or worse than that , in the vindication of he rights , and for the performance of he duty to he maker . " that very day go to he lawyer , and desire that step might be take for the restitution to he of he conjugal rights . the 's bill be read the first time before , and still hold he office . he have speak to the once on the subject , and have be surprised at that gentleman 's courtesy ; -- for have the reputation of be unconciliatory in he manners , and very prone to resent anything like desertion from that allegiance which be due to himself as the leader of he party . " you have better stay where you be and take no step that may be irretrievable , till you have quite make up you mind , " say . " I fear I have make up my mind , " say . " nothing can be do till after , " reply the great man , " and there be no know how thing may go then . I strongly recommend you to stay with we . if you can do this it will be only necessary that you shall put you resignation in 's hand before you speak or vote against we . see and talk it over with he . " possibly imagine that might be move to abandon he bill , when he see what injury he be about to do . at this time receive the follow letter from he darling :-- , . Dearest PHINEAS , we have just get home from , and mean to remain here all through the summer . after leave you sister this house seem so desolate ; but I shall have the more time to think of you . I have be read , as you tell I , and I fancy that I could in truth be a here , if it be not that I be so quite certain that you will come ; -- and that make all the difference in the world in a moated grange . last night I sit at the window and try to realise what I should feel if you be to tell I that you do not want I ; and I get myself into such a ecstatic state of mock melancholy that I cry for half a hour . but when one have such a real living joy at the back of one 's romantic melancholy , tear be very pleasant ; -- they water and do not burn . I must tell you about they all at . they certainly be very unhappy at the idea of you resigning . you father say very little , but I make he own that to act as you be act for the sake of principle be very grand . I would not leave he till he have say so , and he do say it . dear do not understand it as well , but she will do so . she complain mostly for my sake , and when I tell she that I will wait twenty year if it be necessary , she tell I I do not know what waiting mean . but I will , -- and will be happy , and will never really think myself a . dear , dear , dear Phineas , indeed I will not . the girl be half sad and half proud . but I be wholly proud , and know that you be do just what you ought to do . I shall think more of you as a man who might have be a than if you be really sit in the like . as for mamma , I can not make she quite understand it . she merely say that no young man who be go to be marry ought to resign anything . dear mamma ;--sometime she do say such odd thing . you tell I to tell you everything , and so I have . I talk to some of the people here , and tell they what they might do if they have tenant - right . one old fellow , ,-- I do not know whether you remember he ,-- ask if he would have to pay the rent all the same . when I say certainly he would , then he shook he head . but as you say once , when we want to do good to people one have no right to expect that they should understand it . it be like baptize little infant . I get both you note ;-- seven word in one , - , and nine in the other ! but the one little word at the end be worth a whole sheet full of common word . how nice it be to write letter without pay postage , and to send they about the world with a grand name in the corner . when bring I one he always look as if he do not know whether it be a love letter or a order to go to . if he see the inside of they , how short they be , I do not think he would think much of you as a lover nor yet as a - . but I think ever so much of you as both ;-- I do , indeed ; and I be not scold you a bit . as long as I can have two or three dear , sweet , loving word , I shall be as happy as a queen . ah , if you know it all ! but you never can know it all . a man have so many other thing to learn that he can not understand it . good - bye , dear , dear ,
, dearest man . whatever you do I shall be quite sure you have do the best . ever you own , with all the love of she heart , . this be very nice . such a man as be always take a delight which he can not express even to himself in the receipt of such a letter as this . there be nothing so flatter as the warm expression of the confidence of a woman 's love , and think that no woman ever express this more completely than do he Mary . dear , dearest . as for give she up , as for treachery to one so trusting , so sweet , so well belove , that be out of the question . but nevertheless the truth come home to he more clearly day by day , that he of all man be the last who ought to have give himself up to such a passion . for she sake he ought to have abstain . so he tell himself now . for she sake he ought to have keep aloon from she ; -- and for he own sake he ought to have keep aloon from . that very day , with 's letter in he pocket , he go to the livery stable and explain that he would not keep he horse any longer . there be no difficulty about the horse . of the would take he from that very hour . Phinea , as he walk away , utter a curse upon . be just begin the glory of he life in , and he , , be bring he to a end . with 's letter in he pocket he go up to . he have again get into the habit of see frequently , and be often with she brother , who now again live at he father 's house . a letter have reach , through he lawyer , in which a demand be make by for the return of he wife . she be quite determine that she would never go back to he ; and there have come to she a doubt whether it would not be expedient that she should live abroad so as to be out of the way of persecution from she husband . be in great wrath , and have once or twice hint that perhaps he have better " see " . the amenity of such a interview , as this would be , have up to the present day be postpone ; and , in a certain way , Phineas have be use as a messenger between and he wife 's family . " I think it will end , " she say , " in my go to , and settle myself there . will come to I when parliament be not sitte . " " it will be very dull . " " ! what do dulness amount to when one have come to such a pass as this ? when one be in the ruck of fortune , to be dull be very bad ; but when misfortune come , simple dulness be nothing . it sound almost like relief . " " it be so hard that you should be drive away . " she do not answer he for a while , and he be begin to think of he own case also . be it not hard that he too should be drive away ? " it be odd enough that we should both be go at the same time . " " but you will not go ? " " I think I shall . I have resolve upon this , -- that if I give up my place , I will give up my seat too . I go into parliament with the hope of office , and how can I remain there when I shall have gain it and then have lose it ? " " but you will stay in , ? " " I think not . after all that have come and go I should not be happy here , and I should make my way easier and on cheaper term in . my present idea be that I shall endeaavor to make a practice over in my own country . it will be hard work begin at the bottom ; -- will it not ? " " and so unnecessary . " " ah , , -- if it only could be avoid ! but it be of no use go through all that again . " " how much we would both of we avoid if we could only have another chance ! " say . " if I could only be as I be before I persuade myself to marry a man whom I never love , what a paradise the earth would be to I ! with I all regrets be too late . " " and with I as much so . " " no , . even should you resign you office , there be no reason why you should give up you seat . " " simply that I have no income to maintain I in . " she be silent for a few moment , during which she change she seat so as to come nearer to he , place herself on a corner of a sofa close to the chair on which he be seat . " I wonder whether I may speak to you plainly , " she say . " indeed you may . " " on any subject ? " " yes ; -- on any subject . " " I trust you have be able to ry you bosom of all remembrance of . " " certainly not of all remembrance , . " " of all hope , then ? " " I have no
no such hope . " " and of all linger desire ? " " well , yes ; -- and of all linger desire . I know now that it can not be . you brother be welcome to she . " " ah ; -- of that I know nothing . he , with he perversity , have estrange she . but I be sure of this , -- that if she do not marry he , she will marry no one . but it be not on account of he that I speak . he must fight he own battle now . " " I shall not interfere with he , . " " then why should you not establish yourself by a marriage that will make place a matter of indifference to you ? I know that it be within you power to do so . " put he hand up to he breastcoat pocket , and feel that 's letter , -- she precious letter , -- be there safe . it certainly be not in he power to do this thing which recommend to he , but he hardly think that the present be a moment suitable for explain to she the nature of the impediment which stand in the way of such a arrangement . he have so lately speak to with a assurance of undying constancy of he love for , that he could not as yet acknowledge the force of another passion . he shook he head by way of reply . " I tell you that it be so , " she say with energy . " I be afraid not . " " go to , and ask she . hear what she will say . " " would laugh at I , no doubt . " " ! you do not think so . you know that she would not laugh . and be you the man to be afraid of a woman 's laughter ? I think not . " again he do not answer she at once , and when he do speak the tone of he voice be alte . " what be it you say of yourself , just now ? " " what do I say of myself ? " " you regrett that you have consent to marry a man , -- whom you do not love . " " why should you not love she ? and it be so different with a man ! a woman be wretch if she do not love she husband , but I fancy that a man get on very well without any such feeling . she can not domineer over you . she can not expect you to pluck yourself out of you own soil , and begin a new growth altogether in accordance with the law of she own . it be that which do . " " I do not for a moment think that she would take I , if I be to offer myself . " " try she , " say energetically . " such trials cost you but little ; -- we both of we know that ! " still he say nothing of the letter in he pocket . " it be everything that you should go on now that you have once begin . I do not believe in you work at the . you can not do it . a man who have commenced life as you have do with the excitement of politics , who have know what it be to take a prominent part in the control of public affair , can not give it up and be happy at other work . make she you wife , and you may resign or remain in office just as you choose . will be much easier to you than it be now , because it will not be a necessity . let I at any rate have the pleasure of think that one of we can remain here , -- that we need not both fall together . " still he do not tell she of the letter in he pocket . he feel that she move he , -- that she make he acknowledge to himself how great would be the pity of such a failure as would be he . he be quite as much alive as she could be to the fact that work at the , either in or in , would have no charms for he now . the prospect of such a life be very dreary to he . even with the comfort of 's love such a life would be very dreary to he . and then he know , -- he think that he know , -- that be he to offer himself to Madame he would not in truth be reject . she have tell he that if poverty be a trouble to he he need be no longer poor . of course he have understand this . she money be at he service if he should choose to stoop and pick it up . and it be not only money that such a marriage would give he . he have acknowledge to himself more than once that be very lovely , that she be clever , attractive in every way , and as far as he could see , bless with a sweet temper . she have a position , too , in the world that would help he rather than mar he . what might he not do with a independent seat in the house of Commons , and as joint owner of the little house in ? of all career which the world could offer to a man the pleasantest would then be within he reach . " you appear to I as a tempter , " he say at last to . "
" it be unkind of you to say that , and ungrateful . I would do anything on earth in my power to help you . " " nevertheless you be a tempter . " " I know how it ought to have be , " she say , in a low voice . " I know very well how it ought to have been . I should have keep myself free till that time when we meet on the brae of , and then all would have be well with we . " " I do not know how that might have be , " say , hoarsely . " you do not know ! but I know . of course you have stab I with a thousand dagger when you have tell I from time to time of you love for . you have be very cruel ,-- needlessly cruel . be so cruel ! but for all that I have know that I could have keep you , -- have it not be too late when you speak to I . will you not own as much as that ? " " of course you would have be everything to I . I should never have think of then . " " that be the only kind word you have say to I from that day to this . I try to comfort myself in think that it would have be so . but all that be past and gone , and done . I have have my romance and you have have yours . as you be a man , it be natural that you should have be disturb by a double image ; -- it be not so with I . " " and yet you can advise I to offer marriage to a woman , -- a woman whom I be to seek merely because she be rich ? " " yes ;-- I do so advise you . you have have you romance and must now put up with reality . why should I so advise you but for the interest that I have in you ? you prosperity will do I no good . I shall not even be here to see it . I shall hear of it only as so many a woman banish out of hear a distant misunderstood report of what be go on in the country she have leave . but I still have regard enough ,-- I will be bold , and , know that you will not take it amiss , will say love enough for you , -- to feel a desire that you should not be shipwreck . since we first take you in hand between we , and I , I have never swerve in my anxiety on you behalf . when I resolve that it would be better for we both that we should be only friend , I do not swerve . when you would talk to I so cruelly of you love for , I do not swerve . when I warn you from because I think there be danger , I do not swerve . when I bay you not to come to I in because of my husband , I do not swerve . when my father be hard upon you , I do not swerve then . I would not leave he till he be soften . when you try to rob of he love , and I think you would succeed , -- for I do think so , -- I do not swerve . I have ever be true to you . and now that I must hide myself and go away , and be see no more , I be true still . " " , -- dearest ! " he exclaim . " ah , no ! " she say , speak with no touch of anger , but all in sorrow ; --" it must not be like that . there be no room for that . nor do you mean it . I do not think so ill of you . but there may not be even word of affection between we -- only such as I may speak to make you know that I be you friend . " " you be my friend , " he say , stretch out he hand to she as he turn away he face . " you be my friend , indeed . " " then do as I would have you do . " he put he hand into he pocket , and have the letter between he finger with the purport of show it to she . but at the moment the thought occur to he that be he to do so , then , indeed , he would be bound for ever . he know that he be bound for ever , -- bound for ever to he own Mary ; but he desire to have the privilege of think over such bondage once more before he proclaim it even to he dearest friend . he have tell she that she temp he , and she stand before he now as a temptress . but lest it might be possible that she should not tempt in vain , -- that letter in he pocket must never be show to she . in that case must never hear from he lip the name of . he leave she without any assure purpose ;-- without , that be , the assurance to she of any fix purpose . there yet want a week to the day on which 's bill be to be read , -- or not to be read , -- the second time ; and he have still that interval before he need decide . he go to he club , and before he dine he strove to write
write a line to ; -- but when he have the paper before he he find that it be impossible to do so . though he do not even suspect himself of a intention to be false , the idea that be in he mind make the effort too much for he . he put the paper away from he and go down and eat he dinner . it be a , and there be no House in the evening . he have remain in with near seven o'clock , and be engage to go out in the evening to a gathering at 's house . everybody in would be there , and be resolve that as long as he remain in he would be see at place where everybody be see . he would certainly be at 's gather ; but there be a hour or two before he need go home to dress , and as he have nothing to do , he go down to the smoking - room of he club . the seat be crowd , but there be one vacant ; and before he have look about he to scrutinise he neighbourhood , he find that he have place himself with on he right hand and Ratler on he left . there be no two man in all whom he more thoroughly dislike ; but it be too late for he to avoid they now . they instantly attack he , first on one side and then on the other . " so I be tell you be go to leave we , " say . " who can have be ill - nature enough to whisper such a thing ? " reply . " the whisper be very loud , I can tell you , " say . " I think I know already pretty nearly how every man in the house will vote , and I have not get you name down on the right side . " " change it for heaven 's sake , " say . " I will , if you will tell I seriously that I may , " say . " my opinion be , " say , " that a man should be know either as a friend or foe . I respect a declare foe . " " know I as a declare foe then , " say , " and respect I . " " that be all very well , " say , " but it mean nothing . I have always have a sort of fear about you , , that you would go over the trace some day . of course it be a very grand thing to be independent . " " the finest thing in the world , " say ; " only so d ---- would useless . " " but a man should not be independent and stick to the ship at the same time . you forget the trouble you cause , and how you upset all calculation . " " I have not think of the calculation , " say . " the fact be , , " say , " you be make of clay too fine for office . I have always find it have be so with man from you country . you be the grandest horse in the world to look at out on a prairie , but you do not like the slavery of harness . " " and the sound of a whip over we shoulder set we kick ; -- do it not , ? " " I shall show the list to to - morrow , " say , " and of course he can do as he please ; but I do not understand this kind of thing . " " do not you be in a hurry , " say . " I will bet you a sovereign vote with we yet . there be nothing like be a little coy to set off a girl 's charms . I will bet you a sovereign , , that go out into the lobby with you and I against 's bill . " Phineas , not be able to stand any more of this most unpleasant raillery , get up and go away . the club be distasteful to he , and he walk off and saunter for a while about the park . he go down by the of 's column as though he be go to he office , which of course be close at this hour , but turn round when he get beyond the new public building , -- building which he be never destin to use in they completed state , -- and enter the gate of the enclosure , and wander on over the bridge across the water . as he go he mind be full of thought . could it be good for he to give up everything for a fair face ? he swore to himself that of all woman whom he have ever see be the sweetest and the dearest and the best . if it could be well to lose the world for a woman , it would be well to lose it for she . Violet , with all her skill , and all she strength , and all she grace , could never have write such a letter as that which he still hold in he pocket . the best charm of a woman be that she should be soave , and trust , and generous ; and who ever have be more soft , more trusting , and more generous than he Mary ? of course he would be true to she , though he do lose the world . but to yield such a triumph to the Ratlers and Bonteens whom he leave behind he , -- to let they have they
they will over he , -- to know that they would rejoice scurrilously behind he back over he downfall ! the feeling be terrible to he . the last word which have speak make it impossible to he now not to support he old friend . it be not only what Bonteen have say , but that the word of so plainly indicate what would be the word of all the other . he know that he be weak in this . he know that have he be strong , he would have allow himself to be guide , -- if not by the firm decision of he own spirit , -- by the counsel of such man as and , and not by the sarcasm of the Bonteens and Ratler of official life . but man who sojourn amidst savagery fear the mosquito more than they do the lion . he could not bear to think that he should yield he blood to such a one as . and he must yield he blood , unless he could vote for 's motion , and hold he ground afterwards among they all in the house of Commons . he would at any rate see the session out , and try a fall with when they should be sit on different bench , -- if ever fortune should give he a opportunity . and in the meantime , what should he do about ? what a fate be he to have the handsomest woman in with thousand and thousand a year at he disposal ! for ,-- so he now swore to himself ,-- be the handsomest woman in , as be the sweetest girl in the world . he have not arrive at any decision so fixed as to make he comfortable when he go home and dress for 's party . and yet he know , -- he think that he know that he would be true to . the 's the room and passage and staircase at 's house be very crowded when arrive there . man of all shade of politics were there , and the wife and daughter of such man ; and there be a streak of royalty in one of the saloon , and a whole rainbow of foreign ministers with they star , and two blue ribbon be to be see together on the first landing - place , with a stout lady between they carry diamonds enough to load a pannier . everybody be there . find that even be come , as he stumble across he friend on the first foot - ground that he gain in he ascent towards the room . " , -- you here ? " say . " yes , by ! " say the other , " but I be go to escape as soon as possible . I have be try to make my way up for the last hour , but could never get round that huge promontory there . be more persever . " " be here ? " whisper . " I do not know , " say , " but she be determined to run the chance . " a little higher up , -- for be bless with more patience than possess , -- he come upon . " so you be still admit privately , " say . " oh dear yes , -- and we have just be have a most friendly conversation about you . what a man he be ! he know everything . he be so accurate ; so just in the abstract , -- and in the abstract so generous ! " " he have be very generous to I in detail as well as in abstract , " say . " ah , yes ; I be not think of individual exactly . he want of generosity be to large mass , -- to a party , to class , to a people ; whereas he generosity be for mankind at large . he assume the god , affect to nod , and seem to shake the sphere . but I have nothing against he . he have ask I here to - night , and have talk to I most familiarly about . " " what do you think of you chance of a second reading ? " ask . " what do you think of it ?-- you hear more of those thing than I do . " " everybody say it will be a close division . " " I never expect it , " say . " nor I , till I hear what say at the first reading . they will all vote for the bill en masse , -- hat it in they heart all the time . " " let we hope they be not so bad as that . " " it be the way with they always . they do all ou work for we , -- sail either on one tack or the other . that be they use in creation , that when we split among ourselves , as we always do , they come in and finish we job for we . it must be unpleasant for they to be always do that which they always say should never be do at all . " " wherever the gift horse may come from , I shall not look it in the mouth , " say . " there be only one man in the house whom I hope I may not see in the lobby with I , and that be yourself . " " the question be decide now , " say . " and how be it decide ? " Phineas could not tell he friend that a question of so great magnitude to he have be decide by the last sting which he have receive from a insect
insect so contemptible as , but he express the feeling as well as he know how to express it . " oh , I shall be with you . I know what you be go to say , and I know how good you be . but I could not stand it . man be begin already to say thing which almost make I get up and kick they . if I can help it , I will give occasion to no man to hind anything to I which can make I be so wretched as I have be to - day . pray do not say anything more . my idea be that I shall resign to - morrow . " " then I hope that we may fight the battle side by side , " say , give he he hand . " we will fight the battle side by side , " reply . after that he push he way still higher up the stair , have no special purpose in view , not dream of any such success as that of reach he host or hostess ,-- merely feel that it should be a point of honour with he to make a tour through the room before he descende the stair . the thing , he think , be to be do with courage and patience , and this might , probably , be the last time in he life that he would find himself in the house of a . just at the turn of the balustrade at the top of the stair , he find in the very spot on which have be talk with he . " very glad to see you , " say . " you , I find , be a persevering man , with a genius for get upward . " " like the spark , " say . " not quite so quickly , " say . " but with the same assurance of speedy loss of my little light . " it do not suit to understand this , so he change the subject . " have you see the news from ? " " yes , I have see it , but do not believe it , " say . " ah , you have such faith in a combination of british colony , properly back in , as to think they strong against a world in arm . in you place I should hold to the same doctrine , -- hold to it stoutly . " " and you do now , I hope , ? " " well , -- yes ,-- I be not down - hear . but I confess to a feeling that the world would go on even though we have nothing to say to a single province in . but that be for you private ear . you be not to whisper that in Downing . " then there come up somebody else , and go on upon he slow course . he have longe for a opportunity to tell that he could go to no more , but such opportunity have not reach he . for a long time he find himself stuck close by the side of ,-- , -- who have once relieve he from terrible pecuniary anxiety by pay for he a sum of money which be due by he on she brother 's account . " it be a very nice thing to be here , but one do get tired of it , " say . " very tired , " say . " of course it be a part of you duty , . you be on you promotion and be bound to be here . when I ask to come , he say there be nothing to be get till the card be shuffle again . " " they will be shuffle very soon , " say . " whatever colour come up , you will hold trump , I know , " say the lady . " some hand always hold trump . " he could not explain to that it would never again be he fate to hold a single trump in he hand ; so he make another fight , and get on a few step farther . he say a word as he go to half a dozen friend , -- as friend go with he . he be detain for five minute by , who be very gracious and very disagreeable . she tell he that be in the room , but where she do not know . " she be somewhere with , I believe ; and really , , I do not like it . " have hear that have quarrell with , but have not hear of the reconciliation . " really , I do not like it . I be tell that be in the house , and nobody know what may happen . " " be not likely to say anything . " " one can not tell . and when I hear that a woman be separate from she husband , I always think that she must have be imprudent . it may be uncharitable , but I think it be most safe so to consider . " " as far as I have hear the circumstance , be quite right , " say . " it may be so . gentleman will always take the lady 's part , -- of course . but I should be very sorry to have a daughter separate from she husband , -- very sorry . " , who have nothing now to gain from 's favour , leave she abruptly , and go on again . he have a great desire to see and together , though he could hardly tell himself why . he have not see since he return from ,
, and he think that if he meet she alone he could hardly have talk to she with comfort ; but he know that if he meet she with , she would greet he as a friend , and speak to he as though there be no cause for embarrassment between they . but he be so far disappointed , that he suddenly encounter Violet alone . she have be lean on the arm of , and see she cousin leave she . but he would not be such a coward as to avoid she , especially as he know that she have see he . " oh , ! " she say , " do you see that ? " " see what ? " " look ; there be . we have hear that it be possible , and make I promise that I would not leave she . " turn he head , and see stand with he back bolt upright against a door - post , with he brow as black as thunder . " she be just opposite to he , where he can see she , " say . " pray take I to she . he will think nothing of you , because I know that you be still friend with both of they . I come away because want to introduce I to Lady . you know he be go to marry . " Phineas , not care much about and , take 's hand upon he arm , and very slowly make he way across the room to the spot indicate . there they find alone , sit under the upa - tree influence of she husband 's gaze . there be a concourse of people between they , and do not seem inclined to make any attempt to lessen the distance . but have find it impossible to move while she be under she husband 's eye . " , " she say , " could you find ? I know he be here . " " he have go , " say . " I be speak to he downstairs . " " you have not see my father ? he say he would come . " " I have not see he , but I will search . " " no ; -- it will do no good . I can not stay . he carriage be there , I know , -- wait for I . " Phineas immediately start off to have the carriage call , and promise to return with as much celerity as he could use . as he go , make he way much quicker through the crowd than he have do when he have no such object for haste , he purposely avoid the door by which have stood . it would have be he nearest way , but he present service , he think , require that he should keep aloon from the man . but pass through the door and intercept he in he path . " be she go ? " he ask . " well . yes . I dare say she may before long . I shall look for 's carriage by - and - by . " " tell she she need not go because of I . I shall not return . I shall not annoy she here . it would have be much better that a woman in such a plight should not have come to such a assembly . " " you would not wish she to shut herself up . " " I would wish she to come back to the home that she have leave , and , if there be any law in the land , she shall be make to do so . you tell she that I say so . " then fight he way down the stair , and follow in he wake . about half a hour afterwards return to the two lady with tiding that the carriage would be at hand as soon as they could be below . " do he see you ? " say . " yes , he follow I . " " and do he speak to you ? " " yes ; -- he speak to I . " " and what do he say ? " and then , in the presence of , give the message . he think it better that it should be give ; and be he to decline to deliver it now , it would never be give . " whether there be law in the land to protect I or whether there be none , I will never live with he , " say . " be a woman like a head of cattle , that she can be fasten in she crib by force ? I will never live with he though all the judge of the land should decide that I must do so . " think much of all this as he go to he solitary lodging . after all , be not the world much better with he than it be with either of those two wretch married being ? and why ? he have not , at any rate as yet , sacrificed for money or social gain any of the instinct of he nature . he have be fickle , foolish , vain , uncertain , and perhaps covetous ; -- but as yet he have not be false . then he take out 's last letter and read it again . it would , perhaps , be difficult to decide , -- between and , -- which have be most wrong , or which have be nearest to the right , in the circumstance which have lead to they separation . the old lord , wish to induce he son to undertake work of some sort
sort , and feel that he own effort in this direction be worse than useless , have close himself with he intend daughter - in - law , and have obtain from she a promise that she would use she influence with she lover . " of course I think it right that he should do something , " Violet have say . " and he will if you bid he , " reply the . express a great doubt as to this willingness of obedience ; but , nevertheless , she promise to do she best , and she do she best . , when she speak to he , knit he brows with a apparent ferocity of anger which he countenance frequently express without any intention of ferocity on he part . he be annoyed , but be not savagely dispose to . as he look at she , however , he seem to be very savagely dispose . " what be it you would have I do ? " he say . " I would have you choose some occupation , . " " what occupation ? what be it that you mean ? ought I to be a shoemaker ? " " not that by preference , I should say ; but that if you please . " when she lover have frown at she , have resolve , -- have strongly determined , with inward assertion of she own rights , -- that she would not be frightene by he . " you be talk nonsense , . you know that I can not be a shoemaker . " " you may go into parliament . " " I neither can , nor would I if I could . I dislike the life . " " you might farm . " " I can not afford it . " " you might , -- might do anything . you ought to do something . you know that you ought . you know that you father be right in what he say . " " that be easily assert , ; but it would , I think , be better that you should take my part than my father 's , if it be that you intend to be my wife . " " you know that I intend to be you wife ; but would you wish that I should respect my husband ? " " and will you not do so if you marry I ? " he ask . then look into he face and see that the frown be blacker than ever . the great mark down he forehead be deeper and more like a ugly wound than she have ever see it ; and he eye sparkle with anger ; and he face be red as with fiery wrath . if it be so with he when she be no more than engage to he , how would it be when they should be man and wife ? at any rate , she would not fear he , -- not now at least . " no , , " she say . " if you resolve upon be a idle man , I shall not respect you . it be better that I should tell you the truth . " " a great deal better , " he say . " how can I respect one whose whole life will be , -- will be --? " " will be what ? " he demand with a loud shout . " Oswald , you be very rough with I . " " what do you say that my life will be ? " then she again resolve that she would not fear he . " it will be discreditable , " she say . " it shall not discredit you , " he reply . " I will not bring disgrace on one I have love so well . Violet , after what you have say , we have better part . " she be still proud , still determine , and they do part . though it nearly break she heart to see he leave she , she bid he go . she hate herself afterwards for she severity to he ; but , nevertheless , she would not submit to recall the word which she have speak . she have think he to be wrong , and , so think , have conceive it to be she duty and she privilege to tell he what she think . but she have no wish to lose he ; -- no wish not to be he wife even , though he should be as idle as the wind . she be so constitute that she have never allow he or any other man to be master of she heart , -- till she have with a full purpose give she heart away . the day before she have resolve to give it to one man , she might , I think , have resolve to give it to another . love have not conquer she , but have be take into she service . nevertheless , she could not now ry herself of she servant , when she find that he service would stand she no longer in good stead . she part from with a assent , with a assure brow , and with much dignity in she gait ; but as soon as she be alone she be a prey to remorse . she have declare to the man who be to have be she husband that he life be discreditable , -- and , of course , no man would bear such language . have borne it , he would not have be worthy of she love . she herself tell and what have occur , -- and have tell also . lady Baldock have , of course ,
, triumph , -- and seek she revenge by swear that she would regret for ever the loss of so inestimable a gentleman . " then why have you give he up , my dear ? " demand . " because I find that he be too good for I , " say . it may be doubtful whether be not justifi , when she declare that she niece be to she a care so harasse that no aunt know in history have ever be so trouble before . have fuss and fume , and have certainly make thing worse . he have quarrell with he son , and then make it up , and then quarrell again , -- swear that the fault must all be attribute to 's stubbornness and 's temper . Latterly , however , by 's intervention , and he son have again be reconcile , and the endeavoure manfully to keep he tongue from disagreeable word , and he face from evil look , when he son be present . " they will make it up , " have say , " if you and I do not attempt to make it up for they . if we do , they will never come together . " the be convince , and do he best . but the task be very difficult to he . how be he to keep he tongue off he son while he son be daily say thing of which any father , -- any such father as , -- could not but disapprove ? profess to disbelieve even in the wisdom of the house of Lords , and on one occasion assert that it must be a great comfort to any to have three or four old woman in the cabinet . the father , when he hear this , try to rebuke he son tenderly , strove even to be jocose . it be the one wish of he heart that should be he daughter - in - law . but even with this wish he find it very hard to keep he tongue off . when discuss the matter with , would always declare that there be no hope . " the truth be , " she say on the morning of that day on which they both go to 's , " that though we like each other , -- love each other , if you choose to say so , -- we be not fit to be man and wife . " " and why not fit ? " " we be too much alike . each be too violent , too headstrong , and too masterful . " " you , as the woman , ink to give way , " say . " but we do not always do just what we ought . " " I know how difficult it be for I to advise , see to what a pass I have bring myself . " " do not say that , dear ; -- or rather do say it , for we have , both of we , bring ourselves to what you call a pass , -- to such a pass that we be like to be able to live together and discuss it for the rest of we life . the difference be , I take it , that you have not to accuse yourself , and that I have . " " I can not say that I have not to accuse myself , " say . " I do not know that I have do much wrong to since I marry he ; but in marry he I do he a grievous wrong . " " and he have avenge himself . " " we will not talk of vengeance . I believe he be wretch , and I know that I be ; -- and that have come of the wrong that I have do . " " I will make no man wretch , " say . " do you mean that you mind be make up against ? " " I mean that , and I mean much more . I say that I will make no man wretch . you brother be not the only man who be so weak as to be willing to run the hazard . " " there be . " " yes , there be , certainly . perhaps I should not do he much harm ; but then I should do he no good . " " and poor . " " yes ; -- there be . I will tell you something , . the only man I ever see in the world whom I have think for a moment that it be possible that I should like , -- like enough to love as my husband ,-- except you brother , be . " " and now ? " " oh ;-- now ; of course that be over , " say . " it be over ? " " quite over . be he not go to marry ? I suppose all that be fix by this time . I hope she will be good to he , and gracious , and let he have he own way , and give he he tea comfortably when he come up tired from the house ; for I confess that my heart be a little tender towards still . I should not like to think that he have fall into the hand of a female . " " I do not think he will marry . " " why not ? " " I can hardly tell you ; -- but I do not think he will . and you love he once , -- eh , ? " " not quite that , my dear . it have be difficult with I to love .
. the difficulty with most girl , I fancy , be not to love . , when I come to measure he in my mind , be not small , but he be never quite tall enough . one feel oneself to be a sort of recruiting sergeant , go about with a standard of inch . be just half a inch too short . he lack something in individuality . he be a little too much a friend to everybody . " " shall I tell you a secret , ? " " if you please , dear ; though I fancy it be one I know already . " " he be the only man whom I ever love , " say . " but it be too late when you learn to love he , " say . " it be too late , when I be so sure of it as to wish that I have never see . I feel it come on I , and I argue with myself that such a marriage would be bad for we both . at that moment there be trouble in the family , and I have not a shilling of my own . " " you have pay it for . " " at any rate , I have nothing ; -- and he have nothing . how could I have da to think even of such a marriage ? " " do he think of it , ? " " I suppose he do . " " you know he do . do you not tell I before ? " " well ; -- yes . he think of it . I have come to some foolish , half - sentimental resolution as to friendship , believe that he and I could be knit together by some adhesion of fraternal affection that should be void of offence to my husband ; and in furtherance of this he be ask to Loughlinter when I go there , just after I have accept . he come down , and I measure he too , as you have do . I measure he , and I find that he want nothing to come up to the height require by my standard . I think I know he better than you do . " " very possibly ; -- but why measure he at all , when such measurement be useless ? " " can one help such thing ? he come to I one day as I be sit up by the Linter . you remember the place , where it make it be first leap . " " I remember it very well . " " so do I . have show it I as the fairest spot in all . " " and there this lover of ours sang he song to you ? " " I do not know what he tell I then ; but I know that I tell he that I be engage ; and I feel when I tell he so that my engagement be a sorrow to I . and it have be a sorrow from that day to this . " " and the hero , , -- he be still dear to you ? " " dear to I ? " " yes . you would have hate I , have he become my husband ? and you will hate when she become he wife ? " " not in the least . I be no dog in the manger . I have even go so far as almost to wish , at certain moment , that you should accept he . " " and why ? " " because he have wish it so heartily . " " one can hardly forgive a man for such speedy change , " say . " be I not to forgive he ;-- I , who have turn myself away from he with a fix purpose the moment that I find that he have make a mark upon my heart ? I could not wipe off the mark , and yet I marry . be he not to try to wipe off he mark ? " " it seem that he wip it off very quickly ; -- and since that he have wip off another mark . one do not know how many mark he have wip off . they be like the inn -keeper 's score which he make in chalk . a damp cloth bring they all away , and leave nothing behind . " " what would you have ? " " there should be a little notch on the stick , -- to remember by , " say . " not that I complain , you know . I can not complain , as I be not notche myself . " " you be silly , . " " in not have allow myself to be notche by this great champion ? " " a man like have he life to deal with , -- to make the most of it , and to divide it between work , pleasure , duty , ambition , and the rest of it as best he may . if he have any softness of heart , it will be necessary to he that love should bear a part in all these interest . but a man will be a fool who will allow love to be the master of they all . he will be one whose mind be so ill - balance as to allow he to be the victim of a single wish . even in a woman passion such as that be evidence of weakness , and not of strength . " " it seem , then , , that you be weak . " " and if I be , do that condemn he ? he
he be a man , if I judge he rightly , who will be constant as the sun , when constancy can be of service . " " you mean that the future Mrs . will be secure ? " " that be what I mean ; -- and that you or I , have either of we chosen to take he name , might have be quite secure . we have think it right to refuse to do so . " " and how many more , I wonder ? " " you be unjust , and unkind , . so unjust and unkind that it be clear to I he have just gratify you vanity , and have never touch you heart . what would you have have he do , when I tell he that I be engage ? " " I suppose that would not have go to with he . " " ! " " that seem to be the proper thing to do . but even that do not adjust thing finally ; -- do it ? " then some one come upon they , and the conversation be bring to a end . 's Generosity when leave 's house he have quite resolve what he would do . on the next morning he would tell Cantrip that he resignation be a necessity , and that he would take that nobleman 's advice as to resign at once , or wait till the day on which 's would be read for the second time . " my dear Finn , I can only say that I deeply regret it , " say . " so do I . I regret to leave office , which I like , -- and which indeed I want . I regret specially to leave this office , as it have be a thorough pleasure to I ; and I regret , above all , to leave you . but I be convince that be right , and I find it impossible not to support he . " " I wish that be at , " say . Phineas could only smile , and shrug he shoulders , and say that even though be at it would not probably make much difference . when he tender he letter of resignation , beg he to withdraw it for a day or two . he would , he say , speak to . the debate on the second reading of 's bill would not take place till that day week , and the resignation would be in time if it be tender before Phineas either speak or vote against the government . so go back to he room , and endeavoure to make himself useful in some work appertain to he favourite Colony . that conversation have take place on a , and on the follow , early in the day , he leave he room after a late breakfast , -- a prolonge breakfast , during which he have be study tenant - right statistic , prepare he own speech , and endeavour to look forward into the future which that speech be to do so much to influence , -- and turn he face towards . there have be a certain understanding between he and that he be to call in on this morning , and then declare to she what be he final resolve as to the office which he hold . " it be simply to bid she adieu , " he say to himself , " for I shall hardly see she again . " and yet , as he take off he morning easy coat , and dress himself for the street , and stand for a moment before he look - glass , and see that he glove be fresh and that he boot be properly polish , I think there be a care about he person which he would have hardly take have he be quite assure that he simply intend to say good - bye to the lady whom he be about to visit . but if there be any such conscious feeling , he administer to himself a antidote before he leave the house . on return to the sitting - room he go to a little desk from which he take out the letter from which the reader have see , and carefully peruse every word of it . " she be the best of they all , " he say to himself , as he refold the letter and put it back into he desk . I be not sure that it be well that a man should have any large number from whom to select a best ; as , in such circumstance , he be so very apt to change he judgment from hour to hour . the quality which be the most attractive before dinner sometimes become the least so in the evening . the morning be warm , and he take a cab . it would not do that he should speak even he last farewell to such a one as with all the heat and dust of a long walk upon he . have be so careful about he boot and glove he might as well use he care to the end . be a very pretty woman , who spa herself no trouble in make herself as pretty as would allow , on behalf of those whom she favour with she smile ; and to such a lady some special attention be due by one who have receive so many of she smile as have Phineas . and he feel , too , that there be something special in this very visit . it be to be make by appointment , and there have come to be a understanding between they that should tell she on this occasion what be he resolution with reference
reference to he future life . I think that he have be very wise in fortify himself with a further glance at we dear 's letter , before he trust himself within 's door . yes ;-- be at home . the door be open by 's own maid , who , smile , explain that the other servants be all at church . Phineas have become sufficiently intimate at the cottage in to be on friendly term with 's own maid , and now make some little half - familiar remark as to the propriety of he visit during church time . " Madame will not refuse to see you , I be think , " say the girl , who be a German . " and she be alone ? " ask . " ? yes ; -- of course she be alone . who should be with she now ? " then she take he up into the drawing - room ; but , when there , he find that be absent . " she shall be down directly , " say the girl . " I shall tell she who be here , and she will come . " it be a very pretty room . it may almost be say that there could be no prettier room in all . it look out across certain small private garden , -- which be as bright and gay as money could make they when bring into competition with smoke , -- right on to the park . outside and inside the window , flower and green thing be so arrange that the room itself almost look as though it be a bower in a garden . and everything in that bower be rich and rare ; and there be nothing there which annoye by its rarity or be distasteful by its richness . the seat , though they be costly as money could buy , be mean for sitting , and be comfortable as seat . there be book for reading , and the means of read they . two or three gem of English art be hang upon the wall , and could be see backwards and forwards in the mirror . and there be precious toy lie here and there about the room , -- toy very precious , but place there not because of they price , but because of they beauty . Phineas already know enough of the art of live to be aware that the woman who have make that room what it be , have charms to add a beauty to everything she touch . what would such a life as he want , if grac by such a companion , -- such a life as he might be , if the means which be hers be at he command ? it would want one thing , he think , -- the self - respect which he would lose if he be false to the girl who be trust he with such sweet trust at home in . in a very few minute be with he , and , though he do not think about it , he perceive that she be bright in she apparel , that she hair be as soft as care could make it , and that every charm belong to she have be bring into use for he gratification . he almost tell himself that he be there in order that he might ask to have all those charms bestow upon himself . he do not know who have lately come to and be a suppliant for the possession of those rich endowment ; but I wonder whether they would have be more precious in he eye have he know that they have so move the heart of the great as to have induce he to lay he coronet at the lady 's foot . I think that have he know that the lady have refuse the coronet , that knowledge would have enhance the value of the prize . " I be so sorry to have keep you wait , " she say , as she give he she hand . " I be a owl not to be ready for you when you tell I that you would come . " " no ; -- but a bird of paradise to come to I so sweetly , and at a hour when all the other bird refuse to show the feather of a single wing . " " and you , -- you feel like a naughty boy , do you not , in thus come out on a morning ? " " do you feel like a naughty girl ? " " yes ; -- just a little so . I do not know that I should care for everybody to hear that I receive visitor , -- or worse still , a visitor , -- at this hour on this day . but then it be so pleasant to feel oneself to be naughty ! there be a Bohemian flavour of picnic about it which , though it do not come up to the rich gusto of real wickedness , make one fancy that one be on the border of that delightful region in which there be none of the constraint of custom ,-- where man and woman say what they like , and do what they like . " " it be pleasant enough to be on the border , " say . " that be just it . of course decency , morality , and propriety , all make to suit the eye of the public , be the thing which be really delightful . we all know that , and live accordingly , -- as well as we can . I do at least . " " and do not I , ? " " I know nothing about that
that , , and want to ask no question . but if you do , I be sure you agree with I that you often envy the improper people , -- the , -- the people who do not trouble themselves about keep any law except those for breaking which they would be put into nasty , unpleasant prison . I envy they . oh , how I envy they ! " " but you be free as air . " " the most cabin , crib , and confin creature in the world ! I have be fight my way up for the last four year , and have not allow myself the liberty of one flirtation ;-- not often even the recreation of a natural laugh . and now I should not wonder if I do not find myself fall back a year or two , just because I have allow you to come and see I on a morning . when I tell Lotta that you be come , she shook she head at I in dismay . but now that you be here , tell I what you have do . " " nothing as yet , . " " I think it be to have be settle on ? " " it be settled , -- before . indeed , as I look back at it all now , I can hardly tell when it be not settle . it be impossible , and have be impossible , that I should do otherwise . I still hold my place , , but I have declare that I shall give it up before the debate come on . " " it be quite fix ? " " quite fix , my friend . " " and what next ? " , as she thus interrogate he , be lean across towards he from the sofa on which she be place , with both she elbow rest on a small table before she . we all know that look of true interest which the countenance of a real friend will bear when the welfare of he friend be in question . there be doubtless some who can assume it without feeling , -- as there be actor who can personate all the passion . but in ordinary life we think that we can trust such a face , and that we know the true look when we see it . Phinea , as he gaze into 's eye , be sure that the lady opposite he be not ac . she at least be anxious for he welfare , and be make he care she own . " what next ? " say she , repeat she word in a tone that be somewhat hurrie . " I do not know that there will be any next . as far as public life be concerned , there will be no next for I , . " " that be out of the question , " she say . " you be make for public life . " " then I shall be untrue to my making , I fear . but to speak plainly -- " " yes ; speak plainly . I want to understand the reality . " " the reality be this . I shall keep my seat to the end of the session , as I think I may be of use . after that I shall give it up . " " Resign that too ? " she say in a tone of chagrin . " the chance be , I think , that there will be another dissolution . if they hold they own against 's motion , then they will pass a irish . after that I think they must dissolve . " " and you will not come forward again ? " " I can not afford it . " " ! some five hundred pound or so ! " " and , besides that , I be well aware that my only chance at my old profession be to give up all idea of parliament . the two thing be not compatible for a beginner at the law . I know it now , and have buy my knowledge by a bitter experience . " " and where will you live ? " " in , probably . " " and you will do , -- will do what ? " " anything honest in a barrister 's way that may be bring to I . I hope that I may never descmend below that . " " you will stand up for all the blackguard , and try to make out that the thief do not steal ? " " it may be that that sort of work may come in my way . " " and you will wear a wig and try to look wise ? " " the wig be not universal in , . " " and you will wrangle , as though you very soul be in it , for somebody be twenty pound ? " " exactly . " " you have already make a name in the greatest senate in the world , and have govern other country larger than you own -- " " no ;-- I have not do that . I have govern no country . " I tell you , my friend , that you can not do it . it be out of the question . may move forward from little work to big work ; but they can not move back and do little work , when they have have tasnks which be really great . I tell you , , that the house of parliament be the place for you to work in . it be the only place ; -- that and the abode of . be not I you friend who tell
tell you this ? " " I know that you be my friend . " " and will you not credit I when I tell you this ? what do you fear , that you should run away ? you have no wife ; -- no child . what be the come misfortune that you dread ? " she pause a moment as though for a answer , and he feel that now have come the time in which it would be well that he should tell she of he engagement with he own Mary . she have receive he very playfully ; but now within the last few minute there have come upon she a seriousness of gesture , and almost a solemnity of tone , which make he conscious that he should in no way trifle with she . she be so earnest in she friendship that he owe it to she to tell she everything . but before he could think of the word in which he tale should be tell , she have go on with she quick question . " be it solely about money that you fear ? " she say . " it be simply that I have no income on which to live . " " have I not offer you money ? " " but , , you who offer it would yourself despise I if I take it . " " no ;-- I do deny it . " as she say this , -- not loudly but with much emphasis , -- she come and stand before he where he be sitte . and as he look at she he could perceive that there be a strength about she of which he have not be aware . she be stronger , larger , more robust physically than he have hithertoo conceive . " I do deny it , " she say . " money be neither nor , that it should make one noble and another vile . it be a accident , and , if honestly possess , may pass from you to I , or from I to you , without a stain . you may take my dinner from I if I give it you , my flower , my friendship , my ,--my ,--my everything , but my money ! explain to I the cause of the phenomenon . if I give to you a thousand pound , now this moment , and you take it , you be base ; -- but if I leave it you in my will , -- and die , -- you take it , and be not base . explain to I the cause of that . " " you have not say it quite all , " say hoarsely . " what have I leave unsaid ? if I have leave anything unsaid , do you say the rest . " " it be because you be a woman , and young , and beautiful , that no man may take wealth from you hand . " " oh , it be that ! " " it be that partly , " " if I be a man you might take it , though I be young and beautiful as the morning ? " " no ;-- present of money be always bad . they stain and load the spirit , and break the heart . " " and specially when give by a woman 's hand ? " " it seem so to I . but I can not argue of it . do not let we talk of it any more . " " can I argue . I can not argue , but I can be generous ,-- very generous . I can deny myself for my friend , -- can even lower myself in my own esteem for my friend . I can do more than a man can do for a friend . you will not take money from my hand ? " " no , ; -- I can not do that . " " take the hand then first . when it and all that it hold be you own , you can help yourself as you list . " so say , she stand before he with she right hand stretch out towards he . what man will say that he would not have be temp ? or what woman will declare that such temptation should have have no force ? the very air of the room in which she dwelt be sweet in he nostril , and there hover around she a halo of grace and beauty which greet all he sense . she invite he to join he lot to hers , in order that she might give to he all that be need to make he life rich and glorious . how would the Ratler and the envy he when they hear of the prize which have become he ! the Cantrip and the Gresham would feel that he be a friend doubly valuable , if he could be win back ; and would greet he as a fitting ally , -- a ally strong with the strength which he have before want . with whom would he not be equal ? whom need he fear ? who would not praise he ? the story of he poor mary would be know only in a small village , out beyond the channel . the temptation certainly be very strong . but he have not a moment in which to doubt . she be stand there with she face turn from he , but with she hand still stretch towards he . of course he take it . what man so place could do other than take a woman 's hand ? " my friend , " he say . " I will be call friend by you
you no more , " she say . " you must call I , you own , or you must never call I by any name again . which shall it be , sir ? " he pause a moment , hold she hand , and she let it lie there for a instant while she listen . but still she do not look at he . " speak to I ! tell I ! which shall it be ? " still he pause . " speak to I . tell I ! " she say again . " it can not be as you have hint to I , " he say at last . he word do not come louder than a low whisper ; but they be plainly hear , and instantly the hand be withdraw . " can not be ! " she exclaim . " then I have betraye myself . " " no ;-- . " " Sir ; I say yes ! if you will allow I I will leave you . you will , I know , excuse I if I be abrupt to you . " then she strode out of the room , and be no more seen of the eyes of . he never afterwards know how he escape out of that room and find he way into . in after day he have some memory that he remain there , he know not how long , stand on the very spot on which she have leave he ; and that at last there grow upon he almost a fear of moving , a dread lest he should be hear , a inordinate desire to escape without the sound of a footfall , without the clicking of a lock . everything in that house have be offer to he . he have refuse it all , and then feel that of all human being under the sun none have so little right to be stand there as he . he very presence in that draw - room be a insult to the woman whom he have drive from it . but at length he be in the street , and have find he way across into the . then , as soon as he could find a spot apart from the world , he throw himself upon the turf ; and try to fix he thought upon the thing that he have do . he first feel , I think , be one of pure and unmixed disappointment ; -- of disappointment so bitter , that even the vision of he own do not tend to comfort he . how great might have be he success , and how terrible be he failure ! have he take the woman 's hand and she money , have he clench he grasp on the great prize offer to he , he misery would have be ten time worse the first moment that he would have be away from she . then , indeed , -- it be so that he be a man with a heart within he breast , -- there would have be no comfort for he , in he outlook on any side . but even now , when he have do right ,-- know well that he have do right , -- he find that comfort do not come readily within he reach . 's life at this time be not the happiest in the world . she line , as she once say to she friend , be not laid for she in pleasant place . she residence be still with she aunt , and she have come to find that it be almost impossible any longer to endure , and quite impossible to escape from . in former day she have have a dream that she might escape , and live alone if she choose to be alone ; that she might be independent in she life , as a man be independent , if she choose to live after that fashion ; that she might take she own fortune in she own hand , as the law certainly allow she to do , and act with it as she might please . but latterly she have learn to understand that all this be not possible for she . though one law allow it , another law disallow it , and the latter law be at least as powerful as the former . and then she present misery be enhance by the fact that she be now banish from the second home which she have formerly possess . she have always be able to escape from to the house of she friend , but now such escape be out of the question . and live in the same house , and could not live with they . understand all this , and torture she niece accordingly . it be not premeditate torture . the aunt do not mean to make she niece 's life a burden to she , and , so intend , systematically work upon a principle to that effect . lady Baldock , no doubt , desire to do she duty conscientiously . but the result be torture to poor , and a strong conviction on the mind of each of the two lady that the other be the most unreasonable be in the world . the aunt , in these day , have take it into she head to talk of poor . this arise partly from a belief that the quarrel be final , and that , therefore , there would be no danger in aggravate by this expression of pity , -- partly from a feeling that it would be better that she niece should marry than that she should not marry at all , -- and partly , perhaps , from the general principle that , as she think
think it right to scold she niece on all occasion , this might be best do by take a opposite view of all question to that take by the niece to be scold . be suppose to regard as have sinn against she , and therefore talk of " poor . " as to the other lover , she have begin to perceive that they condition be hopeless . she daughter have explain to she that there be no chance remain either for , or for , or for . " I believe she will be a old maid , on purpose to bring I to my grave , " say . when , therefore , be tell one day that be in the house , and be ask to see , she do not at once faint away , and declare that they would all be murder , -- as she would have do some month since . she be perplex by a double duty . if it be possible that should relent and be reconcile , then it would be she duty to save from the claw of the wild beast . but if there be no such chance , then it would be she duty to poor to see that he be not treat with contumely and ill - humour . " do she know that he be here ? " ask she daughter . " not yet , . " " oh dear , oh dear ! I suppose she ought to see he . she have give he so much encouragement ! " " I suppose she will do as she pleasis , . " " , how can you talk in that way ? be I to have no control in my own house ? " it be , however , soon apparent to she that in this matter she be to have no control . " be down - stair , " say , come into the room abruptly . " so tell I . sit down , my dear . " " I can not sit down , aunt , -- not just now . I have send down to say that I would be with he in a minute . he be the most impatient soul alive , and I must not keep he waiting . " " and you mean to see he ? " " certainly I shall see he , " say , as she leave the room . " I wonder that any woman should ever take upon herself the charge of a niece ! " say to she daughter in a despondent tone , as she hold up she hand in dismay . in the meantime , have go down - stair with a quick step , and have then boldly enter the room in which she lover be wait to receive she . " I have to thank you for come to I , , " say . there be still in he face something of savagery , -- a expression partly of anger and partly of resolution to tame the thing with which he be angry . Violet do not regard the anger half so keenly as she do that resolution of taming . a angry lord , she think , she could endure , but she could not bear the idea of be tame by any one . " why should I not come ? " she say . " of course I come when I be tell that you be here . I do not think that there need be a quarrel between we , because we have change we mind . " " such change make quarrel , " say he . " it shall not do so with I , unless you choose that it shall , " say . " why should we be enemie , -- we who have know each other since we be child ? my dearest friend be you father and you sister . why should we be enemy ? " " I have come to ask you whether you think that I have ill - use you ? " " - use I ! certainly not . have any one tell you that I have accuse you ? " " no one have tell I so . " " then why do you ask I ? " " because I would not have you think so , -- if I could help it . I do not intend to be rough with you . when you tell I that my life be disreputable -- " " oh , , do not let we go back to that . what good will it do ? " " but you say so . " " I think not . " " I believe that that be you word , -- the harshest word that you could use in all the language . " " I do not mean to be harsh . if I use it , I will beg you pardon . only let there be a end of it . as we think so differently about life in general , it be better that we should not be marry . but that be settled , and why should we go back to word that be speak in haste , and which be simply disagreeable ? " " I have come to know whether it be settled . " " certainly . you settle it yourself , . I tell you what I think myself bound to tell you . perhaps I use language which I should not have use . then you tell I that I could not be you wife ; -- and I think you be right , quite right . " " I be wrong , quite wrong , " he say impetuously . " so wrong , that I can never
never forgive myself , if you do not relent . I be such a fool , that I can not forgive myself my folly . I have know before that I could not live without you ; and when you be mine , I throw you away for a angry word . " " it be not a angry word , " she say . " say it again , and let I have another chance to answer it . " " I think I say that idleness be not ,-- respectable , or something like that , take out of a copy - book probably . but you be a man who do not like rebuke , even out of copy - book . a man so thin - skinn as you be must choose for himself a wife with a softer tongue than mine . " " I will choose none other ! " he say . but still he be savage in he tone and in he gesture . " I make my choice long since , as you know well enough . I do not change easily . I can not change in this . Violet , say that you will be my wife once more , and I will swear to work for you like a coal - heaver . " " my wish be that my husband ,-- should I ever have one , -- should work , not exactly as a coal - heaver . " " come , , " he say , -- and now the look of savagery depart from he , and there come a smile over he face , which , however , have in it more of sadness than of hope or joy , -- " treat I fairly , -- or rather , treat I generously if you can . I do not know whether you ever love I much . " " very much , -- year ago , when you be a boy . " " but not since ? if it be so , I have better go . love on one side only be a poor affair at best . " " a very poor affair . " " it be better to bear anything than to try and make out life with that . some of you woman never want to love any one . " " that be what I be say of myself to but the other day . with some woman it be so easy . with other it be so difficult , that perhaps it never come to they . " " and with you ? " " oh , with I -- . but it be better in these matter to confine oneself to generality . if you please , I will not describe myself personally . be I to do so , doubtless I should do it falsely . " " you love no one else , ? " " that be my affair , my lord . " " by heaven , and it be mine too . tell I that you do , and I will go away and leave you at once . I will not ask he name , and I will trouble you no more . if it be not so , and if it be possible that you should forgive I -- " " forgive you ! when have I be angry with you ? " " answer I my question , . " " I will not answer you you question , -- not that one . " " what question will you answer ? " " any that may concern yourself and myself . none that may concern other people . " " you tell I once that you love I . " " this moment I tell you that I do so , -- year ago . " " but now ? " " that be another matter . " " , do you love I now ? " " that be a point - blank question at any rate , " she say . " and you will answer it ? " " I must answer it ,-- I suppose . " " well , then ? " " oh , , what a fool you be ! love you ! of course I love you . if you can understand anything , you ought to know that I have never love any one else ; -- that after what have pass between we , I never shall love any one else . I do love you . there . whether you throw I away from you , as you do the other day , -- with great scorn , mind you , -- or come to I with sweet , beautiful promise , as you do now , I shall love you all the same . I can not be you wife , if you will not have I ; can I ? when you run away in you tantrum because I quote something out of the copy - book , I can not run after you . it would not be pretty . but as for love you , if you doubt that , I tell you , you be a -- fool . " as she speak the last word she poute out she lip at he , and when he look into she face he see that she eye be full of tear . he be stand now with he arm round she waist , so that it be not easy for he to look into she face . " I be a fool , " he say . " yes ; -- you be ; but I do not love you the less on that account . " " I will never doubt it again . " " no ; --
-- do not ; and , for I , I will not say another word , whether you choose to heave coals or not . you shall do as you please . I mean to be very wise ; -- I do indeed . " " you be the grandest girl that ever be make . " " I do not want to be grand at all , and I never will be wise any more . only do not fry at I and look savage . " then she put up she hand to smooth he brow . " I be half afraid of you still , you know . there . that will do . now let I go , that I may tell my aunt . during the last two month she have be full of pity for poor . " " it have be poor with a vengeance ! " say he . " but now that we have make it up , she will be horrify again at all you wickedness . you have be a turtle dove lately ; -- now you will be a ogre again . but , , you must not be a ogre to I . " as soon as she could get quit of she lover , she do tell she tale to . " you have accept he again ! " say she aunt , hold up she hand . " yes , -- I have accept he again , " reply . " then the responsibility must be on you own shoulder , " say she aunt ; " I wash my hand of it . " that evening , when she discuss the matter with she daughter , spoke of and , as though they intend marriage be the one thing in the world which she must deplor . the beginning of the the day of the debate have come , and be still sit in he room at the . but he resignation have be send in and accept , and he be simply await the coming of he successor . about noon he successor come , and he have the gratification of resigning he arm -chair to . it be generally understand that gentleman leave office give up either seal or a portfolio . Phineas have be put in possession of no seal and no portfolio ; but there be in the room which he have occupy a special arm -chair , and this with much regret he surrendere to the use and comfort of . there be a glance of triumph in he enemy 's eye , and a exultation in the tone of he enemy 's voice , which be very bitter to he . " so you be really go ? " say . " well ; I dare say it be all very proper . I do not quite understand the thing myself , but I have no doubt you be right . " " it be not easy to understand ; be it ? " say , try to laugh . but do not feel the intend satire , and poor Phinea find it useless to attempt to punish the man he hate . he leave he as quickly as he could , and go to say a few word of farewell to he late chief . " good - bye , , " say . " it be a great trouble to I that we should have to part in this way . " " and to I also , my lord . I wish it could have be avoid . " " you should not have go to with so dangerous a man as . but it be too late to think of that now . " " the milk be spilt ; be it not ? " " but these terrible rending asunder never last very long , " say , " unless a man change he opinion altogether . how many quarrel and how many reconciliation we have liv to see ! I remember when go out of office , because he could not sit in the same room with , and yet they become the fastest of political friend . there be a time when and the could not stable they horse together at all ; and do not you remember when be oblige to give up he hope of office because he have some bee in he bonnet ? " I think , however , that the bee in 's bonnet to which be alluding make its buzzing audible on some subject that be not exactly political . " we shall have you back again before long , I do not doubt . who can really do they work be too rare to be leave long in the comfort of the benche below the gangway . " this be very kindly say , and be flatter and comforte . he could not , however , make understand the whole truth . for he the dream of a life of politics be over for ever . he have try it , and have succeed beyond he utmost hope ; but , in spite of he success , the ground have crumble to piece beneath he foot , and he know that he could never recover the niche in the world 's gallery which he be now leave . that same afternoon he meet in one of the passage lead to the house , and the put he arm through that of we hero as they walk together into the lobby . " I be sorry that we be lose you , " say . " you may be sure that I be sorry to be so lost , " say . " these thing will occur in political life , " say the leader ; " but I think that they seldom leave rancour behind
behind they when the purpose be declare , and when the subject of disagreement be mark and understand . the defalcation which create angry feeling be that which have to be endure without previous warning , -- when a man vote against he party , -- or a set of man , from private pique or from some cause which be never clear . " Phineas , when he hear this , know well how terribly this very man have be harass , and drive nearly wild , by defalcation , exactly of that nature which he be attempt to describe . " no doubt you and think you be right , " continue . " we have give strong evidence that we think so , " say . " we give up we place , and we be , both of we , very poor man . " " I think you be wrong , you know , not so much in you view on the question itself -- which , to tell the truth , I hardly understand as yet . " " we will endeaavor to explain they . " " and will do so very clearly , no doubt . but I think that be wrong in desiring , as a member of a government , to force a measure which , whether good or bad , the government as a body do not desire to initiate , -- at any rate , just now . " " and therefore he resign , " say . " of course . but it seem to I that he fail to comprehend the only way in which a great party can act together , if it be to do any service in this country . do not for a moment think that I be blame he or you . " " I be nobody in this matter , " say . " I can assure you , , that we have not regard you in that light , and I hope that the time may come when we may be sit together again on the same bench . " neither on the Treasury bench nor on any other in that be he to sit again after this fashion ! that be the trouble which be crushe he spirit at this moment , and not the loss of he office ! he know that he could not venture to think of remain in as a member of parliament with no other income than that which he father could allow he , even if he could again secure a seat in parliament . when he have first be return for he have assure he friend that he duty as a member of the of would not be a bar to he practice in the court . he have now be five year a member , and have never once make a attempt at do any part of a barrister 's work . he have go altogether into a different line of life , and have be most successful ;-- so successful that man tell he , and woman more frequently than man , that he career have be a miracle of success . but there have been , as he have well know from the first , this drawback in the new profession which he have choose , that nothing in it could be permanent . they who succeed in it , may probably succeed again ; but then the success be intermittent , and there may be year of hard work in opposition , to which , unfortunately , no pay be assign . it be almost imperative , as he now find , that they who devote themselves to such a profession should be man of fortune . when he have commence he work , -- at the period of he first return for , -- he have have no thought of mende he deficiency in this respect by a rich marriage . have it ever occur to he that he would seek a marriage for that purpose . such a idea would have be thoroughly distasteful to he . there have be no stain of premeditated mercenary arrangement upon he at any time . but circumstance have so fall out with he , that as he win he spur in parliament , as he become known , and be place first in one office and then in another , prospects of love and money together be open to he , and he venture on , leave and the law behind he , -- because these prospects be so alluring . then have come and , -- and everything around he have collapse . everything around he have collapse , -- with , however , a terrible temptation to he to inflate he sails again , at the cost of he truth and he honour . the temptation would have affect he not at all , have be ugly , stupid , or personally disagreeable . but she be , he think , the most beautiful woman he have ever see , the most witty , and in many respects the most charme . she have offer to give he everything that she have , so to place he in the world that opposition would be more pleasant to he than office , to supply every want , and have do so in a manner that have gratify all he vanity . but he have refuse it all , because he be bound to the girl at . my reader will probably say that he be not a true man unless he could do this without a regret . when think of it all , there be many regret . but there be at the same time a resolve on he part , that if any man have ever love the girl he promise to love , he would
would love . a thousand time he have tell himself that she have not the spirit of , or the bright wit of , or the beauty of . but have charms of she own that be more valuable than they all . be there one among the three who have trust he as she trust he , -- or love he with the same satisfied devotion ? there be regret , regret that be heavy on he heart ;-- for , and parliament , and the club , and , have become dear to he . he like to think of himself as he ride in the park , and be greet by all those whose greeting be the most worth having . there be regret , -- sad regret . but the girl whom he love better than the park and the club , -- better even than and , should never know that they have exist . these thought be run through he mind even while he be listen to , as he propound he theory of do justice to . this might probably be the last great debate in which would be able to take a part , and he be determine that he would do he best in it . he do not intend to speak on this day , if , as be generally suppose , the would be adjourn before a division could be obtain . but he would remain on the alert and see how the thing go . he have come to understand the form of the place , and be as well - train a young member of parliament as any there . he have be quick at learn a lesson that be not easily learn , and know how thing be go , and what be the proper moment for this question or that form of motion . he could anticipate a count - out , understand the tone of man 's mind , and could read the gesture of the house . it be very little likely that the debate should be over to - night . he know that ; and as the present time be the evening of , he resolve at once that he would speak as early as he could on the follow . what a pity it be , that with one who have learn so much , all he learning should be in vain ! at about two o'clock , he himself succeed in move the adjournment of the debate . this he do from a seat below the gangway , to which he have remove himself from the bench . then the be up , and he walk home with . , since he have be tell positively by that he have resolve upon resign he office , have say nothing more of he sorrow at he friend 's resolve , but have use he as one political friend use another , tell he all he thought and all he hope as to this new measure of he , and take counsel with he as to the way in which the fight should be fight . together they have count over the list of member , mark these man as supporter , those as opponent , and another set , now more important than either , as be doubtful . from day to day those who have be write down as doubtful be struck off that third list , and put in either the one or the other of those who be either supporter or opponent . and they different mode of argument be settle between these two ally orator , how one should take this line and the other that . to this be very pleasant . he be quite assu now that opposition be more congenial to he spirit , and more fitting for he than office . there be no doubt to he as to he future sit in parliament , let the result of this contest be what it might . the work which he be now do , be the work for which he have be train himself all he life . while he have be force to attend cabinet Council from week to week , he have be depresse . now he be exultant . Phineas see and understand all this , say but little to he friend of he own prospect . as long as this pleasant battle be rage , he could fight in it shoulder to shoulder with the man he love . after that there would be a blank . " I do not see how we be to fail to have a majority after 's speech to - night , " say , as they walk together down through the bright moonlight . " he expressly say that he only speak for himself , " say . " but we know what that mean . he be bid for office , and of course those who want office with he will vote as he vote . we have already count those who would go into office , but they will not carry the whole party . " " it will carry enough of they . " " there be forty or fifty man on he side of the , and as many perhaps on ours , " say , " who have no idea of any kind on any bill , and who simply follow the bell , whether into this lobby or that . never touch they . they do not even look to the result of a division on they own interest , as the making of any calculation would be laborious to they . they party leader be to they a Pope whom they do not dream of doubt . I never can quite make up my mind whether it be good or bad that there should be
be such man in parliament . " " who think much want to speak often , " say . " exactly so , -- and of speak member , know that we have enough . and I suppose that these purblind sheep do have some occult weight that be salutary . they enable a leader to be a leader , and even in that way they be useful . we shall get a division on . " " I understand that have consent to that . " " so tell I . Palliser be to speak , and . and they say that be go to make a onslatch specially on I . we shall get it over by one o'clock . " " and if we beat they ? " ask . " it will depend on the number . everybody who have speak to I about it , seem to think that they will dissolve if there be a respectable majority against they . " " of course he will dissolve , " say , speak of ; " what else can he do ? " " he be very anxious to carry he irish Reform first , if he can do so . good -night , . I shall not be down to - morrow as there be nothing to be do . come to I on , and we will go to the together . " on the be engage to dine with . there be a dinner party in , and meet half - a - dozen barrister and they wife , --men to whom he have look up as successful pundit in the law some five or six year ago , but who since that time have almost learned to look up to he . and now they treat he with that courteousness of manner which success in life always beget . there be a judge there who be very civil to he ; and the judge 's wife whom he have take down to dinner be very gracious to he . the judge have get he prize in life , and be therefore personally indifferent to the fate of ministers ; but the judge 's wife have a brother who want a from , and it be know that be give valuable assistance towards the attainment of this object . " I do think that you and be so right , " say the judge 's wife . , who understand how it come to pass that the judge 's wife should so cordially approve he conduct , could not help think how grand a thing it would be for he to have a for himself . when the guest be go he be leave alone with and . , and remain awhile with they , there have be a understanding that they should have a last chat together over the affair of we hero . " do you really mean that you will not stand again ? " ask . " I do mean it . I may say that I can not do so . my father be hardly so well able to help I as he be when I begin this game , and I certainly shall not ask he for money to support a canvass . " " it be a thousand pity , " say . " I really have begin to think that you would make it answer , " say . " in one way I have make it answer . for the last three year I have liv upon what I have earn , and I be not in debt . but now I must begin the world again . I be afraid I shall find the drudgery very hard . " " it be hard no doubt , " say the barrister , who have go through it all , and be now reap the fruit of it . " but I suppose you have not forget what you learn ? " " who can say ? I dare say I have . but I do not mean the drudgery of learn , so much as the drudgery of look after work ; -- of expect briefs which perhaps will never come . I be thirty year old now , you know . " " be you indeed ? " say , -- who know he age to a day . " how the time pass . I be sure I hope you will get on , . I do indeed . " " I be sure he will , if he put he shoulder to it , " say . neither the lawyer nor he wife repeat any of those sententious admonition , which have almost become rebuke , and which have be so common in they mouth . the fall with which they have threaten have come upon he , and they be too generous to remind he of they wisdom and sagacity . indeed , when he get up to take he leave , . , who probably might not see he again for year , be quite affectionate in she manners to he , and look as if she be almost minded to kiss he as she press he hand . " we will come and see you , " she say , " when you be master of the roll in . " " we shall see he before then thunder at we poor Tory in the , " say . " he will be back again sooner or later . " and so they parte . . . . on the morning before go to , a gentleman call upon he at he lodging . request the servant to bring up the gentleman 's name , but temp perhaps by a shilling the girl bring up the gentleman instead . it be from the office of the " of
of the People . " " , " say , with he hand extend , " I have come to offer you the calumet of peace . " Phineas certainly desire no such calumet . but to refuse a man 's hand be to declare active war after a fashion which men do not like to adopt except on deliberation . he have never care a straw for the abuse which have pour upon he , and now he give he hand to the man of letter . but he do not sit down , nor do he offer a seat to . " I know that as a man of sense who know the world , you will accept the calumet of peace , " continue . " I do not know why I should be ask particularly to accept war or peace , " say . " well , ,-- I do not often quote the ; but those who be not for we must be against we . you will agree to that . now that you have free yourself from the iniquity of that sink of abomination in , I look upon you as a man again . " " upon my word you be very kind . " " as a man and also a brother . I suppose you know that I have get the _banner_ into my own ' and now . " be oblige to explain that he have not hitherto be make acquaint with this great literary and political secret . " oh dear , yes , altogether so . we have get rid of old as I use to call he . he would not go the pace , and so we stripp he . he be do the of Journal_ now , and he ' angs out down at . " " I hope he will succeed , . " " he will earn he wage . he be a man who will always earn he wage , but nothing more . well , now , , I will just offer you one word of apology for we little severity . " " pray do nothing of the kind . " " indeed I shall . Dooty be dooty . there be some thing print which be a little rough , but if one be not a little rough there be not no flavour . of course I write th'ey . you know my ' and , I dare say . " " I only remember that there be some throwing of mud . " " just so . but muld do not break any bone ; do it ? when you turn against we I have to be down on you , and I be down upon you ; -- that be just about all of it . now you be come among we again , and so I come to you with a calumet of peace . " " but I be not come among you . " " yes you be , , and bring Monk with you . " it be now become very disagreeable , and be begin to perceive that it would soon be he turn to say something rough . " now I will tell you what my proposition be . if you will do we two leader a week through the session , you shall have a cheque for L16 on the last day of every month . if that be not honester money than what you get in , my name be not . " " , " say , -- and then he pause . " if we be to come to business , drop the Mister . it make thing go so much easier . " " we be not to come to business , and I do not want thing to go easy . I believe you say some thing of I in you newspaper that be very scurrilous . " " what of that ? if you mind that sort of thing -- " " I do not regard it in the least . you be quite welcome to continue it . I do not doubt but you will continue it . but you be not welcome to come here afterwards . " " do you mean to turn I out ? " " just that . you print a heap of lie - - " " , ! do you say lie , sir ? " " I say lie ;-- lie ;-- lie ! " and walk over at he as though he be go to pitch he instantly out of the window . " you may go and write as many more as you like . it be you trade , and you must do it or starve . but do not come to I again . " then he open the door and stand with it in he hand . " very well , sir . I shall know how to punish this . " " exactly . but if you please you will go and do you punishment at the office of the _Banner _,-- unless you like to try it here . you want to kick I and spit at I , but you will prefer to do it in print . " " yes , sir , " say . " I shall prefer to do it in print , -- though I must own that the temptation to adopt the manual violence of a ruffian be great , very great , very great indeed . " but he resist the temptation and walk down the stair , concoct he article as he go . do not so much impede the business of he day but what be with by two , and in he place in the house when prayer be read at four . as he sit in
in he place , conscious of the work that be before he , listen to the presentation of petition , and to the formal reading of certain notice of motion , which with the asking of sundry question occupy over half a hour , he look back and remember accurately he own feeling on a certain night on which he have intend to get up and address the House . the ordeal before he have then be so terrible , that it have almost obliterated for the moment he sense of hearing and of sight . he have hardly be able to perceive what have be go on around he , and have vainly endeavoured to occupy himself in recall to he memory the word which he wish to pronounce . when the time for pronouncing they have come , he have find himself unable to stand upon he leg . he smile as he recal all this in he memory , wait impatiently for the moment in which he might rise . he audience be assure to he now , and he do not fear it . he opportunity for utterance be he own , and even the speaker could not deprive he of it . during these minute he think not at all of the word that he be to say . he have prepare he matter but have prepare no word . he know that word would come readily enough to he , and that he have learn the task of turn he thought quickly into language while stand with a crowd of listener around he , -- as a practise writer do when seate in he chair . there be no violent beat at he heart now , no dimness of the eyes , no feeling that the ground be turn round under he foot . if only those weary vain question would get themselves all ask , so that he might rise and begin the work of the night . then there come the last thought as the be hush for he rising . what be the good of it all , when he would never have a opportunity of speak there again ? but not on that account would he be slack in he endeavour now . he would be listen to once at least , not as a subaltern of the government but as the owner of a voice prominent in opposition to the government . he have be teach by that that be the one place in the house in which a man with a power of speak could really enjoy pleasure without alloy . he would make the trial , -- once , if never again . thing have so gone with he that the rostrum be he own , and a House cramm to overflow be there to listen to he . he have give up he place in order that he might be able to speak he mind , and have become aware that many intend to listen to he while he speak . he have observ that the row of strangers be thick in the galleries , that peer be stand in the passage , and that over the reporter 's head , the ribbon of many lady be to be see through the bar of they cage . yes ; -- for this once he would have a audience . he speak for about a hour , and while he be speak he know nothing about himself , whether he be do it well or ill . something of himself he do say soon after he have commence , -- not quite begin with it , as though he mind have be laden with the matter . he have , he say , find himself compelle to renounce he happy allegiance to the of the Treasury , and to quit the pleasant company in which , humble as have be he place , he have be allow to sit and act , by he unfortunate conviction in this great subject . he have be tell , he say , that it be a misfortune in itself for one so young as he to have conviction . but he irish birth and irish connection have bring this misfortune of he country so closely home to he that he have find the task of extricat himself from it to be impossible . of what further he say , speak on that terribly unintelligible subject , a tenant - right propose for irish farmer , no English reader will desire to know much . irish subject in the House of Commons be interesting or be dull , be debate before a crowded audience compose of all who be leader in the great world of , or before empty bench , in accordance with the importance of the moment and the character of the debate . for we now it be enough to know that to we hero be accord that attention which orators love , -- which will almost make a orator if it can be assure . a full House with a promise of big type on the next morning would wake to eloquence the propounder of a canadian grievance , or the mover of a indian budget . do not stir out of the till the division be over , have agree with that they two would remain through it all and hear everything that be to be say . have already speak , and to be confide the task of win up the argument for the government . speak also , greatly enliven the tedium of the evening , and to be permit the privilege of a final reply . at two o'clock the division come , and the be beat by a majority of twenty - three . " and now , " say , as he again walk home with , " the pity be that
that we be not a bit nearer tenant - right than we be before . " " but we be nearer to it . " " in one sense , yes . such a debate and such a majority will make man think . but no ;--think be too high a word ; as a rule man do not think . but it will make they believe that there be something in it . many who before regard legislation on the subject as chimerical , will now fancy that it be only dangerous , or perhaps not more than difficult . and so in time it will come to be look on as among the thing possible , then among the thing probable ; -- and so at last it will be range in the list of those few measure which the country require as be absolutely need . that be the way in which public opinion be make . " " it be no loss of time , " say , " to have take the first great step in make it . " " the first great step be take long ago , " say , -- " take by man who be look upon as revolutionary demagogue , almost as traitor , because they take it . but it be a great thing to take any step that lead we onwards . " two day after this declare he intention of dissolve the because of the adverse division which have be produce by 's motion , but express a wish to be allow to carry a irish through parliament before he do so . he explain how expedient this would be , but declare at the same time that if any strong opposition be make , he would abandon the project . he intention simply be to pass with regard to a measure which must be pass soon , and which ought to be pass before a new election take place . the bill be ready , and should be read for the first time on the next night , if the be willing . the House be willing , though there be very many recalcitrant irish member . the irish member make loud opposition , and then twit with he promise that he would not go on with he bill , if opposition be make . but , nevertheless , he do go on , and the measure be hurrie through the two house in a week . we hero who still sit for , but who be never to sit for again , give what assistance he could to the government , and vote for the measure which deprive for ever of its parliamentary honour . " and very dirty conduct I think it be , " say , when he discuss the subject with he agent . " after be put in for the borough twice , almost free of expense , it be very dirty . " it never occur to that a member of parliament might feel himself oblige to vote on such a subject in accordance with he judgment . this irish be scramble through the two house , and then the session be over . the session be over , and they who know anything of the private concern of be aware that he be about to return to , and do not intend to reappear on the scene which have know he so well for the last five year . " I can not tell you how sad it make I , " say . " and it make I sad too , " say . " I try to shake off the melancholy , and tell myself from day to day that it be unmanly . but it get 's the better of I just at present . " " I feel quite certain that you will come back among we again , " say . " everybody tell I so ; and yet I feel quite certain that I shall never come back , -- never come back with a seat in parliament . as my old tutor , , have tell I score of time , I begin at the wrong end . here I be , thirty year of age , and I have not a shilling in the world , and I do not know how to earn one . " " only for I you would still be receive ever so much a year , and all would be pleasant , " say . " but how long would it have last ? the first moment that get the upper hand I should have fall lower than I have fall now . if not this year , it would have be the next . my only comfort be in this , -- that I have do the thing myself , and have not be turn out . " to the very last , however , continue to express he opinion that Phineas would come back , declare that he have know no instance of a young man who have make himself useful in parliament , and then have be allow to leave it in early life . among those of whom he be bound to take a special leave , the member of the family of be , of course , the foremost . he have already hear of the reconciliation of and , and be anxious to offer he congratulation to both of they . and it be essential to he that he should see . to she he write a line , say how much he hope that he should be able to bid she adieu , and a time be fix for he come at which she know that she would meet he alone . but , as chance rule it , he come upon the two lover together , and
and then remember that he have hardly ever before be in the same room with both of they at the same time . " oh , , what a beautiful speech you make . I read every word of it , " say . " and I do not even look at it , old fellow , " say , get up and put he arm on the other 's shoulder in a way that be common with he when he be quite intimate with the friend near he . " go down and hear it , " say . " I could not do that , because I be tie to my aunt . you can not conceive how dutiful I be during this last month . " " and be it to be in a month , ? " say . " she say so . she arrange everything , -- in concert with my father . when I throw up the sponge , I simply ask for a long day . 'a long day , my lord ,' I say . but my father and Violet between they refuse I any mercy . " " you do not believe he , " say . " not a word . if I do he would want to see I on the coast of Flanders again , I do not doubt . I have come to congratulate you both . " " thank you , , " say , take he hand with hearty kindness . " I should not have be quite happy without one nice word from you . " " I shall try and make the best of it , " say . " but , I say , you will come over and ride again . he be down there at the , and I have take a little box close by . I can not stand the governor 's county for hunting . " " and will you wife go down to ? " " of course she will , and ride to hound a great deal closer than I can ever do . mind you come , and if there be anything in the stable fit to carry you , you shall have it . " then Phineas have to explain that he have come to bid they farewell , and that it be not at all probable that he should ever be able to see again in the hunting season . " I do not suppose that I shall make either of you quite understand it , but I have get to begin again . the chance be that I shall never see another foxhound all my life . " " not in ! " exclaim . " not unless I should have to examine one as a witness . I have nothing before I but downright hard work ; and a great deal of that must be do before I can hope to earn a shilling . " " but you be so clever , " say . " of course it will come quickly . " " I do not mean to be impatient about it , nor yet unhappy , " say . " only hunt will not be much in my line . " " and will you leave altogether ? " ask . " altogether . I shall stick to one club , -- 's ; but I shall take my name off all the other . " " what a deuce of a nuisance ! " say . " I have no doubt you will be very happy , " say ; " and you will be a in no time . but you will not go quite yet . " " next . " " you will return . you must be here for we wedding ; -- indeed you must . I will not be marry unless you do . " even this , however , be impossible . he must go on , and must return no more . then he make he little farewell speech , which he could not deliver without some awkward stuttering . he would think of she on the day of she marriage , and pray that she might be happy . and he would send she a little trifle before he go , which he hope she would wear in remembrance of they old friendship . " she shall wear it , whatever it be , or I will know the reason why , " say . " hold you tongue , you rough bear ! " say . " of course I will wear it . and of course I will think of the giver . I shall have many present , but few that I will think of so much . " then leave the room , with he throat so full that he could not speak another word . " he be still break - heart about you , " say the favoured lover as soon as he rival have leave the room . " it be not that , " say . " he be break - heart about everything . the whole world be vanish away from he . I wish he could have make up he mind to marry that german woman with all the money . " it must be understood , however , that Phineas have never speak a word to any one as to the offer which the german woman have make to he . it be on the morning of the on which he be to leave that he see . he have ask that it might be so , in order that he might then have nothing more upon he mind . he find she quite alone , and he could see by she eye that she have be weep . as he look at she ,
, remember that it be not yet six year since he have first be allow to enter that room , he could not but perceive how very much she be alte in appearance . then she have be three - and - twenty , and have not look to be a day older . now she might have be take to be nearly forty , so much have she trouble prey upon she spirit , and eat into the vitality of she youth . " so you have come to say good - bye , " she say , smile as she rise to meet he . " yes , ;-- to say good - bye . not for ever , I hope , but probably for long . " " no , not for ever . at any rate , we will not think so . " then she pause ; but he be silent , sit with he hat dangling in he two hand , and he eye fix upon the floor . " do you know , , " she continue , " that sometimes I be very angry with myself about you . " " then it must be because you have be too kind to I . " " it be because I fear that I have do much to injure you . from the first day that I know you , -- do you remember , when we be talk here , in this very room , about the beginning of the ; -- from that day I wish that you should come among we and be one of we . " " I have be with you , to my infinite satisfaction , -- while it last . " " but it have not last , and now I fear that it have do you harm . " " who can say whether it have be for good or evil ? but of this I be sure you will be certain ,-- that I be very grateful to you for all the goodness you have show I . " then again he be silent . she do not know what it be that she want , but she do desire some expression from he lip that should be warmer than a expression of gratitude . a expression of love , -- of exist love , -- she would have feel to be a insult , and would have treat it as such . indeed , she know that from he no such insult could come . but she be in that morbid , melancholy state of mind which require the excitement of more than ordinary sympathy , even though that sympathy be all painful ; and I think that she would have be please have he refer to the passion for herself which he have once express . if he would have speak of he love , and of she mistake , and have make some half - suggestion as to what might have be they life have thing go differently , -- though she would have rebuk he even for that ,-- still it would have comforte she . but at this moment , though he remember much that have pass between they , he be not even think of the of . all that have take place four year ago ; -- and there have be so many other thing since which have move he even more than that ! " you have hear what I have arrange for myself ? " she say at last . " you father have tell I that you be go to . " " yes ; -- he will accompany I , -- come home of course for parliament . it be a sad break - up , be it not ? but the lawyer say that if I remain here I may be subject to very disagreeable attempt from to force I to go back again . it be odd , be it not , that he should not understand how impossible it be ? " " he mean to do he duty . " " I believe so . but he become more stern every day to those who be with he . and then , why should I remain here ? what be there to tempt I ? as a woman separate from she husband I can not take a interest in those thing which use to charm I . I feel that I be crush and quell by my position , even though there be no disgrace in it . " " no disgrace , certainly , " say . " but I be nobody , -- or worse than nobody . " " and I also be go to be a nobody , " say , laugh . " ah ; you be a man and will get over it , and you have many year before you will begin to be grow old . I be grow old already . yes , I be . I feel it , and know it , and see it . a woman have a fine game to play ; but then she be so easily bowl out , and the term allow to she be so short . " " a man 's allowance of time may be short too , " say . " but he can try he hand again . " then there be another pause . " I have think , , that you would have marry , " she say in she very lowest voice . " you know all my hope and fear about that . " " I mean that you would have marry . " " what make you think that , ? " " because I see that she like you , and because such a marriage would have be so suitable .
. she have all that you want . you know what they say of she now ? " " what do they say ? " " that the of offer to make she he wife , and that she refuse he for you sake . " " there be nothing that people will not say ;--nothing on earth , " say . then he get up and take he leave of she . he also want to part from she with some special expression of affection , but he do not know how to choose he word . he have wish that some allusion should be make , not to the of , but to the close confidence which have so long exist between they ; but he find that the language to do this properly be wante to he . have the opportunity arisen he would have tell she now the whole story of ; but the opportunity do not come , and he leave she , never have mention the name of he mary or have hint at he engagement to any one of he friend in . " it be better so , " he say to himself . " my life in be to be a new life , and why should I mix two thing together that will be so different ? " he be to dine at he lodging , and then leave they for good at eight o'clock . he have pack up everything before he go to , and he return home only just in time to sit down to he solitary mutton chop . but as he sit down he see a small note address to himself lie on the table among the crowd of book , letter , and papers , of which he have still to make disposal . it be a very small note in a envelope of a peculiar tint of pink , and he know the handwriting well . the blood mount all over he face as he take it up , and he hesitat for a moment before he open it . it could not be that the offer should be repeat to he . slowly , hardly venture at first to look at the enclosure , he open it , and the word which it contain were as follow :-- I learn that you be go to - day , and I write a word which you will receive just as you be depart . it be to say merely this , -- that when I leave you the other day I be angry , not with you , but with myself . let I wish you all good wish and that prosperity which I know you will deserve , and which I think you will win . yours very truly , morning . should he put off he journey and go to she this very evening and claim she as he friend ? the question be ask and answer in a moment . of course he would not go to she . be he to do so there would be only one possible word for he to say , and that word should certainly never be spoken . but he write to she a reply , shorter even than she own short note . thanks , dear friend . I do not doubt but that you and I understand each other thoroughly , and that each trust the other for good wish and honest intention . always yours , . . I write these as I be start . when he have write this , he keep it till the last moment in he hand , think that he would not send it . but as he slip into the cab , he give the note to he late landlady to post . at the station come to he to say a word of farewell , and be on he arm . " well do , , well do , " say . " I always know there be a good drop in you . " " you always tell I I should ruin myself in parliament , and so I have , " say . " not at all . it take a deal to ruin a man if he be get the right sperrit . I have better hope of you now than ever I have in the old day when you use to be look out for government place ; -- and have try that too . I think he would find the iron too heavy for he . " " bless you , , " say with she handkerchief up to she eye . " there be not one of them I ever have as lodger I have car about half as much as I do for you . " then they shook hand with he through the window , and the train be off . we be tell that it be a bitter moment with the when he leave the and become once more , of no. 75 , . go out of office have a great fall though they take pension with they for they consolation . and the of the when he leave the glory of the and once more become a simple citizen must feel the change severely . but we hero , , as he turn he back upon the scene of he many success , and prepare himself for permanent residence in he own country , be , I think , in a worse plight than any of the reduce divinity to whom I have allude . they at any rate have know that they fall would come . he , like , have fly up towards the sun , hope that he wing of wax would bear he steadily aloft among the gods . see that he wing be wing of wax ,
, we must acknowledge that they be very good . but the celestial lights have be too strong for they , and now , have live for five year with lord and countess , with ministers and orator , with beautiful woman and man of fashion , he must start again in a little lodging in , and hope that the attorney of that litigious city might be good to he . on he journey home he make but one resolution . he would make the change , or attempt to make it , with manly strength . during he last month in he have allow himself to be sad , depresse , and melancholy . there should be a end of all that now . nobody at home should see that he be depresse . and , he own Mary , should at any rate have no cause to think that she love and he own engagement have ever be the cause to he of depression . do he not value she love more than anything in the world ? a thousand time he tell himself that he do . she be there in the old house at to greet he . she engagement be a affair know to all the county , and she have no idea that it would become she to be coy in she love . she be in he arm before he have speak to he father and mother , and have make she little speech to he , -- very inaudibly indeed , -- while he be cover she sweet face with kiss . " oh , , I be so proud of you ; and I think you be so right , and I be so glad you have do it . " again he cover she face with kiss . could he ever have have such satisfaction as this have he allow 's hand to remain in he ? on the first night of he arrival he sit for a hour downstair with he father talk over he plan . he feel , -- he could not but feel , -- that he be not the hero now that he have be when he be last at , -- when he have come thither with a under he wing . and yet he father do he best to prevent the growth of any such feeling . the old doctor be not quite as well off as he have be when first start with he high hope for . since that day he have abandon he profession and be now live on the fruit of he life 's labour . for the last two year he have be absolve from the necessity of provide a income for he son , and have probably allow himself to feel that no such demand upon he would again be make . now , however , it be necessary that he should do so . could he son manage to live on two hundred a - year ? there would then be four hundr a - year leave for the wants of the family at home . swore that he could fight he battle on a hundred and fifty , and they end the argument by split the difference . he have be pay exactly the same sum of money for the room he have just leave in ; but then , while he hold those room , he income have be two thousand a - year . Tenant - right be a very fine thing , but could it be worth such a fall as this ? " and about dear ? " say the father . " I hope it may not be very long , " say . " I have not speak to she about it , but you mother say that be very averse to a long engagement . " " what can I do ? she would not wish I to marry she daughter with no other income than a allowance make by you . " " you mother say that she have some idea that you and she might live together ; -- that if they let Floodborough you might take a small house in . remember , , I be not propose it myself . " then Phineas bethotch himself that he be not even yet so low in the world that he need submit himself to term dictate to he by . " I be glad that you do not propose it , sir . " " why so , ? " " because I should have be oblige to oppose the plan even if it have come from you . mother - in -law be never a comfort in a house . " " I never try it myself , " say the doctor . " and I never will try it . I be quite sure that do not expect any such thing , and that she be willing to wait . if I can shorten the term of wait by hard work , I will do so . " the decision to which have come on this matter be probably make know to after some mild fashion by old . nothing more be say to about a joint household ; but he be quite able to perceive from the manner of the lady towards he that he propose mother - in - law wish he to understand that he be treat she daughter very badly . what do it signify ? none of they know the story of , and of course none of they would know it . none of they would ever hear how well he have behave to he little Mary . but do know it all before he leave she to go up to . the two lover allow themselves , -- or be allow by they elder , one week
week of exquisite bliss together ; and during this week , tell she , I think , everything . he tell she everything as far as he could do so without seem to boast of he own success . how be a man not to tell such tale when he have on he arm , close to he , a girl who tell he she little everything of life , and only ask for he confidence in return ? and then he secret be so precious to she and so sacr , that he feel as sure of she fidelity as though she be a very goddess of faith and trust . and the temptation to tell be so great . for all that he have to tell she love he the better and still the better . a man desire to win a virgin heart , and be happy to know , -- or at least to believe , -- that he have win it . with a woman every former rival be a add victim to the wheel of the triumphant chariot in which she be sitte . " all these have he know and love , cull sweet from each of they . but now he have come to I , and I be the sweetest of they all . " and so be teach to believe of and of Violet and of , -- that though they have have charms to please , she lover have never be so charmed as he be now while she be hang to he breast . and I think that she be right in she belief . during those lovely summer evening walk along the shore of , be as happy as he have ever be at any moment of he life . " I shall never be impatient , -- never , " she say to he on the last evening . " all I want be that you should write to I . " " I shall want more than that , . " " then you must come down and see I . when you do come they will be happy , happy day for I . but of course we can not be marry for the next twenty year . " " , . " " I will say anything that you like ; -- you will know what i mean just as well . and , , I must tell you one thing , -- though it make I sad to think of it , and will make I sad to speak of it . " " I will not have you sad on we last night , . " " I must say it . I be begin to understand how much you have give up for I . " " I have give up nothing for you . " " if I have not be at when be here , and if we have not , -- have not , -- oh dear , if I have not love you so very much , you might have remain in , and that lady would have be you wife . " " never ! " say stoutly . " would she not ? she must not be you wife now , . I be not go to pretend that I will give you up . " " that be unkind , . " " oh , well ; you may say what you please . if that be unkind , I be unkind . it would kill I to lose you . " have he do right ? how could there be a doubt about it ? how could there be a question about it ? which of they have love he , or be capable of love he as love he ? what girl be ever so sweet , so gracious , so angelic , as he own Mary ? he swore to she that he be prouder of win she than of anything he have ever do in all he life , and that of all the treasure that have ever come in he way she be the most precious . she go to be that night the happiest girl in all Connaught , although when she part from he she understand that she be not to see he again till - . but she do see he again before the summer be over , and the manner of they meeting be in this wise . immediately after the passing of that scramble , parliament , as the reader know , be dissolve . this be in the early day of , and before the end of the new member be again assemble at . this session , late in summer , be very terrible ; but it be not very long , and then it be essentially necessary . there be something of the year 's business which must yet be do , and the country would require to know who be to be the of the government . it be not need that the reader should be trouble any further with the strategy of one political leader or of another , or that more should be say of and he tenant - right . the of have offend by voting in a majority against he , and have punished the of by subject it to the expense and nuisance of a new election . all this be constitutional , and rational enough to , though it may be unintelligible to stranger . the upshot on the present occasion be that the remain in they place and that 's bill , though it have receive the substantial honour of a second reading , pass away for the present into the limbo of abortive legislation . all this would not concern we at all , nor we poor hero much , be it
