Barchester of I who will be the new ? 's , accord to of and the 's the and take counsel VIII the - rejoice at he probable return to the the family X 's reception -- commence 's reception -- conclude versus the the the 's who shall be of the ? the 's by 's the of read himself in at 's manage matter very well at Fourteen argument in favour of 's wrestle and get a fall be entertain by and Grantly at a serious interview Xxx another the 's a for -- the master and Tutor of 's -- I the , the , and meet each other at the sit down to and the Dean die XXXIX the Lookalofts and the -- confide she to she -- iii and be make happy . be encourage by the at the at 's parting interview with the the Thorne show she at - make the the be satisfied with the state of affair 's to the and its the new take of the Deanery , and the of the I who will be the New Bishop ? in the latter day of in the year 185 -, a most important question be for ten day hourly ask in the cathedral city of , and answer every hour in various way -- who be to be the new Bishop ? the death of old , who have for many year fill the chair with meek authority , take place exactly as the ministry of - be go to give place to that - . the illness of the good old man be long and linger , and it become at last a matter of intense interest to those concerned whether the new appointment should be make by a conservative or liberal government . Grantly die as he have liv , peaceably , slowly , without pain and without excitement . the breath eb from he almost imperceptibly , and for a month before he death , it be a question whether he be alive or dead . a trying time be this for the archdeacon , for whom be desig the reversion of he father 's see by those who then have the giving away of episcopal throne . I would not be understand to say that the prime minister have in so many word promise the bishopric to . he be too discreet a man for that . there be a proverb with reference to the killing of cat , and those who know anything either of high or low government place , will be well aware that a promise may be make without positive word , and that a expectant may be put into the highest state of encouragement , though the great man on whose breath he hang may have do no more than whisper that ' Mr so - and - so be certainly a rise man . ' such a whisper have be make , and be know by those who hear it to signify that the cure of the diocese of should not be take out of the hand of the archdeacon . the then prime minister be all in all at , and have lately pass a night at the house of the master of . now the master of -- which be , by the bye , in many respects the most comfortable , as well as the richest college at , -- be the archdeacon 's most intimate friend and most trust counsellor . on the occasion of the prime minister 's visit , be of course present , and the meeting be very gracious . on the follow morning , the master , tell the archdeacon that in he opinion the matter be settle . at this time the bishop be quite on he last leg ; but the ministry be also totter . return from happy and elated , to resume he place in the palace , and to continue to perform for the father the last duty of a son ; which , to give he he due , he perform with more tender care than be to be expect from he usual somewhat worldly manners . a month since the physician have name four week as the outside period during which breath could be support within the body of the die man . at the end of the month the physician wonder , and name another fortnight . the old man live on wine alone , but at the end of the fort night he still liv ; and the tiding of the fall of the ministry become more frequent . and , the two great doctor , now come down for the fifth time , and declare , shak they learn head , that another week of life be impossible ; and as they sit down to lunch in the episcopal dining - room , whisper to the archdeacon they own private knowledge that the ministry must fall within five day . the son return to he father 's room , and after administer with he own hand the sustain modicum of , sit down by the bedside to calculate he chance . the ministry be to be out within five day : he father be to be dead within -- no , he reject that view of the subject . the ministry be to be out , and the diocese might probably be vacant at the same period . there be much doubt as to the name of the man who be to succeed to power , and a week must elapse before a cabinet be form . would not vacancy be fill by the out - go man during that week ? have a kind of idea that such would be the case , but do not know ; and then he wonder at he own ignorance of such a question . he
he try to keep he mind away from the subject , but he could not . the race be so very close , and the stake be so very high . he then look at the dying man 's impassive , placid face . there be no sign there of death or disease ; it be something thinner than of yore , somewhat grayer , and the deep line of age more mark ; but , as far as he could judge , life might yet hang there for week to come . and have thrice be wrong , and might yet be wrong thrice again . the old bishop sleep during twenty of the twenty - four hour , but during the short period of he waking moment , he know both he son and he dear friend , the archdeacon 's father - in - law , and would thank they tenderly for they care and love . now he lay sleep like a baby , rest easily on he back , he mouth just open , and he few gray hair straggl from beneath he cap ; he breath be perfectly noiseless , and he thing , want hand , which lay above the coverlid , never move . nothing could be easier than the old man 's passage from this world to the next . but by no means easy be the emotion of he who sit there watch . he know it must be now or never . he be already over fifty , and there be little chance that he friend who be now leave office would soon return to it . no probable british prime minister but he who be now in , he who be so soon to be out , would think of make a bishop of . thus he think long and sadly , in deep silence , and then gaze at that still liive face , and then at last dared to ask himself whether he really long for he father 's death . the effort be a salutary one , and the question be answer in a moment . the proud , wishful , worldly man , sank on he knee by the bedside , and take the bishop 's hand within he own , pray eagerly that he sins might be forgive he . he face be still bury in the clothes when the door of the bed - room open noiselessly , and enter with a velvet step . 's attendance at that bedside have be nearly as constant as that of the archdeacon , and he ingress and egress be as much a matter of course as that of he son - in - law . he be stand close beside the archdeacon before he be perceive , and would have also knelt in prayer have he not fear that he do so might have cause some sudden start , and have disturb the die man . , however , instantly perceive he , and rise from he knee . as he do so take both he hand , and press they warmly . there be more fellowship between they at that moment than there have ever be before , and it so happen that after circumstance greatly preserve the feeling . as they stand there press each other 's hand , the tear roll freely down they cheek . ' bless you , my dear , '-- say the bishop with feeble voice as he wake --' bless you -- may bless you both , my dear child :' and so he die . there be no loud rattle in the throat , no dreadful struggle , no palpable sign of death ; but the lower jaw fall a little from its place , and the eye , which have be so constantly close in sleep , now remain fixed and open . neither nor know that life be go , though both suspect it . 'I believe it be all over , ' say , still press the other 's hand . 'I think -- nay , I hope it be . ' 'I will ring the bell , ' say the other , speak all but in a whisper . ' should be here . ' , the nurse , be soon in the room , and immediately , with practise hand , close those staring eye . ' it be all over , ? ' ask . ' my lord 's no more , ' say , turn round and curtsey with a solemn face ; ' he lordship 's go more like a sleeping baby than any that I ever see . ' ' it be a great relief , archdeacon , ' say , 'A great relief -- dear good , excellent old man . oh that we last moments may be as innocent and peaceful as he ! ' ' surely , ' say . ' the be praise for all he mercy ; but , for a meek , mild , gentle - speak , he lordship be -- ' and , with unaffected but easy grief , put up she white apron to she flow eye . ' you can not but rejoice that it be over , ' say , still counsel he friend . the archdeacon 's mind , however , have already travel from the death chamber to the closet of the prime minister . he have bring himself to pray for he father 's life , but now that that life be do , to dally with the fact of the bishop 's death -- useless to lose perhaps everything for the pretence of a foolish sentiment . but how be he to act while he father - in - law stood there hold he hand ? how , without appear unfeeling , be he to forget he father in the bishop --
-- to overlook what he have lost , and think only of what he might possibly gain ? ' no ; I suppose not , ' say he , at last , in answer to . ' we have all expect it for so long . ' take he by the arm and lead he from the room . ' we will see he again to - morrow morning , ' say he ; ' we have better leave the room now to the woman . ' and so they go downstairs . it be already eve and nearly dark . it be most important that the prime minister should know that night that the diocese be vacant . everything might depend on it ; and so , in answer to 's further consolation , the archdeacon suggest that a telegraph message should be immediately send off to . who have really be somewhat surprised to find Dr Grantly , as he think , so much affect , be rather take aback ; but he make no objection . he know that the archdeacon have some hope of succeeding to he father 's place , though he by no means know how highly raise that hope have be . ' yes , ' say Grantly , collect himself and shake off he weakness , ' we must send a message at once ; we do not know what might be the consequence of delay . will you do it ? ' 'i ! oh yes ; certainly : I will do it , only I do not know exactly what it be you want . ' Dr Grantly sit down before a writing table , and take pen and ink , write on a slip of paper as follow :- by , for the of -, , or elsewhere . ' the of be dead . ' message send by the . ' there , ' say he . ' just take that to the telegraph office at the railway station , and give it as it be ; they will probably make you copy it on to one of they own slips ; that be all you will have to do : then you will have to pay they half - a - crown . ' and the archdeacon put he hand in he pocket and pull out the necessary sum . feel very much like a errand - boy , and also feel that he be call on to perform he duty as such at rather a unseemly time ; but he say nothing , and take the slip of paper and the proffer coin . ' but you have put my name into it , archdeacon . ' ' yes , ' say the other , ' there should be the name of some clergyman , you know , and what name so proper as that of so old a friend as yourself ? the will not look at the name you may be sure of that ; but my dear , pray do not lose any time . ' get as far as the library door on he way to the station , when he suddenly remember the news with which he be fraught when he enter to poor bishop 's bedroom . he have find the moment so inopportune for any mundane tiding , that he have repress the word which be on he tongue , and immediately afterwards all recollection of the circumstance be for the time banish by the scene which have occur . ' but , archdeacon , ' say , he turn back , ' I forget to tell you -- the ministry be out . ' ' out ! ' ejaculate the archdeacon , in a tone which too plainly show the anxiety of he dismay , although under the circumstance of the moment he endeavoure to control himself : ' out ! who tell you so ? ' explain that news to this effect have come down by electric telegraph , and that the tiding have be leave at the palace door by . the archdeacon sit silent for awhile , meditat , and stand look at he . ' never mind , ' say the archdeacon at last ; ' send the message all the same . the news must be send to some one , and there be at present no one else in a position to receive it . do it at once , my dear friend ; you know I would not trouble you , be I in a state to do it myself . a few minute ' time be of the greatest importance . ' go out and send the message , and it may be as well that we should follow it to its destination . within thirty minute of its leave it reach the of - in he inner library . what elaborate letter , what eloquent appeal , what indignant remonstrance , he might there have to frame , at such a moment , may be conceive , but not describe ! how he be prepare he thunder for successful rival , stand like a british peer with he back to the sea-coal fire , and he hand in he breech pocket , -- how he fine eye be light up with anger , and he forehead gleam with patriotism , -- how he stampe he foot as he think of he heavy associate , -- how he all but swore as he remember how much too clever one of they have be , -- my creative reader may imagine . but be he so engage ? no ; history and truth compel I to deny it . he be sit easily in a lounging chair , con over a list , and by he elbow on the table be lie open a uncut french novel on which he be engage
engage . he open the cover in which the message be enclose , and have read it , he take he pen and write on the back of it -- ' for the of -, with the of - 's compliment , ' and send off again on its journey . thus terminate we unfortunate friend 's chance of possesse the glory of a bishopric . the name of many divine be give in the papers as that of the bishop elect . the declare that be to be the man , in compliment to the late ministry . this be a heavy blow to , but he be not doom to see himself supersed by he friend . the put forward confidently the claim of a great preacher of austere doctrine ; and the eastern hemisphere , a evening paper suppose to possess much official knowledge , declare in favour of a eminent naturalist , a gentleman most completely verse in the knowledge of rock and mineral , but suppose by many to hold on religious subject no special doctrine whatever . the , that daily paper which , as we all know , be the only true source of infallibly correct information on all subject , for a while be silent , but at last spoke out . the merits of all these candidate be discuss and somewhat irreverently dispose of , and then the declare that be to be the man . be the man . just a month after the demise of the late bishop , kiss the 's hand as he successor elect . we must beg to be allow to draw a curtain over the sorrow of the archdeacon as he sit , sombre and sad at heart , in the study of he parsonage at . on the day subsequent to the dispatch of the message he hear that the of - have consent to undertake the formation of a ministry , and from that moment he know that he chance be over . many will think that he be wick to grieve for the loss of episcopal power , wick to have covet it , nay , wick even to have think about it , in the way and at the moment he have do so . with such censure , I can not profess that I completely agree . the nolo episcopari , though still in use , be so directly at variance with the tendency of all human aspiration of rise priest in the of . a lawyer do not sin in seek to be a judge , or in compassing he wish by all honest means . a young diplomat entertaind a fair ambition when he look forward to be the lord of a first - rate embassy ; and a poor novelist when he attempt to rival Dicken or rise above Fitzjames , commit no fault , though he may be foolish . truly say that in these recreant day we can not expect to find the majesty of beneath the cassock of a curate . if we look to we clergyman to be more than man , we shall probably teach ourselves to think that they be less , and can hardly hope to raise the character of the pastor by deny to he the right to entertain the aspiration of a man . we archdeacon be worldly -- who among we be not so ? he be ambitious -- who among we be asham to own that ' last infirmity of noble mind ! ' he be avaricious , my reader will say . no -- it be not for love of lucre that he wish to be bishop of . he be he father 's only child , and he father have leave he great wealth . he preferment bring he in nearly three thousand a year . the bishopric , as cut down by the , be only five . he would be a richer man as archdeacon , than he could be as a bishop . but he certainly do desire to play first fiddle ; he do desire to sit in full lawn sleeve amongst the per of the realm ; and he do desire , if the truth must be out , to be call ' my ' by the reverend breth . he hope , however , be they innocent or sinful , be not fate to be realise ; and be consecrate of . 's to act of parliament it be hardly necessary that I should here give to the public any lengthen biography of , up to the period of the commencement of this tale . the public can not have forget how ill that sensitive gentleman bear the attack that be make upon he in the column of the , with reference to the income which he receive as warden of 's , in the city of . can it be forget that a law - suit be institute against he on the matter of that charity by , who afterwards marry he , 's , younger and then only unmarried daughter . under the pressure of these attack , have resign he wardenship , though strongly recommend to abstain from do so , both by he friend and he lawyer . he do , however , resign it , and betake himself manfully to the duty of the small parish of 's , in the city , of which he be vicar , continue also to perform those of precentor of the cathedral , a situation of small emolument which have hitherto be suppose to be join , as a matter of course , to the wardenship of the hospital above speak of . when he leave the hospital from which he have be so ruthlessly drive , and settle himself down in he own modest manner in the of , he have not expect that other
other would make more fuss about it than he be inclin to do himself ; and the extent of he hope be , that the movement might have be make in time to prevent any further paragraph in the . he affair , however , be not allow to subside thus quietly , and people be quite as much inclin to talk about the disinterested sacrifice he have make , as they have before be to upbraid he for he cupidity . the most remarkable thing that occur , be the receipt of a autographed letter from the of , in which the primate very warmly praise he conduct , and beg to know what he intention be for the future . reply that he intend to be rector of 's in ; and so that matter drop . then the newspaper take up he case , the among the rest , and waft he name in eulogistic strains through every reading - room in the nation . it be discover also , that he be the author of that great musical work , 's , -- and a new edition be speak of , though , I believe , never print . it be , however , certain that the work be introduce into the at 's , and that a long criticism appear in the musical Scrutator , declare that in no previous work of its kind have so much research be join with such exalt musical ability , and assert that the name of Harding would henceforward be know wherever the be cultivate , or value . this be high praise , and I will not deny that be gratify by such flattery ; for if be vain on any subject , it be on that of music . but here the matter reste . the second edition , if print , be never purchase ; the copy which have be introduce into the disappear again , and be laid by in peace , with a load of similar literature . , of the , and he breth occupy themselves with other name , and the underlying fame promise to we friend be clearly intend to be posthumous . have spend much of he time with he friend the bishop , much with he daughter , now , alas , a widow ; and have almost dailly visit the wretched remnant of he former subject , the few survive bedesman now leave at 's . six of they be still live . the number , accord to old 's , should always have be twelve . but after the abdication of they warden , the bishop have appoint no successor to he , and it appear as though the hospital at would fall into abeyance , unless the power that be should take some step towards put it once more into work order . during the past five year the power that be have not overlook , and sundry political doctor have take the matter in hand . shortly after 's resignation , the have very clearly show what ought to be do . in about half a column it have distribute the income , rebuild the building , put a end to all bickering , regenerate kindly feel , provide for , and place the whole thing on a footing which could not but be satisfactory to the city and Bishop of , and to the nation at large . the wisdom of this scheme be testify by the number of letter which " common sense " , " Veritas " , and " one that love fair play , " send to the Jupiter , all expressing admiration and amplify on the detail give . it be singular enough that no adverse letter appear at all , and , therefore , none of course be write . but be not believe , and even the wisdom of the sometimes fall on deaf ear . through other plan do not put themselves forward in the column of the , reformer of church charity be not slack to make know in various place they different nostrum for set 's on its foot again . a learned bishop take occasion , in the , to allude to the matter , intimat that he have communicate on the subject with he right reverend brother of . the radical member for have suggest that the fund should be alienate for the education of the agricultural poor of the country , and he amuse the house by some anecdote touch the superstition and habits of the agriculturist in question . a political pamphleteer have produce a few dozen page , which he call ' who be 's heir ? ' intend to give a infallible rule for the governance of such establishment ; and , at last , a member of the government promise that in the next session a short bill should be introduce for regulate the affair of , and other kindred concern . the next session come , and , contrary to custom , the bill come also . Men' minds be then intent on other thing . the first threatening of a huge war hang heavily over the nation , and the question as to 's heir do not appear to interest very many people either in or out of the house . the bill , however , be read and reread , and in some undistinguished manner pass through it be eleven stage without appeal or dissent . what would have say in the matter , could he have predict that some forty - five gentleman would take on themselves to make a law alte the whole purport of the will , without in the least know at the moment of they make it , what it be that they be do ? it be however to be hope that the under secretary for the knew ,
, for to he have the matter be confide . the bill , however , do pass , and at the time at which this history be suppose to commence , it have be ordain that there should be , as heretofore , twelve old man in , each with 1 4 would a day ; that there should also be twelve old woman , each with 1 2 would a day ; that there should be a matron with a house and L 70 a year ; a steward with 150 a year , who should have the spiritual guidance of that appertaining to the male sex . the bishop , dean , and warden , be , as formerly , to appoint in turn the recipient of the charity , and the bishop be to appoint the officer . there be nothing say as to the wardenship be hold by the precentor of the cathedral , nor a word as to 's right to the situation . it be not , however , till some months after the death of the old bishop , and almost immediately consequent on the installation of he successor , that notice be give that the reform be about to be carry out . the new law and the new bishop be among the earliest work of a new ministry , or rather of a ministry who , have for a while give place to they opponent , have then return to power ; and the death of occur , as we have see , exactly at the period of change . poor ! how well do that widow 's cap become she , and the solemn gravity with which she devote to she new duty . poor ! poor ! I can not say that with I be ever a favourite . I never think he worthy of the wife he have win . but in she estimation he be most worthy . hers be one of those feminine heart which cling to a husband , not with idolatry , for worship can admit of no defect in its idol , but with the perfect tenacity of ivy . as the parasite plant will follow even the defect of the trunk which it embrace , so do cling to and love the very fault of she husband . she have once declare that whatever she father do should in she eye be right . she then transfer she allegiance , and become ever ready to defend the worst failings of she lord and master . and be a man to be love by a woman ; he be himself affectionate , he be confid and manly ; and that arrogance of thought , unsustain by first - rate abilitie , that attempt at be better than he neighbour which jar so painfully on the feeling of he acquaintance , do not injure he in the estimation of he wife . could she even have admit that he have a fault , he early death would have blot out the memory of it . she weep as for the loss of the most perfect treasure with which mortal woman have ever be endow ; for week after he be go the idea of future happiness in this world be hateful to she ; consolation , as it be call , be insupportable , and tear and sleep be she only relief . but temper the wind to the shorn lamb . she know that she have within she the liive source of other car . she know that there be to be create for she another subject of weal or woe , of unutterable joy or despair sorrow , as in he mercy might vouchsafe to she . at first this do not augment she grief ! to be the mother of a poor infant , orphan before it be bear , bring forth to the sorrow of a ever desolate hearth , nurture amidst tear and wailing , and then turn adrift into the world without the aid of a father 's care ! there be at first no joy in this . by degrees , however , she heart become anxious for another object , and , before its birth , the stranger be expect with all the eagerness of a longing mother . just eight month after the father 's death a second be bear , and if the worship of one creature can be innocent in another , let we hope that the adoration offer over the cradle of the fatherless infant may not be impute as sin . it will not be worth we while to define the character of the child , or to point out in how far the fault of the father be redeem within that little breast by the virtue of the mother . the baby , as a baby , be all that be delightful , and I can not foresee that it will be necessary for we to inquire into the fact of he after life . we present business at will not occupy we above a year or two at the furthest , and I will leave it to some other pen to produce , if necessary , the biography of the . but , as a baby , this baby be all that could be desire . this fact no one attempt to deny . ' be he not delightful ? ' she would say to she father , look into he face from she knee , he lustrous eye overflow with soft tear , she young face encircle by she close widow 's cap and she hand on each side of the cradle in which she treasure be sleep . the grandfather would gladly admit that the treasure be delightful , and the uncle archdeacon himself would agree , and , 's sister , would re-echo the word with true
true sisterly energy ; and -- but be a second worshipper at the same shrine . the baby be really delightful ; he take he food with a will , strike out he toe merrily whenever he leg be uncovered , and do not have fit . these be suppose to be the strongest point of baby perfection , and in all these we baby excel . and in this the widow 's deep grief be soften , and a sweet balm be pour into the wound which she have think nothing but death could heal . how much kinder be to we than we be willing to be to ourselve ! at the loss of every dear face , at the last go of every well belove one , we all doom ourselves to a eternity of sorrow , and look to waste ourselves away in a ever - run fountain of tear . how seldom do such grief endure ! how bless be the goodness which forbid it to do so ! ' let I ever remember my living friend , but forget they as soon as they be dead , ' be the prayer of a wise man who understand the mercy of . few perhaps would have the courage to express such a wish , and yet to do so would only be to ask for that release from sorrow , which a kind Creator almost always extend to we . I would not , however , have it imagine that forget she husband . she really think of he with all conjugal love , and enshrin he memory in the innermost centre of she heart . but yet she be happy in she baby . it be so sweet to press the liive toy to she breast , and feel that a human be exist who do owe , and be to owe everything to she ; whose daily food be draw from herself ; whose little want could all be satisfied by she ; whose infant tongue would make he first effort in call she by the sweetest name a woman can hear . and so 's bosom become tranquil , and she set about she new duty eagerly and gratefully . as regard the concern of the world , have leave he widow in prosperous circumstance . he have bequeath to she all that he possess , and that comprise a income much exceed what she or she friend think necessary for she . it amount to nearly a thousand a year ; and when she reflect on its extent , she dearest hope be to hand it over , not only unimpaired , but increase , to she husband 's son , to she own darling , to the little man who now lay sleep on she knee , happily ignorant of the car which be to be accumulate in he behalf . when die , she earnestly implor she father to come and live with she , but this Mr Harding decline , though for some week he remain with she as a visitor . he could not be prevail upon to forego the possession of some small house of he own , and so remain in the lodging he have first select over a chemist 's shop in the at . and this narrative be suppose to commence immediately after the installation of . I will not describe the ceremony , as I do not precisely understand its nature . I be ignorant whether a bishop be chair like a member of parliament , or carry in a gilt coach like a lord mayor , or swear in like a justice of the peace , or introduce like a peer to the upper house , or lead between two breth like a knight of the garter ; but I do know that every thing be properly do , and that nothing fit or become to a young bishop be omit on the occasion . be not the man to allow anything to be omit that might be become to he new dignity . he understand well the value of form , and know that the due observation of rank could not be maintain unless the exterior trapping belong to it be hold in proper esteem . he be a man bear to move in high circle ; at least so he think himself and circumstance have certainly sustain he in this view . he be the nephew of a irish baron by he mother 's side , and he wife be the niece of a scottish earl . he have for year hold some clerical office appertain to courtly matter , which have enable he to live in , and to entrust he parish to he curate . he have be a preacher to the royal beefeater , curator of theological manuscript in the Ecclesiastical court , chaplain of the 's , and almoner to he the of - . he residence in the metropolis , render necessary by the duty entrust to he , he high connection , and the peculiar talents and nature of the man , recommend he to person in power ; and become known as a useful and rising clergyman . some few year since , even within the memory of many who be not yet willing to call themselves old , a liberal clergyman be a person not frequently to be meet . be such , and be look on as a little better than a infidel ; a few other also might be name , but they be 's rara ave ' , and be regard with doubt and distrust by they breth . no man be so surely a tory as a country rector -- nowhere be the power that be so cherish as at . when , however , be make a archbishop , and some year afterwards regius professor , many
many wise divine see that a change be take place in man 's mind , and that more liberal idea would henceforward be suitable to the priest as well as to the laity . begin to be hear of who have cease to anathematise papist on the one hand , or vilify dissenter on the other . it appear clear that high church principle , as they be call , be no longer to be the surest claim to promotion with at any rate one section of statesman , and be one among those who early in life adapt himself to the view hold by the whig on most theological and religious subject . he bear with the idolatry of , tolerate even the infidelity of , and be hand and glive with the Presbyterian of and . such a man at such a time be find to be useful , and 's name begin to appear in the newspaper . he be make one of a commission who go over to to arrange matter preparative to the working of the national board ; he become honorary secretary to another commission nominate to inquire into the revenue of cathedral chapter ; and have have something to do with both the regium donum and the Maynooth grant . it must not be on this account be take as prove that be a man of great mental power , or even of much capacity for business , for such quality have not be require in he . in the arrangement of those church reform with which he be connect , the idea and original conception of the work to be do be generally furnish by the liberal statesman of the day , and the labour of the detail be borne by official of a lower rank . it be , however , think expedient that the name of some clergyman should appear in such matter , and as have become known as a tolerating divine , great use of this sort be make of he name . if he do not do much active good , he never do any harm ; he be amenable to those who be really in authority , and at the sittings of the various board to which he belong maintain a kind of dignity which have it be value . he be certainly possess of sufficient tact to answer the purpose for which he be require without make himself troublesome ; but it must not therefore be surmise that he doubt he own power , or fail to believe that he could himself take a high part in high affair when he own turn come . he be bid he time , and patiently look forward to the day when he himself would sit authoritative at some board , and talk and direct , and rule the roost , while lesser star sit round and obey , as he have so well accustom himself to do . he reward and he time have now come . he be select for the vacant bishopric , and on the next vacancy which might occur in any diocese would take he place in the house of Lords , prepare to give not a silent vote in all matter concern the weal of the church establishment . Toleration be to be the basis on which he be to fight he battle , and in the honest courage of he heart he think no evil would come to he in encountere even such foe as he breth of and . be a ambitious man , and before he be well consecrate of , he have begin to look up to archepiscopal splendour , and the glory of , or at any rate of . he be comparatively young , and have , as he fondly flatter himself , be select as possessing such gift , natural and acquire , as must be sure to recommend he to a yet higher notice , now that a higher sphere be open to he . be , therefore , quite prepared to take a conspicuous part in all theological affair appertain to these realm ; and have such view , by no means intend to bury himself at as he predecessor have do . no : should still be he ground : a comfortable mansion in a provincial city might be well enough for the dead month of the year . indeed have always feel it necessary to he position to retire from when other great and fashionable people do so ; but should still be he fix residence , and it be in that he resolve to exercise that hospitality so peculiarly recommend to all bishop by . how otherwise could he keep himself before the world ? how else give the government , in matter theological , the full benefit of he weight and talents ? this resolution be no doubt a salutary one as regard the world at large , but be not likely to make he popular either with the clergy or the people of . have always live there ; and in truth it be hard for a bishop to be popular after . he income have average l 9000 a year ; he successor be to be rigidly limit to L 5000 . he have but one child on whom to spend he money ; have seven or eight . he have be a man of few personal expensis , and they have be confine to the taste of a moderate gentleman ; but have to maintain a position in fashionable society , and have that to do with comparatively small means . have certainly keep he carriage , as become a bishop ; but he carriage , horse , and coachman , though they do very well for , would have be almost ridiculous at . determine that she husband 's equipage should not shame she , and
and thing on which resolve , be generally accomplish . from all this it be likely to result that would not spend much money at ; whereas he predecessor have deal with the tradesman of the city in a manner very much to they satisfaction . the Grantly , father and son , have spend they money like gentleman ; but it soon become whispered in that be not unacquainted with those prudent device by which the utmost show of wealth be produce from limited means . in person be a good - look man ; spruce and dapper , and very tidy . he be somewhat below middle height , be about five foot four ; but he make up for the inch which he want by the dignity with which he carry those which he have . it be no fault of he own if he have not a commanding eye , for he study hard to assume it . he feature be well form , though perhaps the sharpness of he nose may give to he face in the eyes of some people a air of insignificance . if so , it be greatly redeem by he mouth and ching , of which he be justly proud . may well be say to have be a fortunate man , for he be not bear to wealth , and he be now bishop of ; but nevertheless he have he car . he have a large family , of whom the three eldest be daughter , now all grown up and fit for fashionable life ; and he have a wife . it be not my intention to breathe a word against the character of , but still I can not think that with all she virtue she add much to she husband 's happiness . the truth be that in matter domestic she rule supreme over she titular lord , and rule with a rod of iron . be this all . thing domestic might have abandon to she , if not voluntarily , yet willingly . but be not satisfied with such home dominion , and stretch she power over all he movement , and will not even abstain from thing spiritual . in fact , the bishop be henpeck . the archdeacon 's wife , in she happy home at , know how to assume the full privileges of she rank , and express she own mind in become tone and place . but 's sway , if sway she have , be easy and beneficent . she never shame she husband ; before the world she be a pattern of obedience ; she voice be never loud , nor she look sharp : doubtless she value power , and have not unsuccessfully strive to acquire it ; but she know what should be the limit of woman 's rule . not so . this lady be habitually authoritative to all , but to she poor husband she be despotic . successful as have be he career in the eyes of the world , it would seem that in the eyes of he wife he be never right . all hope of defending himself have long pass from he ; indeed he rarely even attempt self - justification ; and be aware that submission produce the nearest approach to peace which he own house can ever attain . have not be able to sit at the board and committee to which she husband have be call by the state ; nor , as he often reflect , can she make she voice hear in the house of Lords . it may be that she will refuse to he permission to attend to this branch of a bishop 's duty ; it may be that she will insist on he close attendance to he own closet . he have never whisper a word on the subject to live ear , but he have already make he fix resolve . should such a attempt be make he will rebel . dog have turn against they master , and even Neapolitans against they ruler , when oppression have be too severe . and feel within himself that if the cord be draw too tight , he also can muster courage and resist . the state of vassalage in which we bishop have be keep by he wife have not tend to exal he character in the eyes of he daughter , who assume in address they father too much of that authority which be not properly belong , at any rate , to they . they be , on the whole , fine engage young lady . they be tall and robust like they mother , whose high cheek bone , and -- we may say auburn hair , they all inherit . they think somewhat too much of they grand uncle , who have not hithertoo return the compliment by think much of they . but now that they father be a bishop , it be probable that family tie will be draw closer . consider they connection with the church , they entertain but few prejudice against the pleasure of the world ; and have certainly not distress they parent , as too many English girl have lately do , by any enthusiastic wish to devote themselves to the seclusion of a protestant nunnery . 's son be still at school . one other mark peculiarity in the character of the bishop 's wife must be mention . though not averse to the society and manners of the world , she be in she own way a religious woman ; and the form in which this tendency show itself in she be by a strict observance of the Sabbatarian rule . dissipation and low dress during the week be , under she control , aton for by three service , a evening sermon read by herself ,
, and a perfect abstinence from any cheer employment on . unfortunately for those under she roof to whom the dissipation and low dress be not extend , she servants namely and she husband , the compensat strictness of the include all . Woe betide the recreant housemaid who be find to have be listen to the honey of a sweetheart in the 's , instead of the soul - stirr evening discourse of . not only be she send adrift , but she be so sent with a character which leave she little hope of a decent place . Woe betide the six - foot hero who escort to she pew in red plush breech , if he slip away to the neighbour beer - shop , instead of fall into the back seat appropriate to he use . have the eye of Argus for such offender . occasional drunkenness in the week may be overlook , for six foot on low wage be hardly to be procure if the moral be always keep at a high pitch ; but not even for the grandeur or economy will forgive a desecration of the Sabbath . in such matter , allow herself to be often guide by that eloquent preacher , the , and as be guide by he wife , it necessarily follow that the eminent man we have name have obtain a good deal of control over in matter concern religion . 's only preferment have hithertoo be that of reader and preacher in a district church ; and on the consecration of he friend the new bishop , he readily give this up to undertake the onerous but congenial duty of domestic chaplain to the bishop . , however , on he first introduction must not be bring before the public at the tail of a chapter . the 's Chaplain of the 's parentage I be not able to say much . I have hear it assert that he be lineally descende from that eminent physician who assist at the birth of . , and that in early year he add a 'e ' to he name , for the sake of euphony , as other great man have do before he . if this be so , I presume he be christen , for that be he name , in commemoration of the conflict in which he ancestor so distinguished himself . all my research on the subject have , however , fail in enable I to fix the date on which the family change its religion . he have be a sizar at , and have there conduct himself at any rate successfully , for in due process of time he be a ma , have university pupil under he care . from thence he be transfer to , and become preacher at a new district church build on the confines of . he be in this position when congenial idea on religious subjects recommend he to , and the intercourse have become close and confidential . have be thus familiarly throw among the , it be more than natural that some softer feel than friendship should be engender . there have be some passage of love between he and the eldest hope , ; but they have hitherto result in no favourable arrangement . in truth , , have make a declaration of affection , afterwards withdraw it on finding that the doctor have no immediate worldly fund with which to endow he child ; and it may easily be conceive that , after such a announcement on he part , be not readily dispose to receive any further show of affection . on the appointment of to the bishopric of , 's views be , in truth , somewhat alter . Bishops , even though they be poor , can provide for clerical child , and begin to regret that he have not be more disinterested . he no sooner hear the tiding of the doctor 's elevation , than he recommence he siege , not violently , indeed , but respectfully , and at a distance . , however , be a girl of spirit : she have the blood of two per in she vein , and , better still , she have another lover on she book ; so sigh in vain ; and the pair soon find it convenient to establish a mutual bond of inveterate hatred . it may be think singular that 's friendship for the young clergyman should remain firm after such a affair ; but , to tell the truth , she have know nothing of it . though very fond of herself , she have never conceive the idea that either of she daughter would become so , and remember that they high birth and social advantage , expect for they match of a different sort . neither the gentleman nor the lady find it necessary to enlighten she . 's two sister have each known of the affair , so have all the servants , so have all the people live in the adjoin house on either side ; but have be keep in the dark . soon comfort himself with the reflection that , as he have be select as chaplain to the bishop , it would probably be in he power to get the good thing in the bishop 's gift , without trouble himself with the bishop 's daughter ; and he find himself able to endure the pang of reject love . as he sit himself down in the railway carriage , confront the bishop and , as they start on they first journey to , he begin to form in he own mind a plan of he future life . he know well he patron 's strong point , but he know the weak one as well . he understand correctly enough to what attempt the new bishop
bishop 's high spirit would soar , and he rightly guess that public life would better suit the great man 's taste , than the small detail of diocesan duty . he , therefore , he , , would in effect be bishop of . be he resolve ; and to give he due , he have both courage and spirit to bear he out in he resolution . he know that he should have a hard battle to fight , for the power and patronage of the see would be equally covet by another great mind -- would also choose to be bishop of . , however , flatter himself that he could outmanoeuvre the lady . she must live much in , while he would always be on the spot . she would necessarily remain ignorant of much while he would know everything belong to the diocese . at first , doubtless , he must flatter and cajole , perhaps yield in some thing ; but he do not doubt of ultimate triumph . if all other mean fail , he could join the bishop against the wife , inspire courage into the unhappy man , lay a axe to the rock of the woman 's power , and emancipate the husband . such be he thought as he sit look at the sleeping pair in the railway carriage , and be not the man to trouble himself with such thought for nothing . he be possessed of more than average abilitie , and be of good courage . though he can stoop to fawn , and stoop low indeed , if need be , he have still within he the power to assume the tyrant ; and with the power he have certainly the wish . he acquirement be not of the highest order , but such as they be they be completely under control , and he know the use of they . he be gift with a certain kind of pulpit eloquence , not likely , indeed , to be persuasive with man , but powerful with the softer sex . in he sermon he deal greatly in denunciation , excite the mind of he weaker hearer with a not unpleasant terror , and leave a impression on they minds that all mankind be in a perilous state , and all womankind too , except those who attend regularly to the evening lecture in . he look and tones be extremely severe , so much so that one can not but fancy that he regard the greater part of the world as be infinitely too bad for he care . as he walk through the street , he very face denote he horror of the world 's wickedness ; and there be always a anathema lurk in the corner of he eye . in doctrine , he , like he patron , be tolerant of dissent , if so strict a mind can be call tolerant of anything . with Wesleyan - Methodists he have something in common , but he soul tremble in agony at the iniquity of the Puseyite . he aversion be carry to thing outward as well as inward . he gall rise at a new church with a high pitch roof ; a full - breaste black silk waistcoat be with he a symbol of ; and a profane jest - book would not , in he view , more foully desecrate the church seat of a , than a book of prayer print with red letter , and ornament with a cross on the back . most active clergyman have they hobby , and observance be he . , however , be a word which never pollute he mouth -- it be always ' the ' . the ' desecration of the ' as he delight to call it , be to he meat and drink :-- he thrive upon that as policeman do on the general evil habits of the community . it be the loved subject of all he evening discourse , the source of all he eloquence , the secret of he power over the female heart . to he , the revelation of appear in that one law give for jewish observance . to he the mercy of we saviour speak in vain , to he in vain have be preach that sermon that fall from the divine lip on the mountain --' blessed be the meek , for they shall inherit the earth '--' blessed be the merciful , for the they shall obtain mercy ' . to he the be comparatively of little moment , for from it can he draw no fresh authority for that dominion which he love to exercise over at least a seventh part of man 's allot time here below . be tall , and not ill make . he foot and hand be large , as have ever be the case , with all he family , but he have a broad chest and wide shoulders to carry off these excrescence , and on the whole he figure be good . he countenance , however , be not specially prepossesse . he hair be lank , and of a dull pale reddish hue . it be always form into three straight lumpy mass , each brush with admirable precision , and cement with much grease ; two of they adhere closely to the side of he face , and the other lie at right angles above they . he wear no whisker , and be always punctiliously shaven . he face be nearly of the same colour as he hair , though perhaps a little redder : it be not unlike beef , -- beef , however , one would say , of a bad quality . he forehead be capacious and high , but square and heavy , and unpleasently shin . he mouth be large ,
, though he lip be thin and bloodless ; and he big , prominent , pale brown eye inspire anything but confidence . he nose , however , be he redeeming feature : it be pronounce straight and well - form ; though I myself should have like it better if it do not possess a somewhat spongy , porous appearance , as though it have be cleverly form out of a red coloured cork . I never could endure to shake hand with . a cold , clammy perspiration always exude from he , the small drop be ever to be see stand on he brow , and he friendly grasp be unpleasant . be -- such be the man who have suddenly fall into the midst of , and be destin there to assume the station which have heretofore be fill by the son of the late bishop . think , oh , my meditative reader , what a associate we have here for those comfortable prebendary , those gentlemanlike clerical doctor , those happy well - use , well - feed minor canons , who have grow into existence at under the kindly wing of ! but not as a mere associate for those do travel down to with the bishop and he wife . he intend to be , if not they master , at least the chief among they . he intend to lead , and to have follower ; he intend to hold the purse string of the diocese , and draw round he a obedient herd of he poor and hungry breth . and here we can hardly fail to draw a comparison between the archdeacon and we new private chaplain ; and despite the manifold fault of the former , one can hardly fail to make it much to he advantage . both man be eager , much too eager , to support and increase the power of they order . both be anxious that the world should be priest - governed , though they have probably never confess as much , even to themselves . both begrudge any other kind of dominion hold by man over man . , if he admit the 's supremacy in thing spiritual , only admit it as be due to the quasi priesthood convey on the consecrat qualitie of she coronation ; and he regard thing temporal as be by they nature subject to those which be spiritual . 's idea of sacerdotal rule be of a quite different class . he care nothing , one way or the other , for the 's supremacy ; these to he ear be empty word , mean nothing . form he regard but little , and such titular expression of supremacy , consecration , ordination , and the like , convey of themselves no significance to he . let he be supreme who can . the temporal king , judge , or gaoler , can work but on the body . the spiritual master , if he have the necessary gift , and can duly use they , have a wider field of empire . he work upon the soul . if he can make himself be believe , he can be all powerful over those who listen . if he be careful to meddle with none who be too strong in intellect , or too weak in flesh , he may indeed be supreme . and such be the ambition of . interfere very little with the worldly doings of those who be in any way subject to he . I do not mean to say that he omit to notice misconduct among he clergy , immorality in he parish , or omission in he family ; but he be not anxious to do so where the necessity could be avoid . he be not troublead with a propensity to be curiious , and as long as those around he be taint with no heretical lean towards dissent , as long as they fully and freely admit the efficacy of , he be willing that that mother should be merciful and affectionate , prone to indulgence , and unwilling to chastise . he himself enjoy the good thing of this world , and like to let it be know that he do so . he cordially despise any brother rector who think harm of dinner - party , or dread the dangers of a moderate claret - jug ; consequently dinner - party and claret - jug be common in the diocese . he like to give law and to be obey in they implicitly , but he endeavoure that he ordinance should be within the compass of the man , and not unpalatable to the gentleman . he have rule among he clerical neighbour now for sundry year , and as he have maintain he power without become unpopular , it may be presume that he have exercise some wisdom . of 's conduct much can not be say , as he grand career be yet to commence ; but it may be presume that he taste will be very different from those of the archdeacon . he conceive it to be he duty to know all the private doings and desire of the flock entrust to he care . from the poorer class he exacte and unconditional obedience to set rule of conduct , and if disobey he have recourse , like he great ancestor , to the fulmination of a Ernulfus : ' thou shalt be damn in thy go in and in thy come out -- in thy eating and thy drink ,' &c & c &c . with the rich , experience have already teach he a different line of action be necessary . in the upper walks of life do not mind be curse , and the woman , presum that it be do in delicate phrase , rather like it
it . but he have not , therefore , give up so important a portion of believe . with the man , indeed , he be generally at variance ; they be harden sinner , on whom the voice of priestly charmer often fall in vain ; but with the ladie , old and young , firm and frail , devout and dissipate , he be , as he conceive , all powerful . he can reprove fault with so much flattery , and utter censure in so caresse a manner , that the female heart , if it glow with a spark of low church susceptibility , can not withstand he . in many house he be thus a admired guest : the husband , for they wife 's sake , be fain to admit he ; and when once admit it be not easy to shake he off . he have , however , a pawing , greasy way with he , which do not endear he to those who do not value he for they soul 's sake , and he be not a man to make himself at once popular in a large circle such as be now likely to surround he at . it be know that would immediately have to reappoint to the wardenship of the hospital under the act of parliament to which allusion have be make ; but no one imagine that any choice be leave to he -- no one for a moment think that he could appoint any other than . Hard himself , when he hear how the matter have be settle , without trouble himself much on the subject , consider it as certain that he would go back to he pleasant house and garden . and though there would be much that be melancholy , nay , almost heartrend , in such a return , he still be glad that it be to be so . he daughter might probably be persuade to return there with he . she have , indeed , all but promise to do so , though she still entertaine a idea that the greatest of mortal , that important atom of humanity , that little upon , she baby , ought to have a house of he own over he head . such be the state of 's mind in the matter , he do not feel any peculiar personal interest in the appointment of to the bishopric . he , as well as other at , regrett that a man should be send among they who , they be aware , be not of they way of think ; but himself be not a bigote man on point of church doctrine , and he be quite prepared to welcome to in a graceful and become manner . he have nothing to seek and nothing to fear ; he feel that it behove he to be on good term with he bishop , and he do not anticipate any obstacle that would prevent it . in such a frame of mind he proceed to pay he respects at the palace the second day after the arrival of the bishop and he chaplain . but he do not go alone . Dr Grantly propose to accompany he , and be not sorry to have a companion , who would remove from he shoulders the burden of conversation in such a interview . in the affair of the consecration of have be introduce to the bishop , and have also be there . he have , however , keep himself in the background , and he be now to be present to the great man for the first time . the archdeacon 's feeling be of a much stronger nature . he be not exactly the man to overlook he own slighted claim , or to forgive the preference show to another . be play Venus to he , and he be prepare to wage a internecine war against the owner of the wished for apple , and all he satellite private chaplain , and other . nevertheless , it behove he also to conduct himself towards the intruder as a old archdeacon should conduct himself to a income bishop ; and though he be well aware of all 's abominable opinion as regard dissenter , church reform , the hebdomadal council , and such like ; though he dislike the man , and hate the doctrine , still he be prepare to show respect to the station of the bishop . so he and call together at the palace . he lordship be at home , and the two visitor be show through the accustom hall into the well - know room , where the good old bishop use to sit . the furniture have be buy at a valuation , and every chair and table , every bookshelf against the wall , and every square in the carpet , be as well know to each of they as they own bedrooms . nevertheless they at once feel that they be stranger there . the furniture be for the most part the same , yet the place have be metamorphose . a new sofa have be introduce , and horrid chintz affair , most unprelatical and almost irreligious ; such a sofa as never yet stand in the study of any decent high church clergyman of the of . the old curtain have also give away . they have , to be sure , become dingy , and that which have be originally a rich and goodly ruby have degenerat into a reddish brown . , however , think the old reddish bry much preferable to the gaudy buff - colou trumpery moreen which have deem good enough for she husband 's own room in the provincial city of . we friend find sit on the old bishop 's chair , look very nice
nice in he new apron ; they find , too , stand on the hearthrug , persuasive and eager , just as the archdeacon use to stand ; but on the sofa they also find , a innovation for which a precedent might be in vain be seek in all the annal of the bishopric ! there she be , however , and they could only make the best of she . the introduction be go through in much form . the archdeacon shook hand with the bishop and name , who receive such a amount of greeting as be due from a bishop to a precentor . he lordship then present they to he lady wife ; the archdeacon first , with archidiaconal honour , and then the precentor with diminished parade . after this present himself . the bishop , it be true , do mention he name , and so do too , in a louder tone ; but take it upon himself the chief burden of he own introduction . he have great pleasure in make himself acquaint with ; he have hear much of the archdeacon 's good work in that part of the diocese in which he duty as archdeacon have be exercise ( thus purposely ignore the archdeacon 's hithertoo unlimited dominion over the diocese at large ) . he be aware that he lordship depend greatly on the assistance which would be able to give he in that portion of the diocese . he then thrust out he hand , and grasp that of he new foe , bedew it unmercifully . Dr Grantly in return bow , look stiff , contract he eyebrow , and wip he hand with he pocket - handkerchief . nothing abash , then notice the precentor , and descende to the grade of the lower clergy . he give he a squeeze of the hand , damp indeed , but affectionate , and be very glad to make the acquaintance of - ; oh , yes , ; he have not exactly catch the name -- ' Precentor in the cathedral ' surmise . confess that such be the humble sphere of he work . ' some parish duty as well , ' suggest . acknowledge the diminutive incumbency of 's . then leave he alone , have condescende sufficiently , and join the conversation among the higher power . there be four person there , each of whom consider himself the most important personage in the diocese ; himself indeed , or herself , as be one of they ; and with such a difference of opinion it be not probable that they would get on pleasantly together . the bishop himself actually wear the visible apron , and trust mainly to that -- to that and to he title , both be fact which could not be overlook . the archdeacon know he subject , and really understand the business of bishoping , which the other do not ; and this be he strong ground . have she sex to back she , and she habit of command , and be nothing daunt by the high tone of 's face and figure . have only himself and he own courage and tact to depend on , but he nevertheless be perfectly self - assure , and do not doubt but that he should soon get the better of weak man who truste so much to external , as both bishop and archdeacon appear to do . ' do you reside in , ? ' ask the lady with the sweetest smile . explain that he live in he own parish of , a few mile out of the city . Whereupon the lady hope that the distance be not too great for country visit , as she would be so glad to make the acquaintance of . she would take the earliest opportunity , after the arrival of she horse at ; they horse be at present in ; they horse be not immediately come down , as the bishop would be oblige in a few day , to return to town . be no doubt aware that the bishop be at present much call upon by the ' ' : indeed , the committee could not well proceed without he , as they final report have now to be draw up . the bishop have also to prepare a scheme for the ' manufacturing and ' , of which he be a patron , or , or director , and therefore the horse would not come down to Barchester at present ; but whenever the horse do come down , she would take the earliest opportunity of call at , provide the distance be not too great for country visit . the archdeacon make he fifth bow : he have make one at each mention of the horse ; and promise that would do herself the honour of call at the palace on a early day . declare that she would be delight : she have not like to ask , not be quite sure whether Grantly have horse ; besides , the distance might have be &c , &c . Dr Grantly again bowed , but say nothing . he could have buy every single individual possession of the whole family of the Proudy , and have restore they as a gift , without much feel the loss ; and have keep a separate pair of horse for the exclusive use of he wife since the day of they marriage ; whereas have be hithertoo job about the street of at so much a month during the season ; and at other time have manage to walk , or hire a smart fly from the livery stable . ' be the arrangement with reference to the Sabbath - day school generally pretty good in you archdeaconry ? ' ' Sabbath - day school
school ! ' repeat the archdeacon with a affectation of surprise . ' upon my word , I can not tell ; it depend mainly on the parson 's wife and daughter . there be none at . ' this be almost a fib on the part of the , for have a very nice school . to be sure it be not a exclusively , and be not so designate ; but that exemplary lady always attend there a hour before church , and hear the child say they catechism , and see that they be clean and tidy for church , with they hand wash , and they sho tie ; and and , she daughter , carry thither a basket of large bun , bake on the afternoon , and distribute they to all the child not especially under disgrace , which bun be carry home after church with considerable content , and eat hot at tea , be then split and toast . the child of would indeed open they eye if they hear they venerate pastor declare that there be no school in the parish . merely open he eye wider , and slightly shrug he shoulders . he be not , however , prepare to give up he darling project . 'I fear there be a great deal of Sabbath travel here , ' say he , 'on look at the ' Bradshaw ' , I see that there be three train in and three train out every Sabbath . could nothing be do to induce the company to withdraw they ? do not you think , , that a little energy might diminish the evil ? ' ' not be a director , I really can not say . but if you can withdraw the passenger , they company , I dare say , will withdraw the train , ' say the doctor . ' it be merely a question of dividend . ' ' but surely , , ' say the lady , ' surely we should look at it differently . you and I , for instance , in we position : surely we should do all that we can to control so grievous a sin . do not you think so , ? ' and she turn to the precentor , who be sit mute and unhappy . think that all porter and stoker , guard , breaksman , pointsman ought to have a opportunity of go to church , and he hope that they all have . ' but surely , surely , ' continue , ' surely that be not enough . surely that will not secure such a observance of the Sabbath as we be teach to conceive be not only expedient by indispensable ; surly - - ' come what come might , be not to be force into a dissertation on a point of doctrine with , nor yet with ; so without much ceremony he turn he back upon the sofa , and begin to hope that have find the palace repair have be such as to meet he wish . 'yes , yes , ' say he lordship ; upon the whole he think so -- upon the whole , he do not know that there be much ground for complaint ; the architect , perhaps , might have -- but he double , , who have sidle over to the bishop 's chair , would not allow he lordship to finish he ambiguous speech . ' there be one point I would like to mention , . he lordship ask I to step through the premise , and I see that the stall in the second stable be not perfect . ' ' why -- there be stand for a dozen horse , 'say the archdeacon . ' perhaps so , ' say the other ; ' indeed , I 've no doubt of it ; but visitor , you know , often require so much accommodation . there be many of the bishop 's relative who always bring they own horse . ' promise that due provision for the relative 's horse should be make , as far at least as the extent of the original stable building would allow . he would himself communicate with the architect . ' and the coach - house , , ' continue ; ' there be really hardly any room for a second carriage in the large coach - house , and the smaller one , of course , hold only one . ' ' and the gas , ' chim in the lady ; ' there be no gas through the house , no whatever , but in the kitchen and passage . surely the palace should have be fitte through with pipe for gas , and hot water too . there be no hot water lay on anywhere above the ground floor . surely there should be the means of get hot water in the bed - room without have it bring in jug from the kitchen . ' the bishop have a decided opinion that there should be pipe for hot water . hot water be very essential for the comfort of the palace . it be , indeed , a requisite in any decent gentleman 's house . have remark that the coping on the garden wall be in many place imperfect . have discover a large hole , evidently the work of rat , in the servants 's hall . the bishop express a utter detestation of rat . there be nothing , he believe , in this world , that he so much hate as a rat . have , moreover , observe that the lock of the out - house be very imperfect : he might specify the coal - cellar , and the wood - house . have also see that those on the door of the
the servants 's bedroom be in a equally bad condition ; indeed the lock all through the house be old - fashioned and unserviceable . the bishop think that a great deal depend on a good lock , and quite as much on the key . he have observ that the fault very often lay with the key , especially if the wards be in any way twist . be go on with he catalogue of grievance , when he be somewhat loudly interrupt by the archdeacon who succeed in explain that the diocesan architect , or rather he foreman , be the person to be address on such subject ; and that he , , have inquire as to the comfort of the palace , merely as a point of compliment . he be very sorry , however , that so many thing have be find amiss : and then he rise from he chair to escape . , though she have contrive to lend she assistance in recapitulat the palatial dilapidation , have not on that account give up she hold of , nor cease from she cross-examination as the iniquity of Sabbatical amusement . over and over again have she throw out she ' surly , surly , ' at 's devote head , and ill have that gentleman be able to parry the attack . he have never before find himself subject to such a nuisance . lady hithertoo , when they have consult he on religious subject , have listen to what he might choose to say with some deference , and have differ , it they differ , in silence . but interrogate he , and then lecture . ' neither thou , nor thy son , nor thy daughter , nor thy man servant , nor thy maid servant , ' say she , impressively , and more than once , as though have forget the word . she shook she finger at he as she quote the favourite law , as though menace he with punishment ; and then call upon he categorically to state whether he do not think that travel on the be a abomination and a desecration . have never be so hard presse in he life . he feel that he ought to rebuke the lady for presum so to talk to a gentleman and a clergyman so may year she senior ; but he recoil from the idea of scold the bishop 's wife , in the bishop 's presence , on he first visit to the palace ; moreover , to tell the truth , he be somewhat afraid of she . she , see he sit silent and absorb , by no means refrain from the attack . 'i hope , , ' say she , shak she head slowly and solemnly , ' I hope you will not leave I to think that you approve of Sabbath travel , ' and she look a look of unutterable meaning into he eye . there be no standing for this , for be now look at he , and so be the bishop , and so be the archdeacon , who have complete he adieux on that side of the room . therefore get up also , and put out he hand to , say : ' if you will come to 's some , I will preach you a sermon on the subject . ' and so the archdeacon and the precentor take they departure , bow low to the lady , shak hand with the lord , and escape from in the best manner each could . be again maltreate ; but Grantly swore deeply in the bottom of he heart , that no earthly consideration should ever again induce he to touch the paw of that impure and filthy animal . and now , have I the pen of a might poet , would I s in epic verse the noble wrath of the archdeacon . the palace step descend to a broad gravel sweep , from whence a small gate open out into the street , very near the covered gateway lead to the close . the road from the palace door turn to the leave , through the spacious garden , and terminate on the -road , half a mile from the cathedral . till they have pass this small gate and enter the close , neither of they speak a word ; but the precentor clearly see from he companion 's face that a tornado be to be expect , nor be he himself inclin to stop it . though , by nature far less irritable than the archdeacon , even he be angry : he even -- that mild and courteous man -- be inclin to express himself in anything but courteous term . 's good heaven ! ' exclaim the archdeacon , as he place he foot on the gravel walk of the close , and raise he hat with one hand , pass the other somewhat violently over he now grizzl lock ; smoke issue from the uplifted beaver as it be a cloud of wrath , and the safety - valve of he anger open , and emitte a visible steam , prevent positive explosion and probably apoplexy . ' good heaven !' -- and the archdeacon look up to the gray pinnacle of the cathedral tower , make a mute appeal to that still liive witness which have look down on the doings of so many bishop of . 'I do not think I shall ever like that , ' say . ' like he ! ' roar the archdeacon , stand still for a moment to give more force to he voice ; ' like he ! ' all the raven of the close caw they assent . the old bell of the tower , in chim the hour , echo the word ; and
and the swallow fly out from they nests mutely express a similar opinion . like ! why no , it be not very probable that any Barchester - breed living thing should like ! ' either , ' say . the archdeacon thereupon forget himself . I will not follow he example , nor shock my reader by transcrib the term in which he express he feeling as to the lady who have be name . the raven and the last lingering note of the clock bell be less scrupulous , and repeat in corresponding echoe the very improper exclamation . the archdeacon again raise he hat ; and another salutary escape of steam be effect . there be a pause , during which the precentor try to realise the fact that the wife of the bishop of have be thus designate , in the close of the cathedral , by the lip of its own archdeacon : but he could not do it . ' the bishop seem a quiet man enough , ' suggest , have acknowledge to himself he own failure . ' ! ' exclaim the doctor , who for the nonce be not capable of more than spasmodic attempt at utterance . ' well , he do not seem very bright , ' say , ' and yet he have always have the reputation of a clever man . I suppose he be cautious and not inclin to express himself very freely . ' the new bishop of be already so contemptible a creature in 's eye , that he could not condescmend to discuss he character . he be a puppet to be play by other ; a mere wax doll , do up in a apron and a shovel hat , to be stick on a throne or elsewhere and pull about by wire as other chose . do not choose to let himself down low enough to talk about ; but he see that he would have to talk about the other member of he household , the coadjutor bishop , who have bring he lordship down , as it be , in a box , and be about to handle the wire as they will . this in itself be a terrible vexation to the archdeacon . could he have ignore the chaplain , and have fight the bishop , there would have be , at any rate , nothing degrad in such a contest . let the make whom she would bishop of ; a man , or even a ape , when once a bishop , would be a respectable adversary , if he would but fight , himself . but what be such a person as to do , when such another person as be put forward as he antagonist ? if he , we archdeacon , refuse to combat , would walk triumphant over the field , and have the diocese of under he heel . if , on the other hand , the archdeacon accept as he enemy the man whom the new puppet bishop put before he as such , he would have to talk about , and write about , and in all matter treat with , as a be stand , in some degree , on ground similar to he own . he would have to meet ; to -- ! the idea be sicken . he could not bring himself to have to do with . ' he be the most thoroughly bestial creature that ever I set my eye upon , ' say the archdeacon . ' who -- the bishop ? ' ' Bishop ! no -- I be not talk about the bishop . how on earth such a creature get ordain !-- they will ordain anybody now , I know ; but he be be in the church these ten year ; and they use to be a little careful ten year ago . ' 'Oh ! you mean . ' ' do you ever see any animal less like a gentleman ? ' 'I can not say I feel myself much dispose to like he . ' ' like he ! ' again shoute the doctor , and the assent raven again caw a echo ; 'or course you do not like he ; it be not a question of liking . but what be we to do with he ? ' ' do with he ? ' ask . ' yes -- what be we to do with he ? how be we to treat he ? there he be , and there he will stay . he have put he foot in that palace , and he will never take it out again till he be drive . how be we to get rid of he ? ' 'I do not suppose he can do we much harm . ' ' not do harm !-- well I think you will find yourself of a different opinion before a month be gone . what would you say now , if he get himself put into the hospital ? would that be harm ? ' muse awhile , and then say he do not think the new bishop would put into the hospital . ' if he do not put he there , he will put he somewhere else where he will be as bad . I tell you that that man , to all intent and purpose , will be of ; ' and again , raise he hat , and rub he hand thoughtfully and sadly over he head . ' Impudent scoundrel ! ' he exclaim after a while . 'To dare to cross -examine I about school in the diocese , and travel too : I never in my life meet he equal for sheer impudence . why , he must have think we be two candidate for ordination . ' 'i declare I
I think the worst of the two , ' say . ' when a woman be impertinent one must only put up with it , and keep out of she way in future ; but I be not inclin to put up with . " Sabbath travel ! " ' and the doctor attempt to imitate the peculiar drawl of the man he so much dislike : ' " travel ! " those be the sort of man who will ruin the of , and make the profession of clergyman disreputable . it be not the dissenter or the papist that we should fear , but the set of canting , low - breed hypocrite who be wriggl they way in among we ; man who have no fix principle , no standard idea of religion or doctrine , but who take up some popular cry , as this fellow have do about " travel . " ' do not again repeat the question aloud , but he do so constantly to himself , ' what be they to do with ? ' how be he openly , before the world , to show that he utterly disapprove of and abhor such a man ? have escape the taint of any extreme rigour of church doctrine . the clergyman of the city and the neighbourhood , though very well inclin to promote high - church principle , privileges , and prerogative , have never commit themselves to tendency , which be somewhat too loosely call Puseyite practice . they all preach in they black gown , as they fathers have do before they ; they wear ordinary black cloth waistcoat ; they have not candle on they altar , either lighted or unlighted ; they make no private genuflexion , and be contente to confine themselves to such ceremonial observance as have be in vogue for the last hundred year . the service be decently and demurely read in they parish church , chanting be confine to the cathedral , and the science of intoning be unknown . one young man who have come direct from as a curate at have , after the lapse of two or three , make a faint attempt , much to the bewilderment of the poorer part of the congregation . have not be present on the occasion ; but Grantly , who have she own opinion on the subject , immediately after the service express a hope that the young gentleman have not be take ill , and offer to send he all kind of condiment suppose to be good for a sore throat . after that there have be no more intoning at . but now the archdeacon begin to meditate on some strong measure of absolute opposition . and he crew be of the lowest possible order of of clergyman , and therefore it behove he , , to be of the very highest . would abolish all form and ceremony , and therefore feel the sudden necessity of multiply they . would consent to deprive the church of all collective authority and rule , and therefore Dr Grantly would stand up for the full power of convocation , and the renewal of its ancient privileges . it be true that he could not himself into the service , but he could pressure the co-operation of any number of gentlemanlike curate well train in the mystery of do so . he would not willingly alter he own fashion of dress , but he could people Barchester with young clergyman dress in the longest frock , and the highest breaste silk waistcoat . he certainly be not prepare to cross himself , or to advocate the real presence ; but , without go this length , there be various observance , by adopt which he could plainly show he antipathy to such man as and . all these thing pass through he mind as he pace up and down the close with . , war , internecine war be in he heart . he feel that as regard himself and , one of the two must be annihilated as far as the city of be concerned ; and he do not intend to give way until there be not leave to he a inch of ground on which he could stand . he still flatter himself that he could make too hot to hold , and he have no weakness of spirit to prevent he bring about such consummation if it be in he power . 'I suppose must call at the palace , ' say . ' yes , she shall call there ; but it shall be once and once only . I dare say " the horse " will not find it convenient to come to Plumstead very soon , and when that once be do the matter may drop . ' 'I do not suppose need call . I do not think would get on at all well with . ' ' not the least necessity in life , ' reply the archdeacon , not without the reflection that a ceremony which be necessary for he wife , might not be at all binding on the widow of . ' not the slightest reason on earth why she should do so , if she do not like it . for myself , I do not think that any decent young woman should be subject to the nuisance of be in the same room with that man . ' and so the two clergyman parte . go to he daughter 's house , and the archdeacon seek the seclusion of he brougham . the new inhabitant of the palace do not express any higher opinion of they visitor than they visitor have express of they . though they do not use quite such strong language as have do , they feel as much personal aversion , and be quite as
as well aware as he be that there would be a battle to be fight , and that there be hardly room for in as long as be predominant . indeed , it may be doubt whether have not already within he breast a better prepare system of strategy , a more accurately - define line of hostile conduct than the archdeacon . be go to fight because he find that he hate the man . have predetermine to hate the man because he foresee the necessity of fight he . when he have first review the carte de pay , previous to he entry into , the idea have occur to he of conciliat the archdeacon , of cajoling and flatter he into submission , and of obtain the upper hand by cunning instead of courage . a little inquiry , however , suffice to convince he that all he cunning would fail to win over such a man as Grantly to such a mode of action as that to be adopt by ; and then he determin to fall back upon he courage . he at once see that open battle against and all 's adherent be a necessity of he position , and he deliberately plan the most expedient method of give offence . after he arrival the bishop have intimate to the dean that , with the permission of the then in residence , he chaplain would preach in the cathedral on the next . the canon in residence happen to be the and , who at this time be very busy on the shore of , add to that unique collection of butterfly for which he be so famous . or , rather , he would have be in residence but for the butterfly and other such summer - day consideration ; and the vicar-choral , who be to take he place in the pulpit , by no means object to have he word do for he by . accordingly preach , and if a preacher can have satisfaction in be listen to , ought to have be gratify . I have reason to think that he be gratify , and that he leave the pulpit with the conviction that he have do what he intend to do when he enter it . on this occasion the new bishop take he seat for the first time in the throne allot to he . new scarlet cushion and drapery have be prepare , with new gilt binding and new fringe . the old carve oak - wood of the throne , ascend with its numerous grotesque pinnacle , half - way up to the rood of the choir , have be wash , and dust , and rub , and it all look very smart . ah ! how often sit there , in happy early day , on those lowly benche in front of the altar , have I whil away the tedium of a sermon consider how best I might thread my way up amidst those wooden towers , and climb safely to the topmost pinnacle ! all go to hear ; either for that or to gaze at the new bishop . all the best bonnet of the city be there , and moreover all the best glossy clerical hat . not a stall but have its fitting occupant ; for though some of the prebendary might be away in or elsewhere , they place be fill by breth , who flock into on the occasion . the dean be there , a heavy old man , now too old , indeed , to attend frequently in he place ; and so be the archdeacon . so also be the chancellor , the treasurer , the precentor , sundry canons and minor canons , and every lay member of the choir , prepare to s the new bishop in with due melody and harmonious expression of sacred welcome . the service be certainly well perform . be always the case at , as the musical education of the choir have be good , and the voice have be carefully select . the psalm be beautifully chant ; the be magnificently sung ; and the litany be give in a manner , which be still to be find at , but , if my taste be correct , be to be find nowhere else . the litany of have long be the special task to which 's skill and voice have be devote . crowd audience generally make good performer , and though be not aware of any extraordinary exertion on he part , yet probably he rather exceed he usual mark . other be do they best , and it be natural that he should emulate he breth . so the service go on , and at last get into the pulpit . he choose for he text a verse from the precept address by to , as to the conduct necessary in a spiritual pastor and guide , and it be immediately evident that the good clergy of be to have a lesson . ' study to show thyself approve unto , a workman that needeth not to be asham , rightly divide the word of truth . ' these be the word of the text , and with such a subject in such a place , it may be suppose that such a preacher would be listen to by such a audience . he be listen to with breathless attention , and not without considerable surprise . whatever opinion of might have be hold in before he commence , he discourse , none of he hearer , when it be over , could mistake he for either a fool or a coward . it would not be become be I to travesty a sermon , or even repeat the language of it in the page of a novel . in endeavouring to
to depict the character of the persons of whom I write , I be to a certain extent force to speak of sacred thing . I trust , however , that I shall not be think to scoff at the pulpit , though some may imagine that I do not feel the reverence that be due to the cloth . I may question the infallibility of the teacher , but I hope that I shall not therefore be accuse of doubt as to the thing to be teach . , in commence he sermon , show no slight tact in he ambiguous manner of hinting that , humble as he be himself , he stand there as the mouthpiece of the illustrious divine who sit opposite to he ; and have presume so much , he give forth a very accurate definition of the conduct which that prelate would rejoice to see in the clergyman now bring under he jurisdiction . it be only necessary to say , that the peculiar point insiste on be exactly those which be most distasteful to the clergy of the diocese , and most averse to they practice and opinion ; and that all those peculiar habit and privileges which have always be dear to high - church priest , to that party which be now scandalously call the high - and - dry church , be ridicule , abuse , and anathematise . now , the clergyman of the diocese of Barchester be all of the high - and - dry church . have thus , accord to he own opinion , explain how a clergyman should show himself approve unto , as a workman that needeth not to be asham , he go on to explain how the word of truth should be divide ; and here he take a rather narrow view of the question ; and fetch argument from afar . he object be to express he abomination of all ceremonious mode of utterance , to cry down any religious feeling which might be excited , not by the sense , but by the sound of word , and in fact to insult the cathedral practice . have speak of rightly pronouncing instead of rightly divide the word of truth , this part of he sermon would have be more to the purpose ; but the preacher 's immediate object be to preach 's doctrine , and not 's , and he contrive to give the necessary twist to the text with some skill . he could not exactly say , preach from a cathedral pulpit , that chanting should be abandon in cathedral service . by such a assertion , he would have overshot he mark and render himself absurd , to the delight of he hearer . he could , however , and do , allude with heavy denunciation to the practice of intoning in parish church , although the practice be not but unknown in the diocese ; and from thence he come round to the undue preponderance , which he assert , music over mean in the beautiful service which they have just hear . he be aware , he say , that the practice of we ancestor could not be abandon at a moment 's notice ; the feeling of the aged would be outraged , and the mind of respectable man would be shocked . there be many , he be aware , of not sufficient calibre of think to perceive , of not sufficient education to know , that a mode of service , which be effective when outward ceremony be of more moment than inward feeling , have become all but barbarous at a time when inward conviction be everything , when each word of the minister 's lip should fall intelligibly into the listener 's heart . Formerly the religion of the multitude have be a affair of the imagination : now , in these latter day , it have become necessary that a should have a reason for he faith -- should not only believe , but digest -- not only hear , but understand . the word of we morning service , how beautiful , how apposite , how intelligible they be , when read with simple and distinct decorum ! but how much of the meaning of the word be lose when they be produce with all the meretricious charms of melody ! & class &c . here be a sermon to be preach before , , and the rest of they ! before a whole dean and chapter assemble in they own cathedral ! before man who have grow old in the exercise of they peculiar service , with a full conviction of they excellence for all intend purpose ! this too from such a man , a clerical parvenu , a man without a cure , a mere chaplain , a intruder among they ; a fellow rak up , so say , from the gutter of ! they have to sit through it ! none of they , not even , could close he ear , nor leave the house of during the hour of service . they be under a obligation of listen , and that too , without any immediate power of reply . there be , perhaps , no greater hardship at present inflict on mankind in civilised and free country than the necessity of listen to sermon . no one but a preach clergyman have , in these realm , the power of compelling audience to sit silent , and be torment . no one but a preach clergyman can revel in platitude , truism , and untruisms , ( sic ) and yet receive , as he undispu privilege , the same respectful demeanour as though word of impassioned eloquence , or persuasive logic , fall from he lip . let a professor of law or physic find he place in
in a lecture - room , and there pour forth jejune word and useless empty phrase , and he will pour they forth to empty bench . let a barrister attempt to talk without talk well , and he will talk but seldom . a judge 's charge need be listen to per force by none but the jury , prisoner , and gaoler ( sic ) . a member of parliament can be cough down or count out . town -councillor can be taboo . but no one can ry himself of the preaching clergyman . he be the bore of the age , the old man whom we Sindbads can not shake off , the nightmare that disturb we 's rest , the incubus that overload we religion and make 's service distasteful . we be not force into church ! no : but we desire more than that . we desire not to be force to stay away . we desire , nay , we be resolute , to enjoy the comfort of public worship ; but we desire also that we may do so without a amount of tedium which ordinary human nature can not endure with patience ; that we may be able to leave the house of without that anxious long for escape , which be the common consequence of common sermon . with what complacency will a young parson deduce false conclusion from misunderstood texts , and then threaten we with all the penalties of Hade if we neglect to comply with the injunction he have give we ! yes , my too self - confident juvenile friend , I do believe in those mystery , which be so common in you mouth ; I do believe in the unadulterated word which you hold there in you hand ; but you must pardon I if , in some thing , I doubt you interpretation . the bible be good , the prayer - book be good , nay , you yourself would be acceptable , if you would read to I some portion of those time - honoure discourse which we great divine have elaborate in the full maturity of they power . but you must excuse I , my insufficient young lecturer , if I yaw over you imperfect sentence , you repeat phrase , you false patho , you drawling ( sic ) and denouncing ( sic ) , you hum and haw , you oh - ing and ah - e , you black glove and you white handkerchief . to I , it all mean nothing ; and hours be too precious to be so waste -- if one could only avoid it . and here I must make a protest against the pretence , so often put forward by the work clergy , that they be overburden by the multitude of sermon to be preach . we be all too fond of we own voice , and a preacher be encourage in the vanity of make he heard by the privilege of a compelle audience . he sermon be the pleasant morsel of he life , he delicious moment of self - exaltation . 'I have preach nine sermon this week , four the week before . I have preach twenty - three sermon this month . it be really too much . ' ' too much for the strength of any one . ' ' yes ,' he answer meekly , ' indeed it be ; I be begin to feel it painfully . ' ' would , ' say I , ' you could feel it -- would that you could be make to feel it . ' but he never guess that my heart be wrung for the poor listener . there be , at any rate , no tedium feel in listen to on the occasion in question . he subject come too home to he audience to be dull ; and , to tell the truth , have the gift of use words forcibly . he be hear through he thirty minute of eloquence with mute attention and open ear ; but with angry eye , which glar find form one enrage parson to another , with wide - spread nostril from which already burst forth fume of indignation , and with many shuffling ( sic ) of the foot and uneasy motion of the body , which betoken mind disturb , and heart not at peace with all the world . at last the bishop , who , of all the congregation , have be most surprised , and whose hair almost stand on end with terror , give the blessing in a manner not at all equal to that in which he have long be practise it in he own study , and the congregation be free to go they way . the and all be in a tumult . could hardly get himself out of the cathedral porch before he explode in he wrath . the old dean betook himself silently to he deanery , afraid to speak ; and there sit , half stupefy , ponder many thing in vain . creep forth solitary and unhappy ; and , slowly pass beneath the elm of the close , could scarcely bring himself to believe that the word which he have hear have proceed from the pulpit of the . be he again to be disturb ? be he whole life to be show up as a useless sham a second time ? would he have to abdicate he precentorship , as he have he wardenship , and to give up chanting , as he have give up he twelve old bedesman ? and what if he do ! some other Jupiter , some other , would come and turn he out of 's . surely he could not have be wrong all he life in chant the litany as he
he have do ! he begin , however , to have doubt . Doubt himself be 's weakness . it be not , however , the usual fault of he order . yes ! all Barchester be in a tumult . it be not only the clergy who be affect . the laity also have listen to 's new doctrine , all with surprise , some with indignation , and some with a mixed feeling , in which dislike of the preacher be not so strongly blend . the old bishop and he chaplain , the dean and he canons and minor canons , the old choir , and especially Harding who be at the head of it , have all be popular in . they have spend they money and do good ; the poor have not be ground down ; the clergy in society have neither be overbearing nor austere ; and the whole repute of the city be due to its ecclesiastical importance . yet there be those who have hear with satisfaction . it be so pleasant to receive a fillip of excitement when suffer from the dull routine of every day life ! the anthem and be in themselves delightful , but they have be hear so often ! be certainly not delightful , but he be new , and , moreover , clever . they have long thought it slow , so say now may of the , to go on as they have do in they old humdrum way , give ear to none of the religious change which be move the world without . people in advance of the age now have new idea , and it be quite time that should go in advance . might be right . certainly have to be strictly keep in , except as regard the cathedral service . indeed the two hour between service have long be appropriate to morn call and hot luncheon . then school ; Sabbath - day school have call they . the late bishop have really not think of school as he should have do . ( these people probably do not reflect that catechism and collect be quite hard work to the young mind as book - keep is to the elderly ; and that quite as little feeling of worship enter into one task as the other . ) and then , as regard that great question of musical service , there might be much to be say on 's side of the question . it certainly be the fact , that people go to the cathedral to hear the music & c &c . and so a party absolutely form itself in on 's side of the question ! this consist , among the upper class , chiefly of lady . no man -- that be , no gentleman -- could possibly be attract by , or consent to sit at the foot of so abhorrent a Gamaliel . lady be sometimes less nice in they appreciation of physical disqualification ; and , provide that a man speak to they well , they will listen , though he speak from a mouth never so deformed and hideous . be most fortunate as a lover ; and the damp , sandy - haired , saucer - ey , red-fist be powerful only over the female breast . there be , however , one or two of the neighbour clergy who think it not quite safe to neglect the basket in which for the nonce be store the loave and fish of the diocese of . they , and they only , come to call on after he performance in the cathedral pulpit . among they , the rector of , whose wife still continue to present he from year to year with fresh pledge of she love , and so to increase he car and , it be to be hope , he happiness equally . who can wonder that a gentleman , with fourteen liive child and a bare income of L 400 a year , should look after the loave and fishes , ever when they be under the thumb of ? very soon after the on which the sermon be preach , the lead clergy of the neighbourhood hold high debate together as to how should be put down . in the first place he should never again preach from the pulpit of Barchester cathedral . this be 's earliest dictum ; and they all agree , provide only that they have the power to exclude he . declare that the power rest with the dean and chapter , observe that no clergyman out of the chapter have a claim to preach there , save only the bishop himself . to this the dean assent , but allege that contests on such a subject would be unseemly ; to which rejoin a meagre little doctor , one of the cathedral prebendary , that the contest must be all on the side of if every prebendary be always there ready to take he own place in the pulpit . Cunn little meagre doctor , whom it suit well to live in he own cosy house within close , and who be well content to have he little fling at and other absentee , whose italian villa , or entice home , be more tempting than cathedral stall and residence ! to this answer the burly chancellor , a man rather silent indeed , but very sensible , that absent prebendary have they vicar , and that in such case the vicar 's right to the pulpit be the same as that of the higher order . to which the dean assent , groan deeply at these truths . , however , the meagre doctor remark that they would be in the hand of they minor canons , one of whom might at any hour betray he trust
trust . be hear from the burly chancellor a ejaculation sound somewhat like ' Pooh , pooh , pooh ! ' but it might have be that the worthy man be but blow out the heavy breath from he windpipe . why silence he at all , suggest . let they not be asham to hear what any man might have to preach to they , unless he preache false doctrine ; in which case , let the bishop silence he . so speak we friend ; vainly ; for human end must be attaine by human means . but the dean see a ray of hope out of those purblind old eye of he . yes , let they tell the bishop how distasteful to they be this Mr Slope : new bishop just come to he seat could not wish to insult he clergy while the gloss be yet fresh on he first apron . then up rise ; and , have thus collect the scattered wisdom of he associate , speak forth with word of deep authority . when I say up rise the archdeacon , I speak of the inner man , which then spring up to more immediate action , for the doctor have , bodily , be stand all along with he back to the dean 's empty fire - grate , and the tail of he frock coat support over he two arm . he hand be in he breech pockets . ' it be quite clear that this man must not be allow to preach again in the cathedral . we all see that , except we dear friend here , the milk of whose nature run so softly , that he would not have the heart to refuse the Pope , the loan of he pulpit , if the Pope would come and ask it . we must not , however , allow the man to preach again here . it be not because he opinion on church matter may be different from ours -- with that one would not quarrel . it be because he have purposely insult we . when he go up into that pulpit last , he study object be to give offence to man who have grow old in reverence to those thing of which he da to speak so slightingly . what ! to come here a stranger , a young , unknown , and unfriended stranger , and tell we , in the name of the bishop , he master , that we be ignorant of we duty , old - fashioned , and useless ! I do not know whether to most admire he courage or he impudence ! and one thing I will tell you : that sermon originate solly with the man himself . the bishop be no more a party to it than be the dean here . you all know how grieve I be to see a bishop in this diocese hold the latitudinarian idea by which have make himself conspicuous . you all know how greatly I should distrust the opinion of such a man . but in this matter I hold he to be blameless . I believe have live too long among gentleman to be guilty , or to instigate another to be guilty , of so gross a outrage . no ! that man utter what be untrue when he hint that he be speak as the mouthpiece of the bishop . it suite he ambitious view at once to throw down the gauntlet to we -- here within the wall of we own loved cathedral -- here where we have for so many year exercise we ministry , without schism and with good repute . such a attack upon we , come from such a quarter , be abominable . ' ' Abominable , ' groane the dean . ' Abominable , ' mutter the meagre doctor . ' Abominable , ' re-echo the chancellor , uttere a sound from the bottom of he deep chest . 'I really think it be , ' say . ' most abominable , and most unjustifiable , ' continue the archdeacon . ' but , , thank , that pulpit be still we own : you own , I should say . that pulpit belong to the dean and chapter of , and , as yet , be no part of that chapter . you , , have suggest that we should appeal to the bishop to abstain from force this man on we ; but what if the bishop allow himself to be rule by he chaplain ? in my opinion , the matter be in we own hand . Slope can not preach there without permission ask and obtain , and let that permission be invariable refuse . let all participation in the ministry of the cathedral service be refuse to he . then , if the bishop choose to interfere , we shall know what answer to make to the bishop . my friend here have suggest that this man may again find he way into the pulpit by undertake the duty of some of you minor canons ; but I be sure that we may fully trust to these gentleman to support we , when it be know that the dean object to any such transfer . ' ' of course you may , ' say the chancellor . there be much more discussion among the learn conclave , all of which , of course , end in obedience to the archdeacon 's command . they have too long be accustom to he rule to shake it off so soon ; and in this particular case they have none of they a wish to abet the man whom he be so anxious to put down . such a meeting as that we have just record be not hold in such a city as unknown
unknown and untold of . not only be the fact of the meeting talk of in every respectable house , include the palace , but the very speech of the dean , the archdeacon , and chancellor be repeat ; not without many additions and imaginary circumstance , accord to the taste and opinion of the relater . all , however , agree in say that be to be debar from open he mouth in the cathedral of ; many believe that the verger be to be order to refuse he even the accommodation of a seat ; and some of the most far - go advocate for strong measure , declare that this sermon be look upon as a indictable offence , and that proceedings be to be take against he for brawling . the party who be inclin to he -- the enthusiastically religious young lady , and the middle - aged spinster desirous of a move -- of course take up he defence the more warmly on account of this attack . if they could not hear in the cathedral , they would hear he elsewhere ; they would leave the dull dean , the dull old prebendary , and the scarcely less dull young minor canons , to preach to each other ; they would work slipper and cushion , and hey band for , make he a happy martyr , and stick he up in some new ( sic ) or , and put the cathedral quite out of fashion . and at once return to . they think it expedient not to have to encounter any personal application from the dean and chapter respect the sermon till the violence of the storm have expend itself ; but they leave behind they nothing daunt , and he go about he work zealously , flatter such as would listen to he flattery , whisper religious twaddle into the ear of foolish woman , ingratiat himself with the very few clergy who would receive he , visit the house of the poor , inquire into all people , pry into everything , and search with the minutest eye into all palatial dilapidation . he do not , however , make any immediate attempt to preach again in the cathedral . and so all be by the ears . the EX- Warden in to the hospital among the lady in who have hitherto acknowledge as they spiritual director , must not be reckon either the widow , or she sister - in - law . on the first outbreak of the wrath of the denizen of the close , none have be more animate against the intruder than those two lady . and this be natural . who could be so proud of the musical distinction of they own cathedral as the favourite daughter of the precentor ? who would be so likely to resent a insult offer to the old choir ? and in such matter and she sister - in - law have but one opinion . this wrath , however , have in some degree be mitigate , and I regret to say that these lady allow to be he own apologist . about a fortnight after the sermon have be preach , they be both of they not a little surprised by hear announce , as the page in button open 's drawing - room door . indeed , what live man could , by a mere morning visit , have surprise they more ? here be the great enemy of all that be good in come into they own drawing - room , and they have not strong arm , no ready tongue near at hand for they protection . the widow snatch she baby out of it be cradle into she lap , and stand up ready to die manfully in that baby 's behalf , should , under any circumstance , such a sacrifice be necessary . in this manner be receive . but when he leave , he be allow by each lady to take she hand , and to make he adieux as gentleman do who have be graciously entertained ! yes ; he shook hand with they , and be curtsey out courteously , the buttoned page open the door , as he would have do for the best canon of they all . he have touch the baby 's little hand and bless he with a fervid blessing ; he have speak to the widow of she early sorrow , and 's silent tear have not rebuk he ; he have tell that she devotion would be reward , and have hear the praise without disgust . and how have he do all this ? how have he so quickly turn aversion into , at any rate , acquaintance ? how have he overcome the enmity with which those lady have be ready to receive he , and make he peace with they so easily ? my reader will guess from what I have write that I myself do not like ; but I be constrain to admit that he be a man of part . he know how to say a soft word in the proper place ; he know how to adapt he flattery to the ear of he hearer ; he know the wile of the serpent and he use they . could have adapt he manners to man as well as to woman , could he ever have lear not the way of a gentleman , he might have risen to great thing . he commence he acquaintance with by praise she father . he have , he say , become aware that he have unfortunately offende the feeling of a man of whom he could not speak too highly ; he would not now allude to a subject which be probably too serious for draw - room conversation , but he would say
say , that it have be very far from he to utter a word in disparagement of a man , of whom all the world , at least the clerical world , spoke of so highly as it do of . and so he go on , unsay a great deal of he sermon , express he highest admiration for the precentor 's musical talents , eulogise the father and the daughter and the sister - in - law , speak in that low silky whisper which he always have specially prepare for feminine ear , and , ultimately , gain he object . when he leave , he express a hope that he might again be allow to call ; and though give no verbal assent to this , she do not express dissent ; and so 's right to visit at the widow 's house be establish . the day after this visit tell she father of it , and express a opinion that be not quite so black as he have be paint . open he eye rather wider than usual when he hear what have occur , but he say little ; he could not agree in any praise of , and it be not he practice to say much evil of any one . he do not , however , like the visit , and simple - mind as he be , he feel sure that have some deeper motive than the mere pleasure of make soft speech to two lady . , however , have come to see he daughter with other purpose than that of speak either good or evil of . he have come to tell she that the place of warden in 's hospital be again to be fill up , and that in all probability he would once more return to he old house and he twelve bedesman . ' but ,' he say , laugh , 'I shall be greatly shorn of my ancient glory . ' ' why so , papa ? ' ' this new act of parliament , that be to put we all on we foot again , ' continue he , ' settle my income at four hundred and fifty pound per annum . ' ' four hundred and fifty , ' say she , ' instead of eight hundr ! well ; that be rather shabby . but still , papa , you will have the dear old house and garden ? ' 'My dear , ' say he , ' it be worth twice the money ;' and as he speak he show a jaunty kind of satisfaction in he tone and manner , and in the quick , pleasant way in which he pace 's drawing - room . ' it be worth twice the money . I shall have the house and the garden , and a larger income than I can possibly want . ' ' at any rate , you will have no extravagant daughter to provide for ; ' and as she speak , the young widow put she arm within he , and make he sit on the sofa beside she ; ' at any rate you will not have that expense . ' ' no , my dear ; and I shall be rather lonely without she ; but we will not think of that now . as regards income I shall have plenty for all I want . I shall have my old house ; and I do not mind own now that I have feel sometimes the inconvenience of live in a lodging . Lodging be very nice for young man , but at my time of life there be a want of -- I hardly know what to call it , perhaps not respectability --' 'Oh , papa ! I be sure there be be nothing like that . nobody have think it ; nobody in all have be more respecte than you have be since you take those room in . nobody ! not the dean in he deanery , or the archdeacon at . ' ' the archdeacon would not be much oblige to you if he hear you , ' say he , smile somewhat at the exclusive manner in which he daughter confine she illustration to the church dignitary of the chapter of ; ' but at any rate , I shall be glad to get back to the old house . I hear that it be all settle , I have begin to fancy that I can not be comfortable without my two sitting - room . ' ' come and stay with I , papa , till it be settled -- there be a dear papa . ' ' thank ye , Nelly . but no ; I will not do that . it would make two movings . I shall be very glad to get back to my old man again . ! ! there have six of they go in the few last year . six out of twelve ! and the other I fear have have but a sorry life of it there . poor Bunce , poor old ! ' be one of the survive recipient of 's charity ; and old man , now over , who have long be a favourite of 's . ' how happy old Bunce will be , ' say , clapp she soft hand softly . ' how happy they all will be to have you back again . ' you may be sure there will soon be friendship among they again when you be there . ' ' but , ' say he , half laugh , be to have new trouble , which will be terrible to I . there be to be twelve old woman , and a matron . how shall I manage twelve woman and a matron ! ' ' the
the matron will manage the woman of course . ' ' and who will manage the matron ? ' say he . ' she will not want to be manage . she will be a great lady herself , I suppose . but , papa , where will the matron live ? she be not to live in the warden 's house with you , be she ? ' 'Well , I hope not , my dear . ' 'Oh , papa , I tell you fairly . I will not have a matron for a new step - mother . ' ' you sha not , my dear ; that be if I can help it . but they be go to build another house for the matron and the woman ; and I believe they have not even fix yet on the site of the building . ' ' and have they appoint the matron ? ' say . ' they have not appoint the warden yet , ' reply he . ' but there be no doubt about that , I suppose , ' say he daughter . explain that he think there be no doubt ; that the archdeacon have declare as much , say that the bishop and he chaplain between they have not the power to appoint any once else , even if they have the will to do so , and sufficient impudence to carry out such a will . the archdeacon be of the opinion , that though have resign he wardenship , and have do so unconditionally , he have do so under circumstance which leave the bishop no choice as to he re-appointment , now that the affair of the hospital have be settle on a new basis by act of parliament . such be the archdeacon 's opinion , and he father - in - law receive it without a shadow of doubt . have always be strongly oppose to 's resignation of the place . he have do all in he power to dissuade he from it . he have consider that be bound to withstand the popular clamour with which he be attack for receive so large a income as eight hundr a year from such a charity , and be not even satisfi that he father - in - law 's conduct have not be pusillanimous and undignified . he look also on this reduction of the warden 's income as a paltry scheme on the part of government for escape from a difficulty into which it have be bring by the public press . observ that the government have no more right to dispose of a sum of four hundred and fifty pound a year out of the income of 's legacy , than of nine hundred ; whereas , as he say , the bishop , dean and chapter clearly have a right to settle what sum should be pay . he also declare that the government have no more right to saddle the charity with twelve old woman than with twelve hundr ; and he be , therefore , very indignant on the matter . he probably forget when so talk that government have do nothing of the kind , and have never assume any such might or any such right . he make the common mistake of attribute to the government , which in such matter be powerless , the doings of parliament , which in such matter be omnipotent . but though he feel that the glory and honour of the situation of warden of be indeed curtail by the new arrangement ; that the whole establishment have to a certain degree be make vile by the touch of commissioner ; that the place with the lessened income , its old woman , and other innovation , be very different from the hospital of former day ; still the archdeacon be too practical a man of the world to wish that he father - in - law , who have at present little more than l 200 per annum for all he want , should refuse the situation , defile , undignified , and commission - ridden as it be . have , accordingly , make up he mind that he would return to he old house at the hospital , and to tell the truth , have experience almost a childish pleasure in the idea of do so . the diminished income be to he not even the source of momentary regret . the matron and the old woman do rather go against the grain ; but he be able to conseal himself with the reflection , that , after all , such a arrangement might be of real service to the poor of the city . the think that he must receive he re-appointment as the gift of the new bishop , and probably through the hand of , annoye he a little ; but he mind be set at rest by the assurance of the archdeacon that there would be no favour in such a presentation . the re-appointment of the old warden would be regard by all the world as a matter of course . , therefore , feel no hesitation in tell he daughter that they might look upon he return to he old quarter as a settled matter . ' and you will not have to ask for it , papa . ' ' certainly not , my dear . there be no ground on which I could ask for any favour from the bishop , whom , indeed , I hardly know . would I ask a favour , that granting of which might possibly be make a question to be settle by . no ,' say he , move for a moment by a spirit very unlike he own , ' I certainly shall be very glad to go back to the hospital ;
; but I should never go there , if it be necessary that my do so should be the subject of a request to . ' this little outbreak of she father 's anger jar on the present tone of 's mind . she have not learn to like , but she have learn to think that he have much respect for she father ; and she would , therefore , willingly use she effort to induce something like good feeling between they . ' , ' say she , ' I think you somewhat mistake 's character . ' ' do I ? ' say he , placidly . 'I think you do , papa . I think he intend no personal disrespect to you when he preach the sermon which make the archdeacon and the dean so angry .! ' 'I never suppose that he do , my dear . I hope I never inquire within myself whether he do or no . such a matter would be unworthy of any inquiry , and very unworthy of the consideration of the chapter . but I fear he intend disrespect to the ministration 's of 's service , as conduct in conformity with the rule of the of . ' ' but might it not be that he think it he duty to express he dissent from that which you , and the dean , and all of we here approve ? ' ' it can hardly be the duty of any young man rudely to assail the religious conviction of he elder of the church . courtesy should have keep he silent , even if neither charity nor modesty could do so . ' ' but would say that on such a subject the command of he heavenly master do not admit of he be silent . ' ' nor of be courteous , ? ' ' he do not say that , papa . ' ' believe I , my child , that Christian ministers be never call on by 's word to insult the conviction , or even the prejudice , of they breth ; and that religion be at any rate not less susceptible to urbane and courteous conduct among man , than any other study which men take up . I be sorry to say that I can not defend 's sermon in the cathedral . but come , my dear , put on you bonnet , and let we walk round the dear old garden at the hospital . I have never yet have the heart to go beyond the court - yard since we leave the place . now I think I can venture to enter . ' ring the bell , and give a variety of imperative charge as to the welfare of the precious baby , whom , all but unwillingly , she be about to leave for a hour or so , and then saunter forth with she father to revisit the old hospital . it have be forbidden ground to she as well as to he since the day on which they have walk forth together from its walk . chapter IX the Stanhope family it be now three month since begin he reign , and change have already be affect in the diocese which show at least the energy of a active mind . among other thing , absantee clergyman have be favour with hint much too strong to be overlook . poor dear old have on this matter be too lenient , and the archdeacon have never be inclin to be severe with those who be absent on reputable pretence , and who provide for they duty in a liberal way . among the greatest of the diocesan sinner in this respect be . Years have now pass since he have do a day 's duty ; and yet there be no reason against he do duty except a want of inclination on he own part . he hold a prebendal stall in the diocese ; one of the best residence in the close ; and the two large rectory of , and . indeed , he have the cure of three parish , for that of be join to . he have reside in for twelve year . he first go there have be attribute to a sore throat ; and that sore throat , though never repeat in any violent manner have stand he in such stead , that it have enable he to live in easy idleness ever since . he have now be summon home , -- not indeed , with rough violence , or by any peremptory command , but by a mandate which he find himself unable to disregard . have write to he by the bishop 's desire . in the first place , the bishop much want the valuable co-operation of in the diocese ; in the next , the bishop think it he imperative duty to become personally acquainted with the most conspicuous of he diocesan clergy ; then the bishop think it essentially necessary for 's own interest , that should , at any rate for a time , return to ; and lastly , it be say that so strong a feeling be at the present moment evince by the hierarch of the church with reference to the absence of its clerical member , that it behove not to allow he name to stand among those which would probably in a few month be submit to the councils of the nation . there be something so ambiguously frightful in this last threat that determined to spend two or three summer month at he residence in . he rectory be inhabit by he curate , and he feel himself from disuse to be unfit for parochial duty ; but he prebendal home be keep empty for he , and he think it probable that he might be
be able now and again to preach a prebendal sermon . he arrive , therefore , with all he family at , and he and they must be introduce to my reader . the great family characteristic of the might probably be say to be heartlessness ; but the want of feeling be , in most of they , accompany by so great a amount of good nature that they neighbour fail to perceive how indifferent to they be the happiness and well - being of those around they . the Stanhope would visit you in you sickness ( provide it be not contagious ) , would bring you orang , french novel , and the last new bit of scandal , and then hear of you death or you recovery with a equally indifferent composure . they conduct to each other be the same as to the world ; they bear and forbore : and there be sometimes , as will be see , much necessity for forbear : but they love among themselves rarely reach above this . it be astonish how much each of the family be able to do , and how much each do , to prevent the well - being of the other four . for there be five in all ; the doctor , namely , and , two daughter , and one son . the doctor , perhaps , be the least singular and most estimable of they all , and yet such good quality as he possess be all negative . he be a good look rather plethoric gentleman of about sixty year of age . he hair be snow white , very plentiful , and somewhat like wool of the finest description . he whisker be large and very white , and give to he face the appearance of a benevolent sleepy old lion . he dress be always unexceptionable . although he have liv so many year in it be invariably of a decent clerical hue , but it never be hyperclerical . he be a man not give to much talking , but what little he do say be generally well say . he read seldom go beyond romance and poetry of the lightest and not always most moral description . he be thoroughly a bon vivant ; a accomplished judge of wine , though he never drank to excess ; and a most inexorable critic in all affair touch the kitchen . he have have much to forgive in he own family , since a family have grow up around he , and have forgive everything -- except inattention to he dinner . he weakness in that respect be now fully understand , and he temper but seldom try . as be a clergyman , it may be suppose that he religious conviction make up a considerable part of he character ; but this be not so . that he have religious conviction must be believe ; but he rarely obtrude they , even on he child . this abstinence on he part be not systematic , but very characteristic of the man . it be not that he have predetermine never to influence they thought ; but he be so habitually idle that he time for do so have never come till the opportunity for do so be go forever . whatever conviction the father may have have , the child be at any rate but indifferent member of the church from which he draw he income . be . the feature of 's character be even less plainly mark than those of she lord . the far nient of she italian life have enter into she very soul , and bring she to regard a state of inactivity as the only earthly good . in manner and appearance she be exceedingly prepossesse . she have be a beauty , and even now , at fifty - five , she be a handsome woman . she dress be always perfect : she never dress but once in the day , and never appear till between three and four ; but when she do appear , she appear at she best . whether the toil rest partly with she , or wholly with she handmaid , it be not for such a one as the author to imagine . the structure of she attire be always elaborate , and yet never over laboure . she be rich in apparel , but not bedizen with finery ; she ornament be costly , rare , and such as could not fail to attract notice , but they do not look as though wear with that purpose . she well know the great architectural secret of decorate she construction , and never condescende to construct a decoration . but when we have say that know how to dress , and use she knowledge daily , we have say all . other purpose in life she have none . it be something , indeed , that she do not interfere with the purpose of other . in early life she have undergone great trial with reference to the doctor 's dinner ; but for the last ten or twelve year she eldest daughter have take that labour off she hand , and she have have little to trouble she ;-- little , that be , till the edict for this terrible journey have go forth ; since , then , indeed , she life have be laborious enough . for such a one , the toil of be carry from the shore of to the city of be more than labour enough , let the car of the carrier be ever so vigilant . have be oblige to have every one of she dress take in from the effect of the journey . be at this time about thirty - five year old ; and , whatever may have be she fault
fault , she have none of those which belong particularly to old young lady . she neither dress young , nor talk young , nor indeed look young . she appear to be perfectly content with she time of life , and in no way affect the grace of youth . she be a fine young woman ; and have she be a man , would have be a very fine young man . all that be done in the house , and that be not do by servants , be do by she . she give the order , pay the bill , hire and dismiss the domestic , make the tea , carve the meat , and manage everything in the household . she , and she alone , could ever induce she father to look into the state of he worldly concern . she , and she alone , could in any degree control the absurdity of she sister . she , and she alone , prevent the whole family from fall into utter disrepute and beggary . it be by she advice that they now find themselves very unpleasantly situate in . so far , the character of be not unprepossessing . but it remain to be say , that the influence which she have in she family , though it have be use to a certain extent for they worldly well - being , have not be use to they real benefit , as it might have be . she have aide she father in he indifference to he professional duty , counsel he that he livings be as much as he individual property as the estate of he elder brother be the property of that worthy peer . she have for year past stifle every little rising wish for a return to which the doctor have from time to time express . she have encourage she mother in she idleness in order that she herself might be mistress and manager of the household . she have encourage and foster the folly of she sister , though she be always willing , and often able , to protect she from they probable result . she have do she best , and have thoroughly succeed in spoil she brother , and turn he loose upon the world a idle man without a profession , and without a shilling that he could call he own . be a clever woman , able to talk on most subject , and quite indifferent as to what the subject be . she pride herself on she freedom from prejudice , and she might have add , from feminine delicacy . on religion she be a pure freethinker , and with much want of true affection , delighte to throw out she own view before the troubled mind of she father . to have shaken what remain of he of would have gratify she much ; but the idea of he abandon he preferment in the church have never once present itself to she mind . how could he indeed , when he have no income from any other source ? but the two most prominent member of the family still remain to be describe . the second child have be christen , and have be a great beauty . we need not say have been , for she be never more beautiful than at the time of which we write , though she person for many year have be disfigure by a accident . it be unnecessary that we should give in detail the early history of . she have go to when seventeen year of age , and have be allow to make the most of she surpass beauty in the saloon of , and among the crowded villa along the shore of the of . she have become famous for adventur in which she character be just not lose , and have destroy the heart of a dozen cavalier without once be touch in she own . have flowed in quarrel about she charms , and she hear of these encounter with pleasurable excitement . it have be tell of she that on one occasion she have stand by in the disguise of a page , and have see she lover fall . as be so often the case , she have marry the very worst of those who seek she hand . why she have choose , a man of no birth and no property , a mere captain in the pope 's guard , one who have come up to either simply as a adventurer or as a spy , a man of harsh temper and oily manners , mean in figure , swarthy in face , and so false in word as to be hourly detect , need not now be tell . when the moment for do so come , she have probably no alternative . he , at any rate , have become she husband ; and after a prolonge honeymoon among the lakes , they have go together to , the papal captain have vainly endeavoured to induce he wife to remain behind he . six month afterwards she arrive at she father 's house a cripple and a mother . she have arrive without even notice , with hardly clothes to cover she , and without one of those many ornament which have grac she bridal trousseaux . she baby be in the arm of a poor girl from , whom she have take in exchange for the maid who have accompany she thus far , and who have then , as she mistress say , become homesick and have return . it be clear that the lady have determine that there should be no witness to tell story of she life in . she have fallen , she say , in ascend a ruin and have fatally injure the sinews of
of she knee ; so fatally , that when she stand she lose eight inch of she accustom height ; so fatally , that when she essay to move , she could only drag herself painfully along , with protrude hip and extend foot in a manner less graceful than that of a hunchback . she have consequently make up she mind , once and for ever , that she would never stand , and never attempt to move herself . story be not slow to follow she , averr that she have be cruelly ill - use by , and that to he violence have she owed she accident . be that as it may , little have be say about she husband , but that little have make it clearly intelligible to the family that be to be see and hear of no more . there be no question as to re-admitt the poor ill - use beauty to she old family rights , no question as to adopt she infant daughter , beneath the roof tree . though heartless , the be not selfish . the two be take in , pet , make much of , for a time all but adore , and then feel by the two parent to be great nuisance in the house . but in the house the lady be , and there she remain , have she own way , though that way be not very comfortable with the customary usage of a english clergyman . , though force to give up all motion in the world , have no intention whatever of give up the world itself . the beauty of she face be uninjured , and that beauty be of a peculiar kind . she copious rich brown hair be wear in Grecian bandeaux round she head , display as much as possible of she forehead and cheek . she forehead , though rather low , be very beautiful from it be perfect contour and pearly whiteness . she eye be long and large , and marvellously bright ; might I venture to say , bright as 's , I should perhaps best express the depth of they brilliancy . they be dreadful eye to look at , such as would absolutely deter any man of quiet mind and easy spirit from attempt a passage of arm with such foe . there be talent in they , and the fire of passion and the play of wit , but there be no love . be there instead , and courage , a desire for masterhood , cunn , and a wish for mischief . and yet , as eye , they be very beautiful . the eyelash be long and perfect , and the long steady unabashed gaze , with which she would look into the face of she admirer , fascinate while it frightene he . she be a basilisk from whom a ardent lover of beauty could make no escape . she nose and mouth more so at twenty - eight than they have be at eighteen . what wonder that with such charms still glow in she face , and with such deformity destroy she figure , she should resolve to be see , but only to be see recline on a sofa . she resolve have not be carry out without difficulty . she have still frequent the opera at ; she have still be see occasionally in the saloon of the noblesse ; she have cause herself to be carry in and out from she carriage , and that in such a manner as in no wise to disturb she charms , disarrange she dress , or expose she deformity . she sister always accompany she and a maid , a manservant also , and on state occasion , two . it be impossible that she purpose could have be achieve with less : and yet , poor as she be , she have achieve she purpose . and then again the more dissolute italian youths of frequent the villa and surround she couch , not greatly to she father 's satisfaction . sometimes he spirit would rise , a dark spot would show itself on he cheek , and he would rebel ; but would assuage he with some peculiar triumph of she culinary art , and all again would be smooth for a while . Madeline affec all manner of rich and quaint device in the garniture of she room , she person , and she feminine belonging . in nothing be this more apparent than in the visit card which she have prepare for she use . for such a article one would say that she , in she present state , could have but small need , see how improbable it be that she should make a morning call ; but not such be she own opinion . she card be surround by a deep border of gilding ; on this she have imprint , in three line :- . - . and over the name she have a bright gilt coronet , which certainly look very magnificent . how she have come to concoct such a name for herself it would be difficult to explain . she father have be christen , as another man be christen ; and she have no more right to assume it than would have the daughter of a to call herself , on marry a man of the latter name . the gold coronet be equally out of place , and perhaps insert with even less excuse . have not the faintest title to call himself a scion of even italian nobility . have the pair meet in would probably have be a count ; but they have meet in , and any such pretence on he part would have be simply ridiculous . a coronet , however , be a pretty ornament
ornament , and if it could solace a poor cripple to have such on she card , who could begrudge it to she ? of she husband , or of he individual family , she never speak ; but with she admirer she would often allude in a mysterious way to she married life and isolate state , and , point to she daughter , would call she the last of the blood of the emperor , thus refer 's extraction to the old family from which the worst of the Caesars sprang . the ' ' be not without talent , and not without a certain sort of industry ; she be a indomitable letter writer , and she letter be worth the postage : they be full of wit , mischief , satire , love , latitudinarian philosophy , free religion , and , sometimes , alas ! loose ribaldry . the subject , however , depend entirely on the recipient , and she be prepare to correspond with any one , but moral young lady or stiff old woman . she write also a kind of poetry , generally in , and short romance , generally in . she read much of a desultory sort of literature , and as a modern linguist have really make great proficiency . such be the lady who have now come to wound the heart of the man of . be in some respects like he younger sister , but he be less inestimable as a man than she be as a woman . he great fault be a entire absence of that principle which should have induce he , as the son of a man without , to earn he own bread . many attempt have be make to get he to do so , but these have all be frustrated , not so much by idleness on he part , as by a disinclination to exert himself in any way not to he taste . he have be educate at , and have be intend for the , but have leave Cambridge in disgust after a single term , and notify to he father he intention to study for the bar . Preparatory to that , he think it well that he should attend a german university , and consequently go to . there he remain two year , and bring away a knowledge of German and a taste for the fine arts . he still , however , intend himself for the bar , take chamber , engage himself to sit at the foot of a learn pundit , and spend a season in . he there find that all he aptitude inclin he to the life of a artist , and he determine to live by painting . with this object he retire to , and have himself rig out for . as a painter he might have earn he bread , for he want only diligence to ; but when at he mind be carry away by other thing : he soon write home for money , say that he have be convert to the , that he be already a acolyte of the , and that he be about to start with other to on a mission for convert . he do go to , but be unable to convert the , be convert by they . he again write home , to say that be the only giver of perfect law to the world , that the come of the true be at hand , that great thing be do in , and that he have meet one of the family of , a most remarkable man , who be now on he way to western , and whom he have induce to deviate from he route with the object of call at the . then express he hope that he mother and sister would listen to this wonderful prophet . he father he know could not do so from pecuniary consideration . this Sidonia , however , do not take so strong a fancy to he as another of that family once do to a young English nobleman . at least he provide he with no hope of gold as large as lions ; so that the be again oblige to draw on the revenue of the . it be needless to tell how the father swore that he would send no more money and receive no Jew ; nor how declare that could not be leave penniless in ; and how Neroni' resolve to have at she foot . the money be send , and the do come . the do come , but he be not at all to the taste of ' . he be a dirty little old man , and though he have provide no golden lions , he have , it seem , relieve yong 's necessity . he positively refuse to leave the villa till he get a bill from the doctor on he banker . do not long remain a . he soon reappear at the villa without prejudice on the subject of he religion , and with a firm resolve to achieve fame and fortune as a sculptor . he bring with he some model which he have originate at , and which really give much fair promise that he father be induce to go to further expense in furthere these view . open a establishment , or rather take lodging and workshop , at , and there spoil much marble , and make some few pretty image . since that period , now four year ago , he have alternate between and the villa , but he sojourn at the workshop become shorter and shorter , and those at the villa longer and longer . 'Tbe no wonder ; for be not a spot in which a would like to dwell . when the
the family start for he have resolve not to be leave behind , and with the assistance of he elder sister have earn he point against he father 's wish . it be necessary , he say , that he should come to for order . how otherwise be he to bring he profession to account ? in personal appearance be the most singular of being . he be certainly very handsome . he have he sister 's eye without they stare , and without they hard cunning cruel firmness . they be also very much lighter , and of so light and clear a blue as to make he face remarkable , if nothing else do so . on enter a room with he , 's blue eye would be the first thing you would see , and on leave it almost the last thing you would forget . he light hair be very long and silky , come down over he coat . he beard have be prepare in the holy land , and be patriarchal . he never shave , and rarely trim it . it be glossy , soft , clean , and altogether not unprepossessing . it be such that lady might desire to reel it off and work it into they pattern in lieu of floss silk . he complexion be fair and almost pink , he be small in height , and slender in limb , but well - make , and he voice be of particular sweetness.manner and dress he be equally remarkable . he have none of the mauvaise hont of a . he require no introduction to make himself agreeable to any person . he habitually address stranger , lady as well as man , without any such formality , and in do so never seem to meet with rebuke . he costume can not be describe , because it be so various ; but it be always totally oppose in every principle of colour and construction to the dress of those with whom he for the time consort . he be habitually addicte to make love to lady , and do so without scruple of conscience , or any idea that such a practice be amiss . he have no heart to touch himself , and be literally unaware that humanity be subject to such infliction . he have not think much about it ; but , have he be ask , would have say , that ill - treat a lady 's heart mean injure she promotion in the world . he principles therefore forbade he to pay attention to a girl , if he think any man be present whom it might suit she to marry . in this manner , he good nature frequently interfere with he amusement ; but he have no other motive in abstaining from the fullest declaration of love to every girl that please he eye . , as he be generally call , be , however , popular with both sex ; and with as well as . he circle of acquaintance be very large , and embrace people of all sort . he have not respect for rank , and no aversion to those below he . he have live on familiar term with English peer , german shopkeeper , and priests . all people be nearly alike to he . he be above , or rather below , all prejudice . no virtue could charm he , no vice shock he . he have about he a natural good manner , which seem to qualify he for the highest circle , and yet he be never out of place in the lowest . he have no principle , no regard for other , no self - respect , no desire to be other than a drone in a hive , if only he could , as a drone , get what honey be sufficient for he . of honey , in he latter day , it may probably be presage , that he will have but short allowance . such be the family of the , who , at this period , suddenly join themselves to the ecclesiastical circle of Barchester close . any stranger union , it would be impossible perhaps to conceive . and it be not as though they all fall down into the cathedral precinct hitherto unknown and untalked of . in such case no amalgamation would have be at all probable between the new comer and either the Proudie set or the Grantly set . but such be far from be the case . the be all know by name in , and be prepare to receive they with open arm . the doctor be one of the prebendary , one of she rector , one of she pillar of strength ; and be , moreover , count on , as a sure ally , both by Proudies and Grantlys . he himself be the brother of one peer , and he wife be the sister of another -- and both these peer be lord of whiggish tendency , with whom the new bishop have some sort of alliance . this be sufficient to give to high hope that he might enlist on he side , before he enemy could out - manoeuvre he . on the other hand , the old dean have many many year ago , in the day of the doctor 's clerical energie , be instrumental in assist he in he view as to preferment ; and many many year ago also , the two doctor , and , have , as young parson , be joyous together in the common room of . , consequently , do not doubt but that the new comer would range himself under he banner . do any of they dream of what ingredient the family be now compose . 's -- the bishop
bishop and he wife have only spend three or four day in on the occasion of they first visit . he lordship have , as we have see , take he seat on he throne ; but he demeanour there , into which it have be he intention to infuse much hierarchical dignity , have be a good deal disarrange by the audacity of he chaplain 's sermon . he have hardly da to look he clergy in the face , and to declare by the severity of he countenance that in truth he mean all that he factotum be say on he behalf ; nor yet do he dare throw over , and show to those around he that he be no party to the sermon , and would resent it . he have accordingly bless he people in a shambling manner , not at all to he own satisfaction , and have walk back to he palace with he mind very doubtful as to what he would say to he chaplain on the subject . he do not remain long in doubt . he have hardly doff he lawn when the partner of all he toil enter he study , and exclaim even before she have seat herself -- ' , do you ever hear a more sublime , more spirit-moving , more appropriate discourse than that ? ' ' well , my love ; ha - hum -he ! ' the bishop do not know what to say . 'I hope , my lord , you do not mean to say you disapprove ? ' there be a look about the lady 's eye which do not admit of my lord 's disapproving at that moment . he feel that if he intend to disapprove , it must be now or never ; but he also feel that it could not be now . it be not in he to say to the wife of he bosom that 's sermon be ill - time , impertinent and vexatious . ' no , no ,' reply the bishop . ' no , I can not say I disapprove -- a very clever sermon and very well intend , and I dare say will do a great deal of good . ' this last praise be add , see that what he have already say by no means satisfy . 'I hope it will , ' say she . 'I be sure it be well deserve . do you ever in you life , bishop , hear anything so like play - acting as the way in which sing the litany ? I shall beg to continue a course of sermon on the subject till all that be alte . we will have at any rate , in we cathedral , a decent , godly , modest morning service . there must be no more play - act here now ;' and so the lady rang for lunch . this bishop know more about cathedral and deans , and precentor and church service than he wife do , and also more of the bishop 's powers . but he think it better at present to let the subject drop . ' my dear , ' say he , ' I think we must go back to on . I find that my stay here will be very inconvenient to the government . ' the bishop know that to this proposal he wife would not object ; and he also feel that by thus retreat from the ground of battle , the heat of the fight might be get over in he absence . will remain here , of course , ' say the lady . 'Oh , of course , ' say the bishop . thus , after less than a week 's sojourn in he palace , do the bishop fly from ; nor do he return to it for two month , the season be then over . during that time be not idle , but he do not again assay to preach in the cathedral . in answer to 's letter , advise a course of sermon , he have plead that he would at any rate wish to put off such a undertaking till she be there to hear they . he have employ he time in consolidat a and -- or rather a and , and he have not employ he time in vain . he do not meddle with the dean and chapter , except by give they little teasing intimation of the bishop 's wish about this and the bishop 's feeling about that , in a manner which be to they sufficiently annoie , but which they could not resent . he preach once or twice in a distant church in the suburb of the city , but make no allusion to the cathedral service . he commence the establishment of the ' Bishop of 's - day school , ' give notice of a propose ' Bishop of yong 's , ' -- and write three or four letter to the manager of the branch railway , inform he how anxious the bishop be that the train should be discontinue . at the end of two month , however , the bishop and the lady reappear ; and as a happy harbinger of they return , herald they advent by the promise of a evening party on the largest scale . the ticket of invitation be send out from -- they be date from , and be dispatch by the odious Sabbath - break railway , in a huge brown paper parcel to . everybody call himself a gentleman , or herself a lady , within the city of , and a circle of two mile round it , be include . ticket be send to all the diocesan clergy , and also to many other person of priestly note ,
, of whose absence the bishop , or at least the bishop 's wife , feel tolerably confident . it be intend , however , to be a thronge and noticeable affair , and preparation be make for receive some hundred . and now there arise considerable agitation among the whether or not they would attend the bidding . the first feeling with they all be to send the briefest excuse both for themselves and they wife and daughter . but by degrees policy prevail over passion . the archdeacon perceive that he would be make a false step if he allow the cathedral clergy to give the bishop just ground of umbrage . they all meet in conclave and agree to go . the old dean would crawl in , if it be but for half a hour . the chancellor , treasurer , archdeacon , prebendary , and minor canons would all go , and would take they wife . be especially bidden to go , resolve in he heart to keep himself remove from . and be determined to go , though assure by she father that there be no necessity for such a sacrifice on she part . when all Barchester be to be there , neither nor understand why they should stay away . have they not be invite separately ? and have not a separate little note from the chaplain couch in the most respectful language , be enclose with the huge episcopal card ? and the would be there , one and all . even the lethargic mother would so far bestir herself on such a occasion . they have only just arrive . the card be at the residence wait for they . no one in have see they ; and what better opportunity could they have of show themselves to the world ? some few old friend , such as the archdeacon and he wife , have call , and have find the doctor and he eldest daughter ; but the elite of the family be not yet know . the doctor indeed wish in he heart to prevent the signora from accept the bishop 's invitation ; but she herself have fully determined that she would accept it . if she father be asham of have he daughter carry into a bishop 's palace , she have no such feeling . ' indeed , I shall , ' she say to she sister who have greatly endeavoured to dissuade she , by say that the company would consist wholly of parson and parson ' wife . ' Parson , I suppose , be much the same as other man , if you strip they of they black coat ; and as to they wife , I dare say they will not trouble I . you may tell papa I do not mean to be leave at home . ' be tell , and feel that he could do nothing but yield . he also feel that it be useless of he now to be asham of he child . such as they be , they have become such under he auspices ; as he have make he bed , so he must lie upon it ; as he have sown he seed , so must he reap he corn . he do not indeed utter such reflection in such language , but such be the gist of he thought . it be not because be a cripple that he shrank from see she make one of the bishop 's guest ; but because he know that she would practise she accustom lure , and behave herself in a way that could not fail of be distasteful to the propriety of . these thing have annoyed but not shock he in . there they have shocked no one ; but here in , here among he fellow parson , he be asham that they should be see . such have be he feeling , but he repress they . what if he brother clergyman be shocked ! they could not take it from he preferment because the manners of he married daughter be too free . have , at any rate , no fear that she would shock anybody . she ambition be to create a sensation , to have parson at she foot , see that the manhood of consist mainly of parson , and to send , if possible , every parson 's wife home with a green fit of jealousy . none could be too old for she , and hardly any too young . none too sanctified , and none too worldly . she be quite prepared to entrap the bishop himself , and then to turn up she nose at the bishop 's wife . she do not doubt of success , for she have always succeed ; but one thing be absolutely necessary , she must secure the entire use of a sofa . the card send to and and family , have be send in a envelope , have on the cover 's name . the signora soon learn that be not yet at the palace , and that the chaplain be manage everything . it be much more in she line to apply to he than to the lady , and she accordingly write to he the prettiest little billet in the world . in five line she explain everything , declare how impossible it be for she not to be desirous to make the acquaintance of such persons as the bishop of and he wife , and she might add also of , depict she own grievous state , and conclude by be assure that would forgive she extreme hardihood in petition to be allow to be carry to a sofa . she then enclose one of she beautiful card . in return she receive as polite a answer from -- a sofa
sofa should be keep in the large drawing - room , immediately at the top of the grand stair , especially for she use . and now the day of the party have arrive . the bishop and he wife come down from town , only on the morning of the eventful day , as behove such great people to do ; but have toil day and night to see that everything should be in right order . there have be much to do . no company have be see in the palace since heaven know when . new furniture have be require , new pots and pans , new cup and saucer , new dish and plate . have first declare that she would condescmend to nothing so vulgar as eat and drink ; but have talk , or rather write she out of economy !-- bishop should be give to hospitality , and hospitality mean eat and drink . so the supper be conced ; the guest , however , be to stand as they consum it . there be four room open into each other on the first floor of the house , which be denominate the drawing - room , the reception - room , and 's boudoir . in olden day one of these have be 's bed - room , and another he common , sit - room and study . the present bishop , however , have be move down into a back parlour , and have be give to understand that he could very well receive he clergy in the dining - room , should they arrive in too large a flock to be admit to he small sanctum . he have be unwilling to yield , but after a short debate have yield . 's heart beat high as she inspect she suite of room . they be really very magnificent , or at least would be so by candlelight ; and they have nevertheless be get up with commendable economy . large room when full of people , and full of light look well , because they be large , and be full , and be light . small room be those which require costly fitting and rich furniture . know this , and make the most of it ; she have therefore a huge gas lamp with a dozen burner hang from each of the ceiling . people be to arrive at ten , supper be to last from twelve to one , and at half - past one everybody be to be go . Carriage be to come in at the gate in the town and depart at the gate outside . they be desire to take up at a quarter before one . it be manage excellently , and be invaluable . at half - past nine the bishop and he wife and they three daughter enter the great reception - room , and very grand and very solemn they be . be down - stair give the last order about the wine . he well understand that curate and country vicar with they belonging do not require so generous a article as the dignitary of the close . there be a useful gradation in such thing , and at 20 a dozen do very well for the exterior supplementary table in the corner . ' , ' say the lady , as he lordship sit himself down , ' do not sit on that sofa , if you please ; it be to be keep separate for a lady . ' the bishop jump up and seate himself on a cane - bottom chair . 'A lady ? ' he inquire meekly ; 'do you mean one particular lady , my dear ? ' ' yes , bishop , one particular lady , ' say he wife , disdain to explain . ' she have get no leg , papa , ' say the youngest daughter , tittering . ' no leg ! ' say the bishop , open he eye . ' Nonsense , , what stuff you talk , ' say . ' she have get leg , but she can not use they . she have always to be keep lie down , and three or four man carry she about everywhere . ' ' law , how odd ! ' say . ' carry about by four man ! I be quite sure I would not like it . be I right behind , mama ? I feel as if I be open ;' and she turn she back to she anxious parent . ' ! to be sure you be , ' say she , ' and a yard of petticoat string hang out . I do not know why I pay such high wage to , if she can not take the trouble to see whether or no you be fit to be look at , ' and pok the string here , and twitch the dress there , and give she daughter a shove and a shake , and then pronounce it all right . ' but , ' rejoin the bishop , who be die with curiosity about the mysterious lady and she leg , ' who be it that be to have the sofa ? what be she name , ? ' a thunder rap at the front door interrupt the conversation . stand up and shake herself gently , and touch she cap on each side as she look in the mirror . each of the girl stand on tiptoe , and re-arrange the bow on they bosom ; and rush up stair three step at a time . ' but who be it , ? ' whisper the bishop to he youngest daughter . , ' whisper back the daughter ; 'and mind you do not let any one sit upon the sofa . ' !
! ' mutter , to himself , the bewildered prelate . have he be tell that the of be to be there , or of the Western Isle , he could not have be more astonished . , who , have no leg to stand on , have bespeak a sofa in he drawing - room !-- who could she be ? he however could now make no further inquiry , as and be announce . they have be send on out of the way a little before the time , in order that the signora might have plenty of time to get herself conveniently pack into the carriage . the bishop be all smile for the prebendary 's wife , and the bishop 's wife be all smile for the prebendary . be present , and be delighted to make the acquaintance of one of whom he have hear so much . the doctor bow very low , and then look as though he could not return the compliment as regard , of whom , indeed , he have hear nothing . the doctor , in spite of he long absence , know a english gentleman when he see he . and then the guest come in shoal ; and and they three grown daughter . and and they three daughter . the burly chancellor and he wife and clerical son from . the meagre little doctor without encumbrance . Harding with and . the dean lean on a gaunt spinster , he only child now live with he , a lady very learn in stone , fern , plant , and vermin , and who have write a book about petal . a wonderful woman in she way be . , the attorney , with he wife , be to be see , much to the dismay of many who have never meet he in a draw - room before . the five Barchester doctor be all there , and old , the retired apothecary and toothdrawer , who be first teach to consider himself as belong to the higher order by the receipt of the bishop 's card . then come the archdeacon and he wife , with they elder daughter , a slim pale retire girl of seventeen , who keep close to she mother , and look out on the world with quiet watchful eye , one who give promise of much beauty when time should have ripen it . and so the room become full , and knot be form , and every new comer pay he respects to my lord and pass on , not presum to occupy too much of the great man 's attention . the archdeacon shook hand very heartily with , and seate herself by the doctor 's wife . and move about with well regulate grace , measure out the quantity of she favour to the quality of she guest , just as Slope have be do with the wine . but the sofa be still empty , and five - and - twenty lady and five gentleman have be courteously warn off it by the mindful chaplain . ' why do not she come ? ' say the bishop to himself . he mind be so preoccupied with the signora , that he hardly remember how to behave himself en bishop . at last a carriage dash up to the hall step with a very different manner of approach from that of any other vehicle that have be there that evening . a perfect commotion take place . the doctor , who hear it as he be stand in the drawing - room , know that he daughter be come , and retire to the furthest corner , where he might not see she entrance . parke herself up , feel that some important piece of business be in hand . the bishop be instinctively aware , that be come at last , and hurrie to the hall to give he assistance . he be , however , nearly knock down and trample on by the cortege that he encounter on the hall step . he get himself pick up as well as he could , and follow the cortege up stair . the signora be carry head foremost , she head be the care of she brother and a italian man - servant who be accustom to the work ; she foot be in the care of the lady 's maid and the lady 's italian page ; and follow to see that all be done with due grace and decorum . in this manner they climb easily into the drawing - room , and a broad way through the crowd have be open , the signora rest safely on she couch . she have send a servant beforehand to learn whether it be a right or a leave hand sofa , for it require that she should dress accordingly , particularly as regard she bracelet . and very become she dress be . it be white velvet , without any other garniture than rich white lace work with pearl across she bosom , and the same round the armlet of she dress . across she brow she wear a band of red velvet , on the centre of which shine a magnificent in , the tints of whose wing be of the most lovely azure , and the colour of he chubby cheek the clearest pink . on the one arm which she position require she to expose she wear three magnificent bracelet , each of different stone . beneath she on the sofa , and over the cushion and head of it , be spread a crimson silk mantle or shawl , which go under she whole body and conceal she foot . dress as she be and look as she do , so beautiful and yet so motionless , with the pure brilliancy of
of she white dress bring out and strengthen by the colour beneath it , with that lovely head , and those large bold bright stare eye , it be impossible that either man or woman should do other than look at she . neither man nor woman for some minute do do other . she bearer too be worthy of note . the three servant be italian , and though perhaps not peculiar in they own country , be very much so in the palace at . the man , especially attract notice , and create a doubt in the mind of some whether he be a friend or a domestic . the same doubt be feel as to . the man be attire in a loose - fit common black cloth morning coat . he have a jaunty well - pleased clean face , on which no atom of beard appear , and he wear round he neck a loose black silk neckhandkerchief . the bishop assay to make he a bow , but the man , who be well - train , take no notice of he , and walk out of the room , quite at he ease , follow by the woman and the boy . be dress in light blue from head to foot . he have on the loosest possible blue coat , cut square like a shoote coat , and very short . it be line with silk of azure blue . he have on a blue satin waistcoat , a blue handkerchief which be fasten beneath he throat with a coral ring , and very loose blue trousers which almost conceal he foot . he soft glossy beard be softer and more glossy than ever . the bishop , who have make one mistake , think that he also be a servant , and therefore try to make way for he to pass . but soon correct the error . 's -- conclude ' Bishop of , I presume ? ' say , put out he hand , frankly ; 'I be delighted to make you acquaintance . we be in rather close quarter here , a 'nt we ? ' in truth they be . they have be crowd up behind the head of the sofa : the bishop in waiting to receive he guest , and the other in carry she ; and they now have hardly room to move themselves . the bishop give he hand quickly , and make a little study bow , and be delighted to make -- . he could not go on , for he do not know whether he friend be a signor , or a count , or a prince . ' my sister really put you all to great trouble , ' say . ' not at all ! ' the bishop be delighted to have the opportunity of welcome the -- so at least he say -- and attempt to force he way round to the front of the sofa . he have , at any rate , learn that he strange guest be brother and sister . the man , he presume , must be -- or count , or prince , as it might be . it be wonderful what good he speak . there be just a twang of foreign accent , and no more . ' do you like on the whole ? ' ask . the bishop , look dignify , say that he do like . ' you have not be here very long , I believe , ' say . ' no -- not long , ' say the bishop , and try again to make he way between the back of the sofa and a heavy rector , who be stare over it at the grimace of the signora . ' you be not a bishop before , be you ? ' explain that this be the first diocese he have hold . ' ah -- I think so , ' say ; ' but you be change about sometimes , a 'nt you ? ' ' Translation be occasionally make , ' say ; ' but not so frequently as in former day . ' they have cut they all down to pretty nearly the same figure , have not they ? ' say . to this the bishop could not bring himself to make any answer , but again try to move the rector . ' but the work , I suppose , be different ? ' continue . ' be there much to do here at ? ' this be say exactly in the tone that a young Admiralty clerk might use in ask the same question of a brother acolyte in the Treasury . ' the work of a bishop of the of , ' say , with considerable dignity , 'is not easy . the responsibility which he have to bear be very great indeed . ' ' be it ? ' say , open wide he wonderful blue eye . 'Well ; I never be afraid of responsibility . I once think of be a bishop myself . ' ' have think of be a bishop ? ' say , much amazed . ' that be , a parson -- a parson first , you know , and a bishop afterwards . if I have once begin , I would have stuck to it . but , on the whole , I like the of the best . ' the bishop could not discuss the point , so he remain silent . ' now , there be my father , ' continue ; 'he have not stick to it . I fancy he do not like say the same thing so often . by the bye , bishop , have you see my father ? ' the bishop be more amazed than ever . have he see
see he father ? ' no ,' he reply ; he have not yet have the pleasure ; he hope he might ; and , as he say so , he resolve to bear heavy on that fat , immoveable rector , if ever he have the power of do so . 'he be in the room somewhere , ' say , ' and he will turn up soon . by the bye , do you know much about the ? ' at last the bishop see a way out . 'I beg you pardon , ' say he ; ' but I be force to go round the room . ' ' well -- I believe I will follow in you wake , ' say . ' terribly hot , be not it ? ' this he address to the fat rector with whom he have bring himself into the closest contact . ' they have get this sofa into the worst possible part of the room ; suppose we move it . take care , . ' the sofa have certainly be so place that those who be behind it find great difficulty in get out ; -- there be but a narrow gangway , which one person could stop . this be a bad arrangement , and one which think it might be well to improve . ' take care , , ' say he ; and turn to the fat rector , add , ' just help I with a slight push . ' the rector 's weight be rest on the sofa , and unwittingly lent all its impetus to accelerate and increase the motion which intentionally originate . the sofa rush from its mooring , and run half - way into the middle of the room . be stand with in front of the signora , and have be try to be condescende and sociable ; but she be not in the very best of tempers ; for she find that whenever she speak to the lady , the lady replie by speak to . be a favourite , no doubt ; but have no idea of be less thought of than the chaplain . she be begin to be stately , stiff , and offend , when unfortunately the castor of the sofa catch itself in she lace train , and carry away there be no say how much of she garniture . Gather be hear to go , stitch to crack , plait to fly open , flounce be see to fall , and breadth to expose themselves ;-- a long ruin of rent lace disfigure the carpet , and still cling to the vile wheel on which the sofa move . so , when a granite battery be raise , excellent to the eyes of warfaring man , be its strength and symmetry admire . it be the work of year . it be neat embrasure , its finish parapet , its casemate story , show all the skill of modern science . but , anon , a small spark be apply to the treacherous fusee - - a cloud of dust arise to the heaven -- and then nothing be to be see but dirt and dust and ugly fragment . we know what be the wrath of when she beauty be despise . we know too what storm of passion even celestial minds can yield . as may have look at on , so do look on when he push the leg of the sofa into she train . 'Oh , you idiot , ! ' say the signora , see what have be do , and what be the consequence . ' , ' re-echo , as though the word be not half strong enough to express the require meaning ; 'I will let he know - ;' and then look round to learn , at a glance , the worst , she see that at present it behove she to collect the scattered debris of she dress . , when he see what he have do , rush over the sofa , and throw himself on one knee before the offended lady . he object , doubtless , be to liberate the torn lace from the castor ; but he look as though he be implor pardon from a goddess . ' Unhand it , sir ! ' say . from what scrap of dramatic poetry she have extract the word can not be say ; but it must have rest on she memory , and now see opportunely dignify for the occasion . 'I will fly to the loom of the fairy to repair the damage , if you will only forgive I , ' say , still on he knee . ' Unhand it , sir ! ' say , with redouble emphasis , and all but furious wrath . this allusion to the fairy be a direct mockery , and intend to turn she into ridicule . so at least it seem to she . ' Unhand it , sir ! ' she almost scream . ' it be not I ; it be the cursed sofa , ' say , look imploringly in she face , and hold both he hand to show that he be not touch she belonging , but still remain on he knee . Hereupon the signora laugh ; not loud , indeed , but yet audibly . and as the tigress bereft of she young will turn with equal anger on any within reach , so do turn upon she female guest . ' madam , ' she say -- and it be beyond the power of prose to tell of the fire that flash from she eyes . by this time the bishop , and , and she three daughter be around she , and have collect together the wide ruin of she magnificence . the girl fall
fall into circular rank behind they mother , and thus follow she and carry out the fragment , they leave the reception - room in a manner not altogether devoid of dignity . have to retire to re-array herself . as soon as the constellation have sweep by , rise from he knee , and turn with mock anger to the fat rector , say : ' after all it be you do , sir -- not mine . but perhaps you be wait for preferment , and so I bear it . ' Whereupon there be a laugh against the fat rector , in which both the bishop and the chaplain join ; and thus thing get themselves again into order . ' oh , my lord , I be so sorry for this accident , ' say the signora , put out she hand so as to force the bishop to take it . ' my brother be so thoughtless . pray sit down , and let I have the pleasure of make you acquaintance . though I be so poor a creature as to want a sofa , I be not so selfish as to require it all . ' Madeline could always dispose herself so as to make room for a gentleman , though , as she declare , the crinoline of she lady friend be much too bulky to be so accommodated . ' it be solely for the pleasure of meet you that I have have myself drag here , ' she continue . ' of course , with you occupation , one can not even hope that you should have time to come to we , that be , in the way of call . and at you dinner - party all be so dull and so stately . do you know , my lord , that in come to my only consolation have be the thought that I should know you ;' and she look at he with the look of a she - . the bishop , however , think that she look very like a angel , and accept the proffer seat , sit down beside she . he utter some platitude as to this deep obligation for the trouble she have take , and wonder more and more who she be . ' of course you know my sad story ? ' she continue . the bishop do not know a word of it . he know , however , or think he know , that she could not walk into a room like other people , and so make the most of that . he put on a look of ineffable distress , and say that he be aware how have afflict she . the signora just touche the corner of she eye with the most lovely of pocket - handkerchief . yes , she say -- she have be very sorely try -- try , she think , beyond the common endurance of humanity ; but while she child be leave to she , everything be leave . 'Oh ! my lord , ' she exclaim , ' you must see the infant -- the last bud of a wondrous tree : you must let a mother hope that you will lay you holy hand on she innocent head , and consecrate she for female virtue . may I hope it ? ' say she , look into the bishop 's eye , and touch the bishop 's arm with she hand . the bishop be but a man , and say she might . after all , what be it but a request that he would confirm she daughter ?-- a request , indeed , very unnecessary to make , as he should do so as a matter of course , if the young lady come forward in the usual way . ' the blood of , ' say the signora , in all but a whisper ; ' the blood of flow in she vein . she be the last of the ! ' the bishop have hear of the last of the Visigoth , and have float in he brain some indistinct idea of the last of the , but to have the last of the thus bring before he for a blessing be very staggering . still he like the lady : she have a proper way of thinking , and talk with more propriety than she brother . but who be they ? it be now quite clear that that blue madman with the silky beard be not a . the lady be married , and be of course one of the by right of the husband . so the bishop go on learning . ' when will you see she ? ' say the signora with a start . ' see whom ? ' say the bishop . ' my child , ' say the mother . ' what be the young lady 's age ? ' ask the bishop . ' she be just seven , ' say the signora . ' oh , ' say the bishop , shak he head ; ' she be much too young -- very much too young . ' ' but in sunny you know , we do not count by year , ' and the signora give the bishop one of she very sweetest smile . ' but indeed , she be a great deal too young , ' persist the bishop ; 'we never confirm before - - ' ' but you might speak to she ; you might let she hear from you consecrated lip , that she be not a castaway because she be a Roman ; that she may be a and yet a ; that she may owe she black lock and dark cheek to the blood of the pagan Caesar , and yet herself be a child
child of grace ; you will tell she this , will not you , my friend ? ' the friend say he would , and ask if the child could say she catechism . ' no , ' say the signora , 'I would not allow she to learn lesson such as those in a land ride by priest , and pollute by the idolatry of . it be here , here in , that she must first be teach to lisp those holy word . oh , that you could be she instructor ! ' now , certainly like the lady , but , see that he be a bishop , it be not probable that he be go to instruct a little girl in the first rudiment of she catechism ; so he say he would send a teacher . ' but you will see she yourself , my lord ? ' the bishop say he would , but where should he call . ' at papa 's house , ' say the signora , with a air of some little surprise at the question . the bishop actually want the courage to ask she who be she papa ; so he be force at last to leave she without fathom she mystery . , in she second best , have now return to the room , and she husband think it as well that he should not remain in too close conversation with the lady whom he wife appear to hold in such slight esteem . presently he come across he youngest daughter . ' , ' say he , 'do you know who be the father of that ? ' ' it be not Vicinironi , papa , ' say ; ' but , and she be 's daughter . but I must go and do the civil to Grantly ; I declare nobody have speak a word to the poor girl this evening . ! ! 's daughter , of whose marriage with a dissolute italian scamp he now remember to have hear something ! and that impertinent blue cub who have examine he as to he episcopal bearing be old 's son , and the lady who have entreate he to come and teach she child the catechism be old 's daughter ! the daughter of one of he own prebendary ! as these thing flash across he mind , he be nearly as angry as he wife have be . nevertheless he could not but own that the mother of the last of the be a agreeable woman . trip out into the adjoining room , in which be congregate a crowd of Grantlyite clergyman , among whom the archdeacon be stand pre-eminent , while the old dean be sit nearly bury in a huge armchair by the fire - place . the bishop be very anxious to be gracious , and , if possible , to diminish the bitterness which he chaplain have occasion . let do the fortiter in re , he himself would pour in the suaviter in modo . ' pray do not stir , , pray do not stir ,' he say , as the old man essay to get up ; ' I take it as a great kindness , you come to such a omnium gatherum as this . but we have hardly get settled yet , and have not be able to see she friend as she would wish to do . well , , after all , we have not be so hard upon you at . ' ' no , ' say the archdeacon ; ' you have only draw we tooth and cut out we tongue ; you have allow we still to breathe and swallow . ' 'Ha , ha , ha ! ' laugh the bishop ; ' it be not quite so easy to cut out the tongue of a magnate , -- and as for tooth , -- ha , ha , ha ! why , in the way we have leave the matter , it be very odd if the head of college do not have they own way quite as fully as when the hebdomadal board be in all its glory ; what do you say , ? ' 'An old man , my lord , never like change , ' say the dean . ' you must have be sad bungler if it be so , ' say the archdeacon ; ' and indeed , to tell the truth , I think you have bungle it . at any rate , you must own this ; you have not do the half what you boast you would do . ' ' now , as regard you system of professor -- ' begin the chancellor slowly . he be never destin to get beyond the beginning . ' talking of professor , ' say a soft clear voice close behind the chancellor 's elbow ; ' how much you might learn from ; only you be all too proud . ' the bishop look round , perceive that abominable young have pursue he . the dean star at he , as though he be some unearthly apparition ; so also do two or three prebendary and minor canon . the archdeacon laugh . ' the german professor be man of learning , ' say , ' but -- ' ' german professors ! ' groan out the chancellor , as though he nervous system have receive a shock which nothing but a week of Oxford air would cure . ' yes , ' continue ; not at all understanding why a german professor should be contemptible in the eyes of a don . ' not but what the name be best earn at . in Germany the professor do teach ; at , I believe they only profess to do so , and sometimes not even that
that . you will have those universities of yours about you ear soon , if you do not consent to take a lesson from . ' there be no answer this . Dignified clergyman of sixty year of age could not condescmend to discuss such a matter with a young man with such clothes and such a beard . ' have you get good water out at , ? ' say the bishop by way of change the conversation . ' pretty good , ' say the archdeacon . ' but by no means so good as he wine , my lord , ' say a witty minor . ' nor so generally use , ' say another ; ' that be for inward application . ' 'Ha , ha , ha ! ' laugh the bishop , 'a good cellar of wine be a very comfortable thing in a house . ' ' you german professor , sir , prefer beer , I believe , ' say the sarcastic little meagre prebendary . ' they do not think much of either , ' say ; 'and that perhaps account for they superiority . now the jewish professor -' the insult be become too deep for the spirit of to endure , so the archdeacon walk off one way and the chancellor another , follow by they disciple , and the bishop and the young reformer be leave together on the hearth - rug . be a once myself , ' say . the bishop be determine not to stand another examination , or be lead on any term into ; so he again remember that he have to do something very particular , and leave young Stanhope with the dean . the dean do not get the worst of it , for give he a true account of he remarkable doings in the . 'Oh , , ' say the bishop , overtak the cus - devant warden ; 'I want to say one word about the hospital . you know , of course , that it be to be fill up . ' 's heart beat a little , and he say that he have hear so . ' of course , ' continue the bishop ; ' there can be only one man whom I could wish to see in that situation . I do not know what you own view may be , -- ' ' they be very simply tell , my lord , ' say the other ; 'too take the place if it be offer I , and to put up with the want of it should another man get it . ' the bishop profess himself delighted to hear it ; might be quite sure that no other man would get it . there be some few circumstance which would in a slight degree change the nature of the duty . be probably aware of this , and would , perhaps , not object to discuss the matter with . it be a subject to which have give a good deal of attention . feel , he know not why , oppress and annoye . what could do to he ? he know that there be to be change . the nature of they must be communicate to the warden through somebody , and through whom so naturally as the bishop 's chaplain . ' Tbe thus that he try to argue himself back to a easy mind , but in vain . Slope in the mean time have take the seat which the bishop have vacate on the signora 's sofa , and remain with that lady till it be time to marshal the folk to supper . not with contented eye have see this . have not this woman laugh at she distress , and have not hear it ? be she not a intrigue italian woman , half wife and half not , full of affectation , air , and impudence ? be she not horribly bedizen with velvet and pearl , with velvet and pearl , too , which have be tear off she back ? above all , do she not pretend to be more beautiful than she neighbour ? to say that be jealous would give a wrong idea of she feeling . she have not the slightest desire that should be in love with herself . but she desire the incense of 's spiritual and temporal service , and do not choose that they should be turn out of they course to such a object as . she consider also that ought in duty to hate the signora ; and it appear from he manner that he be very far from hat she . ' come , , ' she say , swee by , and look all that she feel ; ' can not you make yourself useful ? do pray take down to supper . ' hear and escape . the word be hardly out of 's mouth , before the intend victim have stick she hand through the arm of one of she husband 's curate , and save herself . what would the archdeacon have say have he see she walk down stair with ? heard also , but be by no means so obedient as be expect . indeed , the period of 's obedience to be draw to a close . he do not wish yet to break with she , nor to break with she at all , if it could be avoid . but he intend to be master in that palace , and as she have make the same resolution , it be not improbable that they might come to blow . before leave the signora he arrange a little table before she , and beg to know what he should bring she . she be quite indifferent , she say -- nothing --anyth . it be
be now she feel the misery of she position , now that she must be leave alone . well , a little chicken , some ham , and a glass of champagne . have to explain , not without blush for he patron , that there be no champagne . would do just as well . and then descend with the learn on he arm . could she tell he , he ask , whether the fern of be equal to those of ? he strongest worldly passion be for fern -- and before she could answer he he leave she wedge between the door and the sideboard . it be fifty minute before she escape , and even then unfed . ' you be not leave we , , ' say the watchful lady of the house , see she slave escape towards the door , with store of provision hold high above the head of the guest . explain that the be in want of she supper . ' pray , , let she brother take it to she , ' say , quite out loud . ' it be out of the question that you should be so employ . , , oblige I ; I be sure will wait upon he sister . ' be most agreeably occupy in the furthest corner of the room , make himself both useful and agreeable to 's youngest daughter . 'I could not get out , madam , if be starve for she supper , ' say he ; 'I be physically fix , unless I could fly . ' the lady 's anger be increase by see that she daughter have go over to the enemy ; and when she see , that in spite of she remonstrance , in the tooth of she positive order , go off to the drawing - room , the cup of she indignation run over , and she could not restrain herself . ' such manners I never see , ' she say , mutter . 'i cannot , and will not permit it ;' and then , after fusse and fume for a few minute , she push she way through the crowd , and follow . when she reach the room above , she find it absolutely desert , except for the guilty pair . the signora be sit very comfortably up for she supper , and be lean over she and administer to she want . they have be discuss the merit of - day school , and the lady suggest that as she could not possibly go to the child , she might be indulge in the wish of she heart by have the child bring to she . ' and when shall it be , ? ' say she . be save the necessity of commit himself to a promise by the entry of . she sweep close up to the sofa so as to confront the guilty pair , stare full at they for a moment , and then say as she pass on to the next room , , he lordship be especially desirous of you attendance below ; you will greatly oblige I if you will join he . ' and so she stalk on . mutter something in reply , and prepare to go down stair . as for the bishop 's want he , he know he lady patroness well enough to take that assertion at what it be worth ; but he do not wish to make himself the hero of a scene , or to become conspicuous for more gallantry than the occasion require . ' be she always like this ? ' say the signora . ' yes -- always --madam , ' say , return ; ' always the same -- always equally adverse to the impropriety of conduct of every description ;' and she stalk back through the room again , follow out of the door . the signora could not follow she , or she certainly would have do so . but she laugh loud , and send the sound of it ring through the lobby and down the stair after 's foot . have she be as active as , she could probably have take no better revenge . ' but she be lame , , and can not move . somebody must have wait upon she . ' ' lame , ' say ; 'I would lame she if she belong to I . what business have she here at all ?--such impertinence --such affectation . ' in the hall and adjacent room all manner of cloaking and shawling be go on , and the folk be get themselves gone . do she best to smirk at each and every one , as they make they adieux , but she be hardly successful . she temper have be try fearfully . by slow degree , the guest go . ' send back the carriage quick , ' say , as and take they departure . the younger Stanhope be leave to the very last , and a uncomfortable party they make with the bishop 's family . they all go into the dining - room , and then the bishop observe that the ' lady ' be alone in the drawing - room , they follow he up . keep and she daughter in close conversation , resolve that he should not be indulge , nor they pollute . the bishop , in mortal dread of and the , try to converse with about the climate of . and the signora have not resource but in each other . ' do you get you supper at last , ? ' say the impudent or else mischievous young man . 'Oh , yes , ' say ; be so very kind to bring it I . I fear , however , he put himself to
to more inconvenience than I wish . ' look at she , but say nothing . the meaning of she look might have be translate : ' if ever you find yourself within these wall again , I will give you leave to be as impudent and affect , and as mischievous as you please . ' at last the carriage return with the three italian servants , and be carry out , as she have be carry in . the lady of the palace retire to she chamber by no means contente with the result of she first grand party at . two or three day after the party , receive a note , begge he to call on , at the palace , at a early hour the follow morning . there be nothing uncivil in the communication , and yet the tone of it be thoroughly displease . it be as follow : " my dear , will you favour I by call on I at the palace to - morrow morning at 9.30 am . the bishop wish I to speak to you touch the hospital . I hope you will excuse my naming so early a hour . I do so as my time be greatly occupied . if , however , it be positively inconvenient to you , I will change it to 10 . you will , perhaps , be kind enough to give I a note in reply . " believe I to be , my dear , you assure friend , Obh . Slope " the , morning , " 20th , 185 - " neither could nor would believe anything of the sort ; and he think , moreover , that be rather impertinent to call himself by such a name . he assure friend , indeed ! how many assure friend generally fall to the lot of a man in this world ? and by what process be they make ? and how much of such process have take place as yet between and ? could not help ask himself these question as he read and re-read the note before he . he answer it , as follow : " dear Sir ,-- I will call at the palace to - morrow at 9.30 am as you desire . " truly yours , " and on the follow morning , punctually at half - past nine , he knock at the palace door , and ask for . the bishop have one small room allot to he on the ground - floor , and have another . into this latter be show , and ask to sit down . be not yet there . the ex-warden stand up at the window look into the garden , and could not help think how very short a time have pass since the whole of that house have be open to he , as though he have be a child of the family , bear and breed in it . he remember how the old servants use to smile as they open the door to he ; how the familiar butler would say , when he have be absent for a few hour longer than usual : 'A sight of you , , be good for sore eye ;' how the fussy housekeeper would swear that he could not have dine , or could not have breakfast , or could not have lunch . and then , above all , he remember the pleasant gleam of inward satisfaction which always spread itself over the old bishop 's face , whenever he friend enter he room . a tear come into he eye as he reflect that all this be gone . what use would the hospital be to he now ? he be alone in the world , and get old ; he would soon , very soon , have to go , and leave it all , as he dear old friend have go ; -- go , and leave the hospital , and he accustom place in the cathedral , and he haunt and pleasure , to younger and perhaps wiser man , in truth , the time for it have go by . he feel as though the world be sinke from he foot ; as though this , this be the time for he to turn with confidence to other . ' what , ' say he to himself , ' can a man 's religion be worth , if it do not support he against the natural melancholy of declining year ? ' and , as he look out through he dimmed eye into the bright parterre of the bishop 's garden , he feel that he have the support which he want . nevertheless , he do not like to be thus keep wait . if do not really wish to see he at half - past nine o'clock , why force he to come away from he lodging with he breakfast in he throat ? to tell the truth , it be policy on the part of . have make up he mind that should either accept the hospital with abject submission , or else refuse it altogether ; and have calculate that he would probably be more quick to do the latter , if he could be get to enter upon the subject in all ill - humour . perhaps be not altogether wrong in he calculation . it be nearly ten when hurry into the room , and , mutter something about the bishop and diocesan duty , shook 's hand ruthlessly , and beg he to be seat . now the airy superiority which this man assume , do go against the grain of ; and yet he do not know how to resent it . the whole tendency of he mind and disposition be oppose to any contra-assumption of grandeur on he
he own part , and he have not the worldly spirit or quickness necessary to put down insolent pretension by downright and open rebuke , as the archdeacon would have do . there be nothing for but to submit and he accordingly do so . ' about the hospital , , ' begin , speak of it as the head of college at might speak of some sizarship which have to be dispose of . cross one leg over the other , and then one hand over the other on the top of they , and look in the face ; but he say nothing . ' it be to be fill up again , ' say . say that he have understood so . ' of course , you know , the income be very much reduced , ' continue . ' the bishop wish to be liberal , and he therefore tell the government that he think it ought to be put at not less than l 450 . I think on the whole the bishop be right ; for though the service require will not be of a very onerous nature , they will be more so than they be before . and it be , perhaps , well that the clergy immediately attach to the cathedral town should be make comfortable to the extent of the ecclesiastical means at we disposal will allow . those be the bishop 's idea , and I must say mine also . ' sit rub one hand on the other , but say not a word . ' so much for the income , . the house will , of course , remain to the warden as before . it should , however , I think be stipulate that he should paint inside every seven year , and outside every three year , and be subject to dilapidation , in the event of vacating either by death or otherwise . but this be a matter on which the bishop must yet be consult . ' still rubb he hand , and still sit silent , gaze up into 's unprepossessing face . ' then , as to duty , ' continue he , 'I believe , if I be rightly inform , there can hardly be say to have be any duty hitherto , ' and he give a sort of half laugh , as though to pass off the accusation in the guise of a pleasantry . think of the happy , easy year he have pass in he old house ; of the worn - out , a man whom he have succoure ; of he good intention ; and of he work , which have certainly be of the lightest . he think of those thing , doubt for a moment whether he do or do not deserve the sarcasm . he give he enemy the benefit of the doubt , and do not rebuke he . he merely observ , very tranquilly , and perhaps with too much humility , that the duty of the situation , such as they be , have , he believe , be do to the satisfaction of the late bishop . again smile , and this time the smile be intend to operate against the memory of the late bishop , rather than against the energy of the ex-warden ; and so it be understand by . the colour rise in he cheek , and he begin to feel very angry . ' you should be aware , , that thing be a good deal change in , ' say . say that he be aware of it . ' and not only in , , but in the world at large . it be not only in that a new man be carry out new measure and cast away the useless rubbish of past century . the same thing be go on throughout the country . work be now require from every man who receive wage ; and they who have superintend the doing of the work , and the paying of the wage , be bound to see that this rule be carry out . new man , , be now need , and be now forthcome in the church , as well as in other profession . ' all this be wormwood to we old friend . he have never rate very high he own ability or activity ; but all the feeling of he heart be with the old clergy , and any antipathy of which he heart be susceptible , be direct against those new , busy uncharitable , self - laud man , of whom be so good a example . ' by no means , ' say . ' the bishop be very anxious that you should accept the appointment ; but he wish you should understand beforehand what will be the require duty . in the first place , a Sabbath - day school will be attach to the hospital . ' ' what ! for the old man ? ' ask . ' no , , not for the old man , but for the benefit of the child of such of the poor of as it may suit . the bishop will expect that you shall attend this school , and the teacher shall be under you inspection and care . ' slip he topmost hand off the other , and begin to rub the calf of the leg which be support . ' as to the old man , ' continue , ' and the old woman who be to form part of the hospital , the bishop be desirous that you shall have morning and evening service on the premise every Sabbath , and one week - day service ; that you shall preach to they once at least on ; and that the whole hospital be always collect
collect for morning and evening prayer . the bishop think that this will render it unnecessary that any separate seat in the cathedral should be reserve for the hospital inmate . ' pause , but still say nothing . ' indeed , it would be difficult to find seat for the woman ; and , on the whole , , I may as well say at once , that for people of that class the cathedral service do not appear to I to be the most useful , -- even if it be so for any class of people . ' ' we will not discuss that , if you please , ' say . 'I be not desirous of do so ; at least , not at the present moment . I hope , however , you fully understand the bishop 's wish about the new establishment of the hospital ; and if , as I do not doubt , I shall receive from you a assurance that you will accord with he lordship 's view , it will give I very great pleasure to be the bearer from he lordship to you of the presentation of the appointment . ' ' but if I disagree with he lordship 's view ? ' ask . ' but I hope you do not , ' say . ' but if I do ? ' again ask the other . ' if such unfortunately should be the case , which I can hardly conceive , I presume you own feeling will dictate to you the propriety of decline the appointment . ' ' but if I accept the appointment , and yet disagree with the bishop , what then ? ' this question rather bother . it be true that he have talk the matter over with the bishop , and have receive a sort of authority for suggest to Hard the propriety of a school , and certain hospital service ; but he have no authority for say that those proposition be to be make peremptory condition attach to the appointment . the bishop 's idea have be that would of course consent , and that the school would become , like the rest of those new establishment in the city , under the control of he wife and he chaplain . 's idea have be more correct . he intend that should refuse the situation , and that a ally of he own should get it ; but he have not conceive the possibility of openly accept the appointment , and as openly reject the condition . ' it be not , I presume , probable , ' say he , ' that you will accept from the hand of the bishop a piece of preferment , with a fix predetermination to disacknowledge the duty attach to it . ' ' if I become warden , ' say , ' and neglect my duty , the bishop have mean by which he can remedy the grievance . ' 'I hardly expect such a argument from you , or I may say the suggestion of such a line of conduct , ' say , with a great look of injured virtue . ' do I expect such a proposition . ' 'I shall be glad at any rate to know what answer I be to make to he lordship , ' say . 'I will take a early opportunity of see he lordship myself , ' say . ' such a arrangement , ' say , ' will hardly give he lordship satisfaction . indeed , it be impossible that the bishop should himself see every clergyman in the diocese on every subject of patronage that may arise . the bishop , I believe , do see you on the matter , and I really can not see why he should be troubled to do so again . ' ' do you know , , how long I have be officiate as a clergyman in this city ? ' 's wish be now nearly fulfil . have become very angry , and it be probable that he might commit himself . 'I really do not see what that have to do with the question . you can not think that the bishop would be justified in allow you to regard as a sinecure a situation that require a active man , merely because you have be employ for many year in the cathedral . ' ' but it might induce the bishop to see I , if I ask he to do so . I shall consult my friend in this matter , ; but I mean to be guilty of no subterfuge , -- you may tell the bishop that as I altogether disagree with he view about the hospital , I shall decline the situation if I find that any such condition be attach to it as those you have suggest ;' and so say , take he hat and go he way . be contente . he consider himself at liberty to accept 's last speech as a absolute refusal of the appointment . at least , he so represent it to the bishop and to . ' that be very surprising , ' say the bishop . ' not at all , ' say ; ' you little know how determine the whole set of they be to withstand you authority . ' ' but be so anxious for it , ' say the bishop . ' yes , ' say , ' if he can hold it without the slightest acknowledgement of you lordship 's jurisdiction . ' ' that be out of the question , ' say the bishop . 'I should imagine it to be quite so , 'say the chaplain . ' indeed , I should think so , ' say the lady . 'I really be sorry for it , ' say
say the bishop . 'I do not know that there be much cause for sorrow , ' say the lady . be a much more deserve man , more in need of it , and one who will make himself much more useful in the close neighbourhood of the palace . ' 'I suppose I have better see Quiverful ? ' say the chaplain . 'I suppose you have , ' say the bishop . chapter xiii the be not a happy man as he walk down the palace pathway , and step out into the close . he preferment and pleasant house be a second time go from he ; but that he could endure . he have be school and insult by a man young enough to be he son ; but that he could put up with . he could even draw from the very injury , which have be inflict on he , some of that consolation , which we may believe martyr always receive from the injury of they own suffering , and which be generally proportion in it strength to the extent of cruelty with which martyr be treat . he have admit to he daughter that he want the comfort of he old home , and yet he could have return to he lodging in the , if not with exultation , at least with satisfaction , have that be all . but the venom of the chaplain 's harangue have work into he blood , and have sap the life of he sweet contentment . ' new man be carry out new measure , and be eat away the useless rubbish of past century . ' what cruel word these have be ; and how often be they now use with all the heartless cruelty of a Slope ! a man be sufficientely condemne if it can only be show that either in politics or religion he do not belong to some new school establish within the last score of year . he may then regard himself as rubbish and expect to be car away . a man be nothing now unless he have within he a full appreciation of the new era ; a ear in which it would seem that neither honesty nor truth be very desirable , but in which success be the only touchstone of merit . we must laugh at every thing that be establish . let the joke be ever so bad , ever so untrue to the real principles of joke ; nevertheless we must laugh -- or else beware the cart . we must talk , think , and live up to the spirit of the time , and write up to it too , if that cacoethes be upon we , or else we be nuy . new man and now measure , long credit and few scruple , great success and wonderful ruin , such be now the taste of who know how to live . Alas , alas ! under the circumstance could not but feel that he be a who do not know how to live . this new doctrine of and the rubbish cart , new at least at , sadly disturb he equanimity . ' the same thing be go on throughout the whole country ! ' ' work be now require from every man who receive wage ! ' and have he be live all he life receive wage and do no work ? have he in truth so live as to be now in he old age justly reckon as rubbish fit only to be hide away in some huge dust hole ? the school of man to whom he profess to belong , the , the Gwynne , and the old high set of divine , be afflict with no such self - accusation as these which trouble . they , as a rule , be as satisfied with the wisdom and propriety of they own conduct as can be any , or any , with he own . but unfortunately for himself , have little of this self - reliance . when he hear himself designate as rubbish by the of the world , he have no other recourse than to make inquiry within he own bosom as to the truth of the designation . Alas , alas ! the evidence seem generally to go against he . he have profess to himself in the bishop 's parlour that in these come source of the sorrow of the age , in these fit of sad regret from which the latter year of few reflecting man can be free , religion would suffice to comfort he . yes , religion could conseal he for the loss of any worldly good ; but be he religion of that active sort which would enable he so to repent of misspent year as to pass those that be leave to he in a spirit of hope for the future ? and such repentance itself , be it not a work of agony and of tear ? it be very easy to talk of repentance ; but a man have to walk over hot ploughshare before he can complete it ; to be skin alive as be ; to be stick full of arrow as be ; to lie broiling on a gridiron like ! how if he past life require such repentance as this ? have he the energy to go through with it ? Hard after leave the palace , walk slowly for a hour or so beneath the shady elm of the close , and then betake himself to he daughter 's house . he have at any rate make up he mind that he would go out to to consult , and that he would in the first instance tell Eleanor what have occur . and now he be doom to undergo another misery . have
have forestall he at the widow 's house . he have call there on the preceding afternoon . he could not , he have say , deny himself the pleasure of tell that she father be about to return to the pretty house at 's hospital . he have be instruct by the bishop to inform Hard that the appointment would now be make at once . the bishop be of course only too happy to be able to be the means of restoring to Hard the preferment which he have so long adorn . and then by degrees have introduce the subject of the pretty school which he have hope before long to see attach to the hospital . he have quite fascinated by he description of this picturesque , useful , and charitable appendage , and she have go so far as to say that she have no doubt she father would approve , and that she herself would gladly undertake a class . anyone who have hear the entirely different tone , and see the entirely different manner in which have speak of this project institution to the daughter and to the father , would not have fail to own that be a man of genius . he say nothing to about the hospital sermon and service , nothing about the exclusion of the old man from the cathedral , nothing about dilapidation and painting , nothing about car away the rubbish . have say to herself that certainly she do not like Slope personally , but that he be a very active , zealous , clergyman , and would no doubt be useful in . all this pave the way for much additional misery to . put on she happiest face as she hear she father on the stair , for she think she have only to congratulate he ; but directly she see he face , she know that there be but little matter for congratulation . she have see he with the same weary look of sorrow on one or two occasion before , and remember it well . she have see he when he first read that attack upon himself in the , which have ultimately cause he to resign the hospital ; and she have see he also when the archdeacon have persuade he to remain there against he own sense of propriety and honour . she know at a glance that he spirit be in deep trouble . 'Oh , papa , what be it ? ' say she , put down she boy to crawl upon the floor . 'I come to tell you , my dear , ' say he , ' that I be go out to : you will not come with I , I suppose ? ' , ? shall you stay there ? ' 'I suppose I shall tonight : I must consult the archdeacon about this weary hospital . ah I ! I wish I have never think of it again . ' ' why , papa , what be the matter ? ' 'I have be with , my dear ; and he be not the pleasantest companion in the world , at least not to I . ' give a sort of half blush ; but she be wrong if she imagine that she father in any way allude to she acquaintance with . ' well , papa . ' ' he want to turn the hospital into a school and a preach house ; and I suppose he will have he way . I do not feel myself adapt for such a establishment , and therefore , I suppose , I must refuse the appointment . ' ' what would be the harm of the school , papa ? ' ' the want of a proper schoolmaster , my dear . ' ' but that would of course be suppli . ' wish to supply it by make I he schoolmaster . but as I be hardly fit for such work , I intend to decline . ' 'Oh , papa ! do not intend that . he be here yesterday , and what he intend --' ' he be here yesterday , be he ? ' ask . ' yes , papa . ' ' and talk about the hospital ? ' ' he be say how glad he would be , and the bishop too , to see you back there again . and then he speak about the school ; and to tell the truth I agree with he ; and I think you would have do so too . spoke of a school , not inside the hospital , but just connect with it , of which you would be the patron and visitor ; and I think you would have like such a school as that ; and I promise to look after it and to take a class -- and it all see so very --. but , oh , papa ! I shall be so miserable if I find that I have do wrong . ' ' nothing wrong at all , my dear , ' say he , gently , very gently reject he daughter 's caress . ' there can be nothing wrong in you wishing to make yourself useful ; indeed , you ought to do so by all means . every one must now exert himself who would not choose to go to the wall . ' poor thus attempt in he misery to preach the new doctrine to he child . ' himself or herself , it be all the same ,' he continue , ' you will be quite right , my dear , to do something of this sort ; but --' ' well , papa . ' 'I be not quite sure that if I be you I would select for my guide . ' ' but
but I have never do so , and never shall . ' ' it would be very wicked of I to speak evil of he , for to tell the truth I know no evil of he ; but I be not quite sure that he be honest . that he be not gentleman - like in he manners , of that I be quite sure . ' 'I never think of take he for my guide , papa . ' 'as for myself , my dear , ' continue he , 'we know the old proverb --" it be a bad thing teach a old dog new trick . " I must decline the school , and shall therefore probably decline the hospital also . but I will first see you brother - in - law . ' so he take up he hat , kiss the baby , and withdraw , leave in as low spirit as himself . all this be a great aggravation to he misery . he have so few with whom to sympathise , that he could not afford to be cut off from the one whose sympathy be of the most value to he . and yet it seem probable that this would be the case . he do not own to himself that he wish he daughter to hate ; yet have she express such a feeling there would have be very little bitterness in the rebuke he would have give she for so uncharitable a state of mind . the fact , however , be that she be on friendly term with , that she coincide with he view , adhere at once to he plan , and listen with delight to he teaching . hardly wish he daughter to hate the man , but he would have prefer that to she love he . he walk away to the inn to order a fly , go home to put up he carpet bag , and then start for . there be , at any rate , no danger that the archdeacon would fraternise with ; but then he would recommend internecine war , public appeal , loud reproach , and all the paraphernalia of open battle . now that alternative be hardly more to 's taste than the other . when reach the parsonage he find that the archdeacon be out , and would not be home till dinner - time , so he begin he complaint to he elder daughter . Mrs Grantly entertain quite as strong a antagonism to as do she husband ; she be also quite as alive to the necessity of combatt the faction , of support the old church interest of the close , of keep in she own set much of the loave and fish as duly belong to it ; and be quite as well prepare as she lord to carry on the battle without give or take quarter . not that she be a woman prone to quarrell , or ill inclin to live at peace with she clerical neighbour ; but she feel , as do the archdeacon , that the presence of in be a insult to every one connect with the late bishop , and that he assume dominion in the diocese be a spiritual injury to she husband . people have little guess how bitter could be . she live on the best of term with all the rector 's wives around she . she have be popular with all the lady connect with the close . though much the wealthiest of the ecclesiastical matron of the county , she have so manage she affair that she carriage and horse have give umbrage to none . she have never throw herself among the county grandee so as to excite the envy of other clergyman 's wife . she have never talke too loudly of earl and countess , or boast that she give she governess sixty pound a year , or she cook seventy . have live the life of a wise , discreet , peace - make woman ; and the people of be surprised at the amount of military vigour she display as general of the feminine Grantlyite force . Mrs Grantly soon learn that she sister have promise to assist in the affair of the hospital ; and it be on this point that she attention soon fix itself . ' how can endure he ? ' say she . ' he be a very crafy man , ' say she father , ' and he craft have be successful in make think that he be a meek , charitable , good clergyman . God forgive I , if I wrong he , but such be not he true character in my opinion . ' ' he true character , indeed ! ' say she , with something approach scorn for she father 's moderation . 'I only hope he will not have craft enough to make forget herself and she position . ' ' do you mean marry he ? ' say he , start out of he usual demeanour by the abruptness and horror of so dreadful a proposition . ' what be there so improbable in it ? of course that would be he own object if he think he have any chance of success . have a thousand a year entirely at she own disposal , and what better fortune could fall to 's lot than the transferring of the disposal of such a fortune to himself ? ' ' but you can not think she like he , ? ' ' why not ? ' say . ' why should not she like he ? he be just the sort of man to get on with a woman left as she be , with no one to look after she . ' ' look after she ! ' say the
the unhappy father ; 'do not we look after she ? ' 'Ah , papa , how innocent you be ! of course it be to be expect that should marry again . I should be the last to advise she against it , if she would only wait the proper time , and then marry at least a gentleman . ' ' but you do not really mean to say that you suppose have ever think of marry ? why , have only be dead a year . ' ' eighteen month , ' say he daughter . ' but I do not suppose have ever think about it . it be very probable , though , that he have , and that he will try and make she do so ; and that he will succeed too , if we do not take care what we be about . ' this be quite a new phase of the affair to poor . to have thrust upon he as he son - in - law , as the husband of he favourite child , the only man in the world whom he really positively dislike , would be a misfortune which he feel he would not know how to endure patiently . but then , could there be any ground for so dreadful a surmise ? in all worldly matter he be apt to look upon the opinion of he eldest daughter , as one generally sound and trustworthy . in she appreciation of character , of motive , and the probable conduct both of man and woman , she be usually not far wrong . she have early foresee the marriage of and ; she have at a glance decipher the character of the new bishop and he chaplain ; could it possibly be that she present surmise should ever come forth as true ? ' ' but you do not think that she like he , ' say again . ' well , papa , I can not say that I think she dislike he as she ought to do . why be he visit there as a confidential friend , when he never ink to have be admit inside the house ? why be it that she speak to he of about you welfare and you position , as she clearly have do ? at the bishop 's party the other night , I see she talk to he for half a hour at the stretch . ' 'I think seem to talk to nobody there but that daughter of , ' say , wish to defend he child . 'Oh , be a cleverer man than you think of , papa , and keep more than one iron in the fire . ' to give she due , any suspicion as to the slightest inclination on she part towards be a wrong to she . she have no more idea of marry than she have of marry the bishop ; and the idea that would present himself as a suitor have never occur to she . indeed , to give she she due again , she have never think about suitor since she husband 's death . but nevertheless it be true that she have overcome all that repugnance to the man which be so strongly feel for he by the rest of the faction . she have forgive he he sermon . she have forgive he he low church tendency , he school , and puritanical observance . she have forgiven he pharisaical arrogance , and even he greasy face and oily vulgar manners . have agree to overlook such offence as these , why should she not in time be teach to regard as a suitor ? and as to he , it must be affirm that he be hithertoo equally innocent of the crime impute to he . how it have come to pass that a man whose eye be generally widly open to everything have not perceive that this young widow be rich as well as beautiful , can not probably now be explain . but such be the fact . have ingratiate himself with , merely as he have do with other lady , in order to strengthen he party in the city . he subsequently attend he error ; but it be not till after the interview with he and . the new campaign the archdeacon do not return to the parsonage till close upon the hour of dinner , and there be therefore no time to discuss matter before that important ceremony . he seem to be in a especial good humour , and welcome he father - in - law with a sort of jovial earnestness that be usual with he when thing on which be intent be go on as he would have they . ' it be all settle , my dear , ' say he to he wife as he wash he hand in he dressing - room , while she , accord to she wont , sit listen in the bedroom ; ' have agree to accept the living . he will be here next week . ' and the archdeacon scrub he hand and rub he face with a violent alacrity , which show that 's come be a great point gai . ' will he come here to Plumstead ? ' say the wife . ' he have promise to stay a month with we , ' say the archdeacon , 'so that he may see what he parish be like . you will like very much . he be a gentleman in every respect , and full of good humour . ' 'he be very queer , be not he ? ' ask the wife . ' well -- he be a little odd in some of he fancie ; but there be nothing about he you will not like .
. he be as staunch a churchman as there be at . I really do not know what we should do without . it be a great thing for I to have he so near I ; and if anything can put down , will do it . ' the be a fellow of , the favoured disciple of the great , a high churchman at all point ; so high , indeed , that at one period of he career he have all but topple over into the cesspool of ; a poet and also a polemical writer , a great pet in the common room at , a eloquent clergyman , a droll , odd , humorous , energetic , conscientious man , and , as the archdeacon have boast of he , a thorough gentleman . as he will hereafter be bring more closely to we notice , it be now only necessary to add , that he have just be present to the vicarage of by , in whose gift as archdeacon the living lay . 's be a parish lie just without the city of . the suburb of the new town , indeed , be partly within its precinct , and the pretty church and parsonage be not much above a mile distant from the city gate . be not a rich piece of preferment -- it be worth some three or four hundr a year , at most , and have generally be hold by a clergyman attach to the cathedral choir . the archdeacon , however , feel , when the living on this occasion become vacant , that it imperatively behove he to aid the force of he party with some tower of strength , if any such tower could be get to occupy 's . he have discuss the matter with he breth in ; not in any weak spirit as the holder of patronage to be use for he own or he family 's benefit , but as one to whom be commit a trust , on the due administration of which much of the church 's welfare might depend . he have submit to they the name of , as though the choice have rest with they all in conclave , and they have unanimously admit that , if would accept 's no better choice could possibly be make . if would accept 's ! there lay the difficulty . be a man stand somewhat prominently before the world , that be , before the of world . he be not a rich man , it be true , for he hold no preferment but he fellowship ; but he be a man not over anxious for riche , not marry of course , and one whose time be greatly take up in discussing , both in print and on platform , the privileges and practice of the church to which he belong . as the archdeacon have do battle for its temporality , so do do battle for its spirituality ; and both have do so conscientiously ; that be , not so much each for he own benefit as for that of other . hold such a position as do , there be much reason to doubt whether he would consent to become the parson of 's , and have take the trouble to go himself to on the matter . and together have succeed in persuade this eminent divine that duty require he to go . there be wheel within wheel in this affair . for some time past have be engage in a tremendous controversy with no less a person than , respect the apostolic succession . these two gentleman have never see each other , but they have be extremely bitter in print . have endeavoure to strengthen he cause by call Arabin a owl , and have retaliate by hinting that be a infidel . this battle have be commence in the column of the daily , a powerful newspaper , the manager of which be very friendly to 's view of the case . the matter , however , have become too tedious for the reader of the , and a little note have therefore be append to one of 's most tell rejoinder , in which it have be state that no further letter from the reverend gentleman could be insert except as advertisement . other method of publication be , however , find less expensive than advertisement in the ; and the war go on merrily . declare that the main part of the consecration of a clergyman be the self - devotion of the inner man to the duty of the ministry . contend that a man be not consecrate at all , have , indeed , no single attribute of a clergyman , unless he become so through the imposition of some bishop 's hand , who have become a bishop through the imposition of other hand , and so on in a direct line to one of the apostle . each have repeatedly hng the other on the horn of a dilemma ; but neither seem to a whit the worse for the hanging ; and so the war go on merrily . whether or no the near neighbourhood of the foe may have act in any way as a inducement to to accept the living of , we will not pretend to say ; but it have at any rate be settle in 's library , at , that he would accept it , and that he would lend he assistance towards drive the enemy out of , or , at any rate , silence he while he remain there . intend to keep he room at , and to have the assistance of a curate at ; but he promise to give as much time as possible to the neighbourhood of , and from so
so great a man be quite satisfied with such a promise . it be no small part of the satisfaction derivable from such a arrangement that would be force to institute into a living , immediately under he own nose , the enemy of he favourite chaplain . all through the dinner the archdeacon 's good humour shone brightly in he face . he ate of the good thing heartily , he drank wine with he wife and daughter , he talk pleasantly of he doings at , tell he father - in - law that he ought to visit at , and launch out again in praise of . 'Is marry , papa ? ' ask . ' no , my dear ; the fellow of a college be never marry . ' ' be he a young man , papa ? ' ' about forty , I believe , ' say the archdeacon . ' oh ! ' say . have she father say eighty , would not have appear to she to be very much older . when the two gentleman be leave alone over they wine , tell he tale of woe . but even this , sad as it be , do not much diminish the archdeacon 's good humour , though it greatly add to he pugnacity . ' he can not do it , ' say Grantly over and over again , as he father - in - law explain to he the term on which the new warden of the hospital be to be appoint ; ' he can not do it . what he say be not worth the trouble of listen to . he can not alter the duty of the place . ' ' who can not ? ' ask the ex-warden . ' neither can the bishop nor the chaplain , nor yet the bishop 's wife , who , I take it , have really more to say to such matter than either of the other two . the whole body corporate of the palace together have no power to turn the warden of the hospital into a schoolmaster . ' ' but the bishop have the power to appoint whom he please , and -- ' 'I do not know that ; I rather think he will find he have no such power . let he try it , and see what the press will say . for once we shall have the popular cry on we side . but , ass as he be , know the world too well to get such a hornet 's nest about he ear . ' wince at the idea of the press . he have have enough of that sort of publicity , and be unwilling to be show up a second time either as a monster or as a martyr . he gently remark that he hope the newspaper would not get hold of he name again , and then suggest that perhaps it would be better that he should abandon he object . 'I be get old , ' say he ; 'and after all I doubt whether I be fit to undertake new duty . ' ' new duty ! ' say the archdeacon : 'do not I tell you there shall be no new duty ? ' 'Or , perhaps , old duty either , ' say ; 'I think I will remain content as I be . ' the picture of cart away the rubbish be still present to he mind . the archdeacon drank off he glass of claret , and prepare himself to be energetic . 'I do hope , ' say he , ' that you be not go to be so weak as to allow such a man as to deter you from do what you know be you duty to do . you know that it be you duty to resume you place at the hospital now that parliament have so settle the stipend as to remove those difficulty which induce you to resign it . you can not deny this ; and should you timidity now prevent you from do so , you conscience will hereafter never forgive you ;' and as he finish this clause of he speech , he push over the bottle to he companion . ' you conscience will never forgive you ,' he continue . ' you resign the place from conscientious scruple , scruple which I greatly respect , though I do not share they . all you friend respecte they , and you leave you old house as rich in reputation as you be ruin in fortune . it be now expect that you will return . be say only the other day -- ' ' Dr Gwynne do not reflect how much older a man I be now than when he last see I . ' ' old -- nonsense ! ' say the archdeacon ; ' you never think yourself old till you listen to the impudent trash of that coxcomb at the palace . ' 'I shall be sixty - five if I live till , ' say . ' and seventy - five if you live till ten year , ' say the archdeacon . ' and you bid fair to be as efficient then as you be ten year ago . but for heaven 's sake let we have no pretence in this matter . you plea of old age be only a pretence . but you be not drink you wine . it be only a pretence . the fact be , you be half afraid of this Slope , and would rather subject yourself to comparative poverty and discomfort , than come to blow with a man who will trample on you , if you let he . ' 'I certainly do not like come to blow , if I can help it .
. ' ' nor I neither -- but sometimes we can not help it . this man 's object be to induce you to refuse the hospital , that he may put some creature of he own into it ; that he may show he power , and insult we all by insult you , whose cause and character be so intimately bound up with that of the chapter . you owe it to we all to resist he in this , even if you have no solicitude for yourself . but surely , for you own sake , you will not be so lily - live as to fall into this trap which he have bait for you , and let he take the very bread out of you mouth without a struggle . ' do not like be call lily - liver , and be rather inclin to resent it . 'I doubt there be any true courage , ' say he , 'in squabbling for money . ' ' if honest man do not squabble for money , in this world of ours , the dishonest man would get it all ; and I do not see that the cause of virtue would be much improve . no , -- we must use the means which we have . if we be to carry you argument home , we might give away every shilling of revenue which the church have ; and I presume you be not prepare to say that the church would be strengthen by such a sacrifice . ' the archdeacon fill he glass and then empty it , drink with much reverence a silent toast to the well - being and permanent security of those temporality which be so dear to he soul . 'I think all quarrel between a clergyman and he bishop should be avoid , ' say . ' I think so too ; but it be quite as much the duty of the bishop to look to that as of he inferior . I tell you what , my friend ; I will see the bishop in this matter , that be , if you will allow I ; and you may be sure I will not compromise you . my opinion be , that all this trash about - school and the sermon have originate wholly with and , and that the bishop know nothing about it . the bishop can not very well refuse to see I , and I will come upon he when he have neither he wife nor he chaplain by he . I think you will find that it will end in he send you the appointment without any condition whatever . and as to the seat in the cathedral , we may safely leave that to . I believe the fool positively think that the bishop could walk away with the cathedral , if he please . ' and so the matter be arrange between they . have come expressly for advice , and therefore feel himself bound to take the advice give he . he have know , moreover , beforehand , that the archdeacon would not hear of he give the matter up , and accordingly though he have in perfect good faith put forward he own view , he be prepare to yield . they therefore go into the drawing - room in good humour with each other , and the evening pass pleasantly in prophetic discussion on the future wars of and . the frog have the mouse would be nothing to they , nor the anger of and . how the archdeacon rub he hand , and plume himself on the success of he last move . he could not himself descend into the arena with , but would have no such scruple . be exactly the man for such work , and the only man whom he know that be fit for it . the archdeacon 's good humour and high buoyancy continue till , when recline on he pillow , commence to give he she view of the state of affair in . and then certainly he be start . the last word he say that night be as follow :-- ' if she do , by heaven , I will never speak to she again . she drag I into the mire once , but I will not pollute myself with such filth as that -- ' and the archdeacon give a shudder which shook the whole room , so violently be he convulse with the thought which then agitate he mind . now in this matter , the widow be scandalously ill - treat by she relative . she have speak to the man three or four time , and have express she willingness to teach in a - school . such be the full extent of she sins in the matter of . poor ! but time will show . the next morning return to , no further word have be speak in he hearing respect 's acquaintance with he younger daughter . but he observ that the archdeacon at breakfast be less cordial than he have be on the preceding evening . the 's lose no time in availing himself of the bishop 's permission to see , and it be in he interview with this worthy pastor that he first learn that be worth the wooing . he ride out to to communicate to the embryo ware the good will of the bishop in he favour , and during the discussion on the matter , it be unnatural that the pecuniary resource of and he family should become the subject of remark . , with he fourteen child and he four hundr a year , be a very poor man , and the prospect of this new preferment , which be to be hold together with he living , be very
very grateful to he . to what clergyman so circumstanced would not such a prospect be very grateful ? but have long be acquaint with , and have receive kindness at he hand , so that he heart misgave he as he think of supplant a friend at the hospital . nevertheless , he be extremely civil , cringingly civil , to ; treat he quite as the great man ; entreate this great man to do he the honour to drink a glass of sherry , at which , as it be very poor , the now pamper turn up he nose ; and end by declare he extreme obligation to the bishop and , and he great desire to accept the hospital , if -- if it be certainly the case that have refuse it . what man , as needy as , would have be more disinterested ? do positively refuse it , ' say , with a certain air of offended dignity , ' when he hear of the condition to which the appointment be now subject . of course , you understand , , that the same condition will be impos on yourself . ' care nothing for the condition . he would have undertake to preach any number of sermon might have choose to dictate , and to pass every remain hour of he within the wall of a school . what sacrifice , or , at any rate , what promise , would have be too much to make for such a addition to he income , and for such a house ! but he mind still recur to . 'To be sure , ' say he ; 's daughter be very rich , and why should he trouble himself with the hospital ? ' ' you mean , ' say . 'I mean the widowed daughter , ' say the other . ' have twelve hundred a year of she own , and I suppose mean to live with she . ' ' hundred a year of she own ! ' say , and very shortly afterwards take he leave , avoiding , as far as it be possible for he to do , any further allusion to the hospital . hundr a year , say he to himself , as he ride slowly home . if it be the fact that have twelve hundred a year of she own , what a fool would he be to oppose she father 's return to he old place . the train of 's idea will probably be plain to all my reader . why should he not make the twelve hundr a year he own ? and if he do so , would it not be well for he to have a father - in - law comfortably provide with the good thing of this world ? would it not , moreover , be much more easy for he to gain he daughter , if he do all in he power to forward he father 's view ? these question present themselves to he in a very forcible way , and yet there be many point of doubt . if he resolve to restore to Hard he former place , he must take the necessary step for do so at once ; he must immediately talk over the bishop , quarrel on the matter with whom he know he could not talk over , and let know that he have be a little too precipitate as to 's positive refusal . that he could effect all this , he do not doubt ; but he do not wish to effect it for nothing . he do not wish to give way to , and then be reject by the daughter . he do not wish to lose one influential friend before he have gain another . and thus he ride home , meditat the many thing in he mind . it occur to he that be sister - in - law to the archdeacon ; and that not even for twelve hundred a year would he submit to that imperious man . a rich wife be a great desideratum to he , but success in he profession be still greater ; there be , moreover , other rich woman who might be willing to become wife ; and after all , this twelve hundr a year might , when inquire into , melt away into some small sum utterly beneath he notice . then also he remember that have a son . another circumstance also much influence he , though it be one which may almost be say to have influence he against he will . the vision of be perpetually before he eye . it would be too much to say that be lose in love , but yet he think , and keep continually think , that he have never see so beautiful a woman . he be a man whose nature be open to such impulse , and the wile of the charmer have be thoroughly successful in imposing upon he thought . we will not talk of he heart : not that he have no heart , but because he heart have little to do with he present feeling . he taste have be pleased , he eye char , and he vanity gratify . he have be dazzl by a sort of loveliness which he have never before see , and have be catch by a easy , free , voluptuous manner which be perfectly new to he . he have never be so tempt before , and the temptation be now irresistible . he have not own to himself that he care for this woman more than for other around he ; but yet he think often of the time when he might see she next , and make , almost unconsciously , little cunning plan for see
see she frequently . he have call at 's house the day after the bishop 's party , and then the warmth of he admiration have be feed with fresh fuel . if the signora have be kind in she manner , and flatter in she speech when lie upon the bishop 's sofa , with the eyes of so many on she , she have be much more so in she mother 's drawing - room , with no one present but she sister to repress either she nature or she art . have thus leave she quite bewilder , and could not willingly admit into he brain any scheme , a part of which would be the necessity of abandon all further special relationship with this lady . and so he slowly ride along very meditative . and here the author must beg it to be remember that be not in all thing a bad man . he motive , like those of most man , be mix ; and though he conduct be generally very different from that which we would wish to praise , it be actuate perhaps as often as that of the majority of the world by a desire to do he duty . he believe in the religion which he teach , harsh , unpalatable , uncharitable as that religion be . he believe those whom he wish to get under he hoof , the Grantlys and Gwynnes of the church , to be the enemy of that religion . he believe himself to be the pillar of strength , destin to do great thing ; and with that subtle , selfish , ambiguous sophistry to which the mind of all man be so subject , he have teach himself to think that in do much for the promotion of he own interest he be do much also for the promotion of religion . have never be a immoral man . indeed , he have resist temptation to immorality with a strength of purpose that be creditable to he . he have early in life devote himself to work which be not compatible with the ordinary pleasure of youth , and he have abandon such pleasure not without a struggle . it must therefore be conceive that he do not admit to himself that he warmly admire the beauty of a married woman without heartfelt sting of conscience ; and to pacify that conscience , he have to teach himself that the nature of he admiration be innocent . and thus he ride along meditative and ill at ease . he conscience have not a word to say against he choose the widow and she fortune . that he look upon as a godly work rather than otherwise ; as a deed which , if carry through , would redound to he credit as a . on that side lay no future remorse , no conduct which he might probably have to forget , no inward sting . if it should turn out to be really the fact that have twelve hundred a year at she own disposal , would rather look upon it as a duty which he owed he religion to make himself the master of the wife and the money ; as a duty , too , in which some amount of self - sacrifice would be necessary . he would have to give up he friendship with the signora , he resistance to , he antipathy -- no , he find on mature self - examination , that he could not bring himself to give up he antipathy to . he would marry the lady as the enemy of she brother - in - law , if such a arrangement suite she ; if not , she must look elsewhere for a husband . it be with such resolve as this that he reach . he would at once aascertain what the truth might be as to the lady 's wealth , and have do this , he would be rule by circumstance in he conduct respect the hospital . if he find that he could turn round and secure the place for without much self - sacrifice , he would do so ; but if not , he would wo the daughter in opposition to the father . but in no case would he succumb to the archdeacon . he see he horse take round to the stable , and immediately go forth to commence he inquiry . to give he due , he be not a man who ever let much grass grow under he foot . poor ! she be doom to be the intend victim of more scheme than one . about the time that be visit the vicar of , a discussion take place respect she charms and wealth at 's house in the close . there have be morning caller there , and people have tell some truth and also some falsehood respect the property which have leave behind he . by degree the visitor go , and as the doctor go with they , and as the doctor 's wife have not make she appearance , and she brother be leave together . he be sit idly at the table , scrawl caricature of , then yawn , then turn over a book or two , and evidently at a loss how kill some time without much labour . ' you have not do much , , about get any order , ' say he sister . ' order ! ' say he ; ' who on earth be there at to give some order ? who among the people here could possibly think it worth he while to have he head do into marble ? ' ' then you mean to give up you profession , ' say she . ' no , I do not , ' say he , go
go on with some absurd portrait of the bishop . ' look at that , ; be not it the little man all over , apron and all ? I would go on with my profession at once , as you call it , if the governor would set I up with a studio in ; but as to sculpture at -- I suppose half the people here do not know what a torso mean . ' ' the will not give you a shilling to start you in , ' say . ' indeed , he can not give you what would be sufficient , for he have not get it . but you might start yourself very well , if you please . ' ' how the deuce be I to do it ? ' say he . 'to tell you the truth , , you will never make a penny by any profession . ' ' that be what I often think myself , ' say he , not in the least offended . ' some man have a great gift of make money , but they can not spend it . other can not put two shilling together , but they have a great talent for all sort of outlay . I begin to think that my genius be wholly in the latter line . ' ' how do you mean to live then ? ' ask the sister . 'I suppose I must regard myself as a young raven , and look for heavenly manna ; besides , we have all get something when the governor go . ' ' yes -- you will have enough to supply yourself with glove and boot ; that be , if the have not get the possession of it all . I believe they have the most of it already . I wonder , , at you indifference ; that you , with you talents and personal advantage , should never try to settle yourself in life . I look forward with dread to the time when the governor must go . mother , and , and I , -- we shall be poor enough , but you will have absolutely nothing . ' ' sufficient for the day be the evil thereof , ' say . ' will you take my advice ? ' say the sister . ' , ' say the brother . ' will you marry a wife with money ? ' ' at any rate , ' say he , 'I will not marry one without ; wife with money a 'nt so easy to get now - a - day ; the parson pick they all up . ' ' and a parson will pick up the wife I mean for you , if you do not look quickly about it ; the wife I mean be . ' ' Whew - with - with - w ! ' whistle , 'a widow ! ' ' she be very beautiful , ' say . ' with a son and heir already to my hand , ' say . 'a baby that will very likely die , ' say . 'I do not see that , ' say . ' but however , he may live for I -- I do not wish to kill he ; only , it must be own that a ready - make family be a drawback . ' ' there be only one after all , ' plead . ' and that a very little one , as the maid - servant say , ' rejoin . ' Beggar must not be chooser , ; you can not have everything . ' ' know I be not unreasonable , ' say he , ' nor yet opinionate ; and if you will arrange it for I , , I will marry the lady . only mark this : the money must be sure , and the income at my own disposal , at any rate for the lady 's life . ' be explain to she brother that he must make love for himself if he mean to carry on the matter , and be encourage he to so , by warm eulogium on 's beauty , when the signora be bring into the drawing - room . when at home , and subject to the gaze of none but she own family , she allow herself to be drag about by two person , and she two bearer now deposite she on the sofa . she be not quite so grand in she apparel as she have be at the bishop 's party , but yet she be dress with much care , and though there be a look of care and pain about she eye , she , be , even by daylight , extremely beautiful . ' well , ; so I be go to be married , ' begin , as soon as the servants have withdraw . ' there be no other foolish thing leave , that you have not do , ' say , ' and therefore you be quite right to try that . ' 'Oh , you think it be a foolish thing , do you ? ' say he . ' there be advise I to marry by all means . but on such a subject you opinion ought to be the best ; you have experience to guide you . ' ' yes , I have , ' say , with a sort of harsh sadness in she tone , which seem to say -- what be it to you if I be sad ? I have never ask you sympathy . be sorry when he see that she be hurt by what he say , and he come and squat on the floor close before she face to make he peace with she . ' come ,
, , I be only joke ; you know that . but in sober earnest , be advise I to marry . she want I to marry . she be a widow with lot of tin , a fine baby , a beautiful complexion , and the and hotel up in . by , , if I marry she , I will keep the public house myself -- it be just the life that suit I . ' ' what ? ' say , ' that vapid swarthy creature in the widow 's cap , who look as though she clothes have be stick on she back with a pitchfork ! ' the signora never allow any woman to be beautiful . ' instead of be vapid , ' say , 'I call she a very lovely woman . she be by far the loveliest woman in the room the other night ; that be , except you , . ' even the compliment do not soften the asperity of the maim beauty . ' every woman be charme accord to , ' she say ; 'I never kknow a eye with so little true appreciation . in the first place , what woman on earth could look well in such a thing as that she have on she head ? ' ' of course she wear a widow 's cap ; but she will put that off when marry she . ' 'I do not see any " of course " in it , ' say . ' the death of twenty husband should not make I undergo such a penance . it be as much a relic of paganism as the sacrifice of a hindu woman at the burning of she husband 's body . if not so bloody , it be quite as barbarous , and quite as useless . ' ' but you do not blame she for that , ' say . ' she do it because it be the custom of the country . people would think ill of she if she do not do it . ' ' exactly , ' say . ' she be just one of those english nonentity who would tie she head up in a bag for three month every summer , if she mother and she grandmother have tie up they head before she . it would never occur to she , to think whether there be any use in submit to such a nuisance . ' ' it be very hard , in a country like , for a young woman to set herself in opposition to the prejudice of that sort , ' say the prudent . ' what you mean be , that it be very hard for a fool not to be a fool , ' say . have so much knock about the world from he earliest year , that he have not retain much respect for the gravity of English custom ; but even to he mind a idea present itself , that , perhaps in a wife , true british prejudice would not in the long run be less agreeable than Anglo- italian freedom from restraint . he do not exactly say so , but he express the idea in another way . ' I fancy , ' say he , ' that if I be to die , and then walk , I should think that my widow look better in one of those cap than any other kind of head - dress . ' ' yes -- and you would fancy also that she could do nothing better than shut herself up and cry for you , or else burn herself . but she would think differently . she would probably wear one of those horrid she - helmet , because she would want the courage not to do so ; but she would wear it with a heart longe for the time when she might be allow to throw it off . I hate such shallow false pretence . for my part , I would let the world say what it please , and show no grief if I feel none ; -- and perhaps not , if I do . ' ' but wear a widow 's cap will not lessen she fortune , ' say . 'or increase it , ' say . ' then why on earth do she do it ? ' ' but 's object be to make she put it off , ' say . ' if it be true that she have get twelve hundred a year quite at she own disposal , and she be not utterly vulgar in she manners , I would advise you to marry she . I dare say she be to be have for the asking ; and as you be not go to marry she for love , it do not much matter whether she be good - looking or not . as to you really marry a woman for love , I do not believe you be fool enough for that . ' 'Oh , ! ' cry she sister . ' and oh , ! ' say the other . ' you do not mean to say that no man can love a woman unless he be a fool ? ' 'I mean very much the same thing , -- that any man who be willing to sacrifice he interest to get possession of a pretty face be a fool . pretty face be to be have cheaper than that . I hate you mawkish sentimentality , . you know as well as I do in what way husband and wife generally live together ; you know how far the warmth of conjugal affection can withstand the trial of a bad dinner , of a rainy day , or of the least privation which poverty bring with it ; you know what
what freedom a man claim for himself , what slavery he would exact from he wife if he could ! and you know also how wive generally obey . marriage mean tyranny on one side and deceit on the other . I say that a man be a fool to sacrifice he interests for such a bargain . a woman , too generally , have no other way of living . ' ' but have no other way of living , ' say . ' then , in 's name , let he marry , ' say . and so it be settle between they . but let the gentle - hear reader be under no apprehension whatsoever . it be not destin that shall marry or . and here , perhaps , it may be allow to the novelist to explain he view on a very important point in the art of tell tale . he venture to reprobate that system which go so far to violate all proper confidence between the author and he reader , by maintain nearly to the end of the third volume a mystery as to the fate of they favourite personage . Nay , more , and worse than this , be too frequently done . have not often the profoundest effort of genius be use to baffle the aspiration of the reader , to raise false hope and false fear , and to give rise to expectation which be never realise ? be not promise all but make of delightful horror , in lieu of which the writer produce nothing but commonplace reality in he final chapter ? and be there not a species of deceit in this to which the honesty of the present age should lend no countenance ? and what can be the worth of that solicitude which a peep into the third volume can utterly dissipate ? what the value of those literary charms which be absolutely destroy by they enjoyment ? when we have once learn what be the picture before which be hang 's solemn curtain , we feel no further interest about either the frame or the veil . they be to we , merely a receptacle for old bone , and inappropriate coffin , which we would wish to have decently bury out of we sight . and then , how grievous a thing it be to have the pleasure of you novel destroy by the ill - consider triumph of a previous reader . 'Oh , you need not be alarme , for , of course , she accept in the end . ' ' how very ill - nature you be , , ' say , with tear in she eye ; 'I do not care a bit about it now . ' dear , if you will read my book , you may defy the ill - nature of you sister . there shall be no secret that she can tell you . Nay , take the last chapter , if you please -- learn from it be page all the result of we troubled story , and the story shall have lose none of its interest , if indeed , there be any interest in it to lose . we doctrine be , that the author and the reader should move along together in full confidence with each other . let the personage of the drama undergo ever so completely a comedy of error among themselves , but let the spectator never mistake the for the Ephesian ; otherwise he be one of the dupe , and the part of a dupe be never dignify . I would not for the value of this chapter have it believe by a single reader that my could bring herself to marry , or that she should be sacrifice to a . but among the good folk of many believe both the one and the other . 's , diddle , diddle , diddle , dum , dum , dum , ' say , or sung . ' Diddle , diddle , diddle , diddle , dum , dum , dum , ' continue , take up the second part in the concerted piece . the only audience at the concert be the baby , who however give such vociferous applause , that the performer presum it to amount to a encore , commence again . ' Diddle , diddle , diddle , diddle , dum , dum , dum : have not he get lovely leg ? ' say the rapturous mother . 'h 'm , 'm , 'm , be , be , ' simmer , bury she lip in the little fellow 's fat neck , by way of kiss he . 'h 'm , 'm , 'm , be , be , ' simmer the mamma , bury she lip also in he fat round short leg . 'he be a dawty little bold darling , so he be ; and he have the nicest little pink leg in all the world , so he have ;' and the simmering and the kissing go on over again , and as though the lady be very hungry , and determined to eat he . ' well , then , he be he own mother 's own darling : well , he shall -- oh , oh , -- , -- do you ever see ? what be I to do ? my naughty , naughty , naughty little . ' all these energetic exclamation be elicit by the delight of the mother in find that she son be strong enough and mischievous enough , to pull all she hair out from under she cap . 'he be be and pull down all mamma 's hair , and he be the naughtiest , naughtiest , naughtiest little man that ever , ever , ever , ever , ever --' a regular service
service of baby worship be go on . be sit on a low easy chair , with the boy in she lap , and be knee before the object of she idolatry . as she try to cover up the little fellow 's face with she long , glossy , dark brown lock , and permit he to pull they hither and thither , as he would , she look very beautiful in spite of the widow 's cap which she still wear . there be a quiet , endure , grateful sweetness about she face , which grow so strongly upon those who know she , as to make the great praise of she beauty which come from she old friend , appear marvellously exaggerate to those who be only slightly acquaint with she . she loveliness be like that of many landscape , which require to be often see to be fully enjoy . there be a depth of dark clear brightness in she eye which be lose upon a quick observer , a character about she mouth which only show itself to those with whom she familiarly converse , a glorious form of head the perfect symmetry of which require the eye of a artist for its appreciation . she have none of that dazzling brilliancy , of that voluptuous Rubens beauty , of that pearly whiteness , and those vermilion tint , which immediately entrance with the power of a basilisk man who come within reach of . it be all be impossible to resist the signora , but no one be call upon for any resistance towards . you might begin to talk to she as though she be you sister , and it would not be till you head be on you pillow , that the truth and intensity of she beauty would flash upon you ; that the sweetness of she voice would come upon you ear . a sudden half - hour with the , be like fall into a pit ; a evening spend with like a unexpected ramble in some quiet field of asphodel . ' we will cover he up till there sha not be a morsel of he little ' itle , ' itle , 'itle nose to be see , ' say the mother , stretch she stream lock over the infant 's face . the child scream with delight , and kick till be hardly able to hold he . at this moment the door open , and be announce . jump , and with a sudden quick motion of she hand push back she hair over she shoulders . it would have be perhaps better for she that she have not , for she thus show more of she confusion than she would have do have she remain as she be . , however , immediately recognise the loveliness , and think to himself , that irrespective of she fortune , she would be a inmate that a man might well desire for he house , a partner for he bosom 's care very well qualified to make care lie easy . hurry out of the room to re-adjust she cap , mutter some unnecessary apology about she baby . and while she be go , we will briefly go back and state what have be hitherto the result of 's meditations on he scheme of matrimony . he inquiry as to the widow 's income have at any rate be so far successful as to induce he to determine to go on with the speculation . as regard , he have also resolve to do what he could without injury to himself . to he determine not to speak on the matter , at least not at present . he object be to instigate a little rebellion on the part of the bishop . he think that such a state of thing would be advisable , not only in respect to and , but also in the affair of the diocese generally . be by no means of the opinion that be fit to rule , but he conscientiously think it wrong that he brother clergy should be subject to petticoat government . he therefore make up he mind to infuse a little of he spirit into the bishop , sufficient to induce he to oppose he wife , though not enough to make he altogether insubordinate . he have therefore take the opportunity of again speak to he lordship about the hospital , and have endeavoure to make it appear that after all it would be unwise to exclude Harding from the appointment . , however , have a harder task than he have imagine . , anxious to assume to herself as much as possible of the merit of patronage , have write to , request she to call at the palace ; and have then explain to that matron , with much mystery , condescension , and dignity , the good that be in store for she and she progeny . indeed have be so engage at the very time that have be do the same with she husband at , and have thus in a measure commit herself . the thanks , the humility , the gratitude , the surprise of have be very overpowering ; she have all but embrace the knee of she patroness ; and have promise that the prayer of fourteen unprovided babe ( so have describe she own family , the eldest of which be a stout young woman of three - and - twenty ) should be put up to heaven morning and evening for the munificent friend whom have send to they . such incense as this be not unpleasing to , and she make the most of it . she offer she general assistance to the fourteen unprovided babe , if , as she have no doubt , she should find they worthy
worthy ; express a hope that the eldest of they would be fit to undertake tuition in she Sabbath school , and altogether make herself a very great lady in the estimation of . have do this , she think it prudent to drop a few word before the bishop , let he know that she have acquaint the Puddingdale family with they good fortune ; so that he might perceive that he stand commit to the appointment . the husband well understand the rule of he wife , but he do not resent it . he know that she be take the patronage out of he hand ; he be resolve to put a end to she interference , and re-assume he power . but then he think this be not the best time to do it . he put off the evil hour , as many a man in similar circumstance have do before he . have be the case , , naturally encounter a difficulty in talk over the bishop , a difficulty indeed which he find could not be overcome except at the cost of a general outbreak at the palace . a general outbreak at the present moment might be good policy , but it also might not . it be at any rate not a step to be lightly take . he begin by whispering to the bishop that he fear the public opinion would be against he if do not reappear at the hospital . the bishop answer with some warmth that have be promise the appointment on 's advice . ' not promise ! ' say . ' yes , promise , ' reply the bishop , ' and have see on the subject . ' this be quite unexpected on the part of , but he presence of mind do not fail he , and he turn the statement to he own account . ' ah , my lord , ' say he , 'we shall all be in scrape if the lady interfere . ' this be too much in unison with he lordship 's feeling to be altogether unpalatable , and yet such a allusion to interference demand a rebuke . my lord be somewhat astounde also , though not altogether make miserable , by find that there be a point of difference between he wife and he chaplain . 'I do not know what you mean by interference , ' say the bishop mildly . ' when hear that be to be appoint , it be not unnatural that she should wish to see about the school . I really can not say that I see any interference . ' 'I only speak , my lord , for you own comfort , ' say ; ' for you own comfort and dignity in the diocese . I can have no other motive . as far as personal feeling go , be the best friend I have . I must always remember that . but still , in my present position , my first duty be to you lordship . ' 'I be sure of that , , I be quite sure of that ;' say the bishop mollify : ' and I really think that should have the hospital . ' ' upon my word , I be inclin to think so . I be quite prepared to take upon myself the blame of first suggest 's name . but since do so , I have find that there be so strong a feeling in the diocese in favour of , that I think you lordship should give way . I hear also that have modify he objection he first feel to you lordship 's proposition . and as to what have pass between and Quiverful , the circumstance may be a little inconvenient , but I really do not think that that should weigh in a matter of so much moment . ' and thus the poor bishop be leave in a dreadfully undecided state as to what he should do . he mind , however , slightly inclin itself to the appointment of , see that by such a step , he should have the assistance of in opposing . such be the state of affair at the palace , when call at 's house , and find she play with she baby . when she run out of the room , begin praise the weather to , then he praise the baby and kiss he , and then he praise the mother , and then he praise herself . , however , be not long before she come back . 'I have to apologise for call at so very early a hour , ' begin , ' but I be really so anxious to speak to you that I hope you and will excuse I . ' mutter something in which the word ' certainly ' , and 'of course ' , and ' not early at all ' , be just audible , and then apologise for she own appearance , declare with a smile , that she baby be become such a big boy that he be quite unmanageable . 'he be a great bit naughty boy , ' say she to the child ; ' and we must send he away to a great big rough romping school , where they have great big rod , and do terrible thing to naughty boy who do not do what they own mamma tell they ;' and she then commence another course of kissing , be actuate theretoo by the terrible idea of send she child away which she own imagination have depict . ' and where the master do not have such beautiful long hair to be dishevelled , ' say , take up the joke and pay a compliment at the same time . think he might as well have leave the compliment
compliment alone ; but she say nothing and look nothing , be occupy as she be with the baby . ' let I take he , ' say . ' he clothes be nearly off he back with he romping , ' and so say she leave the room with the child . have hear say he have something pressing to say to , and think that she might be trop , take the opportunity of get herself out of the room . ' do not be long , , ' say , as shut the door . 'I be glad , , to have the opportunity of have ten minute ' conversation with you alone , ' begin . ' will you let I openly ask you a plain question ? ' ' certainly , ' say she . ' and I be sure you will give I a plain and open answer . ' ' either that or none at all , ' say she , laugh . ' my question be this , ; be you father really anxious to get back to the hospital ? ' ' why do you ask I ? ' say she . ' why do not you ask himself ? ' 'my dear , I will tell you why . there be wheel within wheel , all of which i would explain to you , only I fear there be not time . it be essentially necessary that I should have a answer to this question , otherwise I can not know how to advance you father 's wish ; and it be quite impossible that I should ask himself . no one can esteem you father more than I do , but I doubt if this feeling be reciprocal . ' it certainly be not . ' I must be candid with you as the only means of avoid ultimate consequence , which may be most injuriious to . I fear there be a feeling , I will not even call it a prejudice , with regard to myself in , which be not in my favour . you remember the sermon --' 'Oh ! , we need not go back to that , ' say . ' for one moment , . it be not that I may talk of myself , but because it be so essential that you should understand how matter stand . that sermon may have be ill - judge , -- it be certainly misunderstood ; but I will say nothing about that now ; only this , that it do give rise to a feeling against myself which you father share with other . it may be that he have proper cause , but the result be that he be not inclin to meet I on friendly term . I put it to yourself whether you do not know this to be the case . ' make no answer , and , in the eagerness of he address , ed he chair a little nearer to the widow 's seat , unperceive by she . ' such be so , ' continue , 'I can not ask he this question as I can ask it of you . in spite of my delinquency since I come to you have allow I to regard you as a friend . ' make a little motion with she head which be hardly confirmatory , but if he notice it , do not appear to do so . ' to you I can speak openly , and explain the feeling of my heart . this you father would not allow . unfortunately the bishop have think it right that this matter of the hospital should pass through my hand . there have be some detail to get up with which he would not trouble himself , and thus it have come to pass that I be force to have a interview with you father on the matter . ' 'I be aware of that , ' say . ' of course , ' say he . ' in that interview leave the impression on my mind that he do not wish to return to the hospital . ' ' how could that be ? ' say , at last stir up to forget the cold propriety of demeanour which she have determined to maintain . ' my dear , I give you my word that such be the case , ' say he , again get a little nearer to she . ' and what be more than that , before my interview with , certain person at the palace , I do not mean the bishop , have tell I that such be the fact . I own , I hardly believe it ; I own , I think that you father would wish on every account , for conscience 's sake , for the sake of those old man , for old association , and the memory of dear day go by , on every account I think that he would wish to resume he duty . but I be tell that such be not he wish ; and he certainly leave I with the impression that I have be tell the truth . ' ' well ! ' say , now sufficiently rouse on the matter . 'I fear 's step , ' say , ' would it be ask too great a favour to beg you to -- I know you can manage anything with . ' do not like the word manage , but still she go out , and ask to leave they alone for another quarter of a hour . ' thank you , ,-- I be so very grateful for this confidence . well , I leave you father with this impression . indeed , I may say that he make I understand that he decline the appointment . '
' ' not the appointment , ' say . 'I be sure he do not decline the appointment . but he say that he would not agree , -- that be , that he do not like the scheme about the school , and the service , and all that . I be quite sure he never say he wish to refuse the place . ' 'Oh , ! ' say , in a manner almost impassioned . 'I would not , for the world , say to so good a daughter a word against so good a father . but you must , for he sake , let I show you exactly how the matter stand at present . be a little flurried when I tell he of the bishop 's wish about the school . I do so , perhaps , with less caution because you yourself have so perfectly agree with I on the same subject . he be a little put out and speak warmly . " tell the bishop , " say he , " that I quite disagree with he , -- and shall not return to the hospital as such condition be attach to it . " what he say be to that effect ; indeed , he word were , if anything , stronger than those . I have no alternative but to repeat they to he lordship , who say that he could look on they in no other light than a refusal . he also have hear the report that you father do not wish for the appointment , and put all these thing together , he think he have not choice but to look for some one else . he have consequently offer the place to . ' ' offer the place to ! ' repeat , she eye suffuse with tear . ' then , , there be a end of it . ' ' no , my friend -- not so , ' say he . ' it be to prevent such be the end of it that I be now here . I may at any rate presume that I have get a answer to my question , and that be desirous of return . ' ' Desirous of return -- of course he be , ' say ; 'or course he wish to have back he house and he income , and he place in the world ; to have back what he give up with such self - deny honesty , if he can have they without restraint on he conduct to what at he age it would be impossible that he should submit . how can the bishop ask a man of he age to turn schoolmaster to a pack of child ? ' ' out of the question , ' say , laugh slightly ; 'or course no such demand shall be make on you father . I can at any rate promise you that I will not be the medium of any so absurd a requisition . we wish you father to preach in the hospital , as the inmate may naturally be too old to leave it ; but even that shall not be insist on . we wish also to attach a Sabbath - day school to the hospital , think that such a establishment could not but be useful under the surveillance of so good a clergyman as , and also under you own . but , dear ; we will not talk of those thing now . one thing be clear ; we mustdo what we can to annul this rash offer the bishop make to . you father would not see , would he ? be a honourable man , and would not , for a moment , stand in you father 's way . ' ' what ? ' say ; ' ask a man with fourteen child to give up he preferment ! I be quite sure he will do no such thing . ' 'I suppose not , ' say ; and he again draw near to , so that now they be very close to each other . do not think much about it , but instinctively move away a little . how greatly would she have increase the distance could he have guess what have be say about she at ! 'I suppose not . but it be out of the question that should supersede you father -- quite out of the question . the bishop have be too rash . a idea occur to I , which may , perhaps , with 's bless , put we right . my dear , would you object to see the bishop yourself ? ' ' why should not my father see he ? ' say . she have once before in she life interfere with she father 's affair , and then not to much advantage . she be older now , and feel that she should take no step in a matter so vital to he without he consent . ' why , to tell the truth , ' say , with a look of sorrow , as though he greatly bewail the want of charity in he patron , ' the bishop fancie he have cause of anger against you father . I fear a interview would lead to further ill will . ' ' why , ' say , 'my father be the mildest , the gentlest man liive . ' 'I only know , ' say , ' that he have the best of daughter . so you would not see the bishop ? as to get a interview , I could manage that for you without the slightest annoyance to yourself . ' 'I could do nothing , , without consult my father . ' 'Ah ! ' say he , ' that would be useless ; you
you would then only be you father 's messenger . do anything occur to yourself ? something must be done . you father shall not be ruin by so ridiculous a misunderstanding . ' say that nothing occur to she , but that it be very hard ; and the tear come to she eye and roll down she cheek . would have give much to have have the privilege of dry they ; but he have tact enough to know that he have still a great deal to do before he could even hope for any privilege with . ' it cut I to the heart to see you so grieved , ' say he . ' but pray let I assure you that you father 's interest shall not be sacrifice if it be possible for I to protect they . I will tell the bishop openly what be the fact . I will explain to he that he have hardly the right to appoint any other than you father , and will show he that if he do so he will be guilty of great injustice -- and you , , you will have the charity at any rate to believe this of I , that I be truly anxious for you father 's welfare , -- for he and for you own . ' the widow hardly know what answer to make . she be quite aware that she father would not be at all thankful to ; she have a strong wish to share she father 's feeling ; and yet she could not but acknowledge that be very kind . she father , who be generally charitable to all man , who seldom speak ill of any one , have warn against , and yet she do not know how to abstain from thanke he . what interest could he have in the matter but that which he profess ? nevertheless there be that in he manner which even she distrust . she feel , and she do not know why , that there be something about he which ought to put she on she guard . Slope read all this in she hesitat manner just as plainly as though she have open she heart to he . it be the talent of the man that he could so read the inward feeling of woman with whom he converse . he know that be doubt he , and that if she thank he she would only do so because she could not help it ; but yet this do not make he angry or even annoy he . be not build in a day . 'I do not come for thanks , ' continue he , see she hesitation ; ' and do not want they -- at any rate before they be merit . but this I do want , , that I may make myself friend in this fold to which it have pleas to call I as one of the humblest of he shepherd . if I can not do so , my task here must indeed be a sad one . I will at any rate endeavour to deserve they . ' 'I be sure , ' say she , ' you will soon make plenty of friend . ' she feel herself oblige to say something . ' that will be nothing unless they be such as will sympathise with my feeling ; unless they be such as I can reverence and admire -- and love . if the best and purest turn away from I , I can not bring myself to be satisfied with the friendship of the less estimable . in such case I must live alone . ' 'Oh ! I be sure you will not do that , . ' mean nothing , but it suit he to appear that some special allusion have be intend . ' indeed , , I shall live alone , quite alone as far as the heart be concerned , if those with whom I yearn to ally myself turn away from I . but enough of this ; I have call you my friend , and I hope you will not contradict I . I trust the time may come when I may also call you father so . my bless you , , you and you darling boy . and tell you father from I that what can be do for he interest shall be do . ' and so he take he leave , press the widow 's hand rather more closely than usual . circumstance , however , seem just then to make this intelligible , and the lady do not feel call on to resent it . 'I can not understand he , ' say to , a few minute afterwards . 'I do not know whether he be a good man or a bad man -- whether he be true or false . ' ' then give he the benefit of the doubt , ' say , ' and believe the best . ' 'On the whole I think I do , ' say . 'I think I do believe that he mean well -- and if so , it be a shame that we should revile he , and make he miserable while he be among we . but , oh , I fear papa will be disappoint in the hospital . ' who shall be of the walk ? all this time thing be go on somewhat uneasily at the palace . the hint or two which have give be by no means throw away upon the bishop . he have a feeling that if he ever mean to oppose the now almost unendurable despotism of he wife , he must lose no further time in do so ; that if he even mean to be himself master in he own
own diocese , let alone he own house , he should begin at once . it would have be easier to have do so from the day of he consecration than now , but easier now than when should have succeed in thoroughly master the diocesan detail . then the proffered assistance of be a great thing for he , a most unexpected and invaluable aid . Hitherto he have look on the two as ally force ; and have consider that as ally they be impregnable . he have begin to believe that he only chance of escape would be by the advancement of to some distant and rich preferment . but now it seem that one of he enemy , certainly the least potent of they , but nevertheless one very important , be willing to desert he own camp . he walk up and down he little study , almost think that the time have come when he would be able to appropriate to he own use the big room upstairs , in which he predecessor have always sat . as he resolve these thing in he mind a note be bring to he from Grantly , in which that divine beg he lordship to do he the honour of see he on the morrow -- would he lordship have the kindness to name the hour ? have propose visit would have reference to the re-appointment of to the wardenship of 's hospital . the bishop have read this note be inform that the archdeacon 's servant be wait for a answer . here at once a great opportunity offer itself to the bishop of acting on he own responsibility . he bethotch himself of he new ally , and ring the bell for . it turn out that be not in the house ; and then , greatly da , the bishop with he own unassisted spirit write a note to the archdeacon say that he would see he , and name the hour for do so . have watch from he study - window that the messenger get safely off the premise with this despatch , he begin to turn over in he mind what step he should next take . to -morrow he would have to declare to the archdeacon either that should have the appointment , or that he should not have it . the bishop feel that he could not honestly throw over without inform , and he resolve at last to brave the lioness in she own den and tell she that circumstance be such that it behove he to reappoint . he do not feel that he should at all derogate from he new courage by promise that the very first piece of available preferment at he disposal should be give to Quiverful to ato for the injury do to he . if he could mollify the lioness with such a sop , how happy would he think he first effort have be ? not without many misgiving do he find himself in 's boudoir . he have at first thought of send for she . but it be not at all impossible that she might choose to take such a message amiss , and then also it might be some protection to he to have he daughter present at the interview . he find she sit with she account book before she nibbl the end of she pencil evidently merse in pecuniary difficulty , and harass in mind by the multiplicity of palatial expense , and the heavy cost of episcopal grandeur . she daughter be around she . be read a novel , be cross a note to she bosom friend in , and be work diminutive coach wheel for the bottom of a petticoat . if the bishop could get the better of he wife in she present mood , he would be a man indeed . he might then consider victory he own for ever . after all , in such case the matter between husband and wife stand much the same as it do between two boy at the same school , two cock in the same yard , or two armie on the same continent . the conqueror once be generally the conqueror for ever after . the prestige of victory be everything . ' Ahem -- my dear , ' begin the bishop , ' if you be disengage , I wish to speak to you . ' put she pencil down carefully at the point to which she have dot she figure , mark down in she memory the sum she have arrive at , and then look up , sourly enough , into she helpmate 's face . ' if you be busy , another time will do as well , ' continue the bishop , whose courage like ' have ooze out , now that he find himself on the ground of battle . ' what be it about , bishop ? ' ask the lady . ' well -- it be about those Quiverful -- but I see you be engage . another time will do just as well for I . ' ' what about the Quiverful ? it be quite understood I believe , that they be to come to the hospital . there be to be no doubt about that , be there ? ' and as she speak she keep she pencil sternly and vigorously fix on the column of figure before she . ' why , my dear , there be a difficulty , ' say the bishop . 'A difficulty ! ' say , ' what difficulty ? the place have be promise to , and of course he must have it . he have make all he arrangement . he have write for a curate for , he have speak to the auctioneer about sell he farm , horse , and cow ,
, and in all respects consider the place as he own . of course he must have it . ' now , bishop , look well to thyself , and call up all the manhood that be in thee . think how much be at stake . if now thou be not true to thy gun , no Slope can hereafter ay thee . how can he who desert he own colour at the final smell of gunpowder expect faith in any ally . thou thyself hast seek the battlefield ; fight out the battle manfully now thou art there . courage , bishop , courage ! Frowns can not kill , nor can sharp word break any bone . after all the apron be thine own . she can appoint no warden , give away no benefice , nominate no chaplain , a ' thou art but true to thyself . up , man , and at she with a constant heart . some little monitor within the bishop 's breast so address he . but then there be another monitor there which advise he differently , and as follow . remember , bishop , she be a woman , and such a woman be the very mischief . be it not better for thee to carry on this war , if it must be wage , from behind thine own table in thine own study ? do not every cock fight best on be own dunghill ? thy daughter also be here , the pledge of thy love , the fruit of thy loin ; be it well that they should see thee in the hour of thy victory over they mother ? , be it well that they should see thee in the possible hour of thy defeat ? besides , hast thou not choose thy opportunity with wonderful little skill , indeed with no touch of sagacity for which thou be famous ? will it not turn out that thou be wrong in this matter , and thine enemy right ; that thou hast actually pledge thyself in this matter of the hospital , and that now thou wouldst turn upon thy wife because she require from thee but the fulfilment of thy promise ? be thou not a bishop , and be not thy word to be hold sacr whatever be the result ? return , bishop , to thy sanctum on the lower floor , and postpone thy combative propensity for some occasion in which at least thou mayest fight the battle against odd less tremendously against thee . all this pass within the bishop 's bosom while stall sit with she fix pencil , and the figure of she sum still endure on the tablet of she memory . 'L4 17s 7 ,' she say to herself . ' of course must have the hospital , ' she say out loud to she lord . ' well , my dear , I merely want to suggest to you that seem to think that if be not appoint , public feeling in the matter would be against we and that the press might perhaps take it up . ' seem to think ! ' say , in a tone of voice which plainly show the bishop that he be right in look for a breach in that quarter . ' and what have Mr Slope to do with it ? I hope , my lord , you be not go to allow yourself to be govern by a chaplain . ' and now in she eagerness the lady lose she place in she account . ' certainly not , my dear . nothing I can assure you be less probable . but still may be useful in find how the wind blow , and I really think that if we could give something good to -- ' ' Nonsense , ' say ; ' it would be year before you could give they anything else that could suit they half as well , and as for the press and the public , and all that , remember there be two way of tell a story . if be fool enough to tell he tale , we can also tell ours . the place be offer to he , and he refuse it . it have now be give to someone else , and there be a end of it . at least , I should think so . ' ' well , my dear , I rather believe you be right ;' say the bishop , and sneak out of the room , he go down stair , trouble in he mind as to how he should receive the archdeacon on the morrow . he feel himself not very well just at present ; and begin to consider that he might , not improbably , be detain in he room the next morning by a attack of bile . he be , unfortunately , very subject to bilious annoyance . , indeed ! I will Slope he , ' say the indignant matron to she listen progeny . 'I do not know what have come to . I believe he think he be to be of himself , because I have take he by the hand , and get you father to make he he domestic chaplain . ' ' he be always full of impudence , ' say ; 'I tell you so once before , mamma. ' Olivia , however , have not think he too impudent when once before he have propose to make she . ' well , , I always think you like he , ' say , who at that moment have some grudge against she sister . 'I always dislike the man because I think he thoroughly vulgar . ' ' there you be wrong , ' say ; 'he be not vulgar at all ; and what
what be more , he be a soul - stirring , eloquent preacher ; but he must be teach to know he place if he be to remain in this house . ' ' he have the horridest eye I ever see in a man 's head , ' say ; ' and I tell you what , he be terribly greedy ; do you see the current pie he eat yesterday ? ' when get home he soon learn from the bishop , as much from he manner as he word , that 's behest in the matter of the hospital be to be obey . let fall something as to ' this occasion only , ' and ' keep all affair about patronage exclusively in he own hand . ' but he be quite decided about ; and as do not wish to have both the prelate and the prelatess against he , he do not at present see that he could do anything but yield . he merely remark that he would of course carry out the bishop 's view , and that he be quite sure that if the bishop trust to he own judgment thing in the diocese would certainly be well order . know that if you hit a nail on the head often enough , it will penetrate at last . he be sit alone in he room on the same evening when a light knock be make on he door , and before he could answer it the door be open , and he patroness appear . he be all smile in a moment , but so be not she also . she take , however , the chair that be offer to she , and thus begin she expostulation :- , I do not at all approve you conduct the other night with that italian woman . any one would have think that you be she lover . ' ' good gracious , my dear madam , ' say , with a look of horror . ' why , she be a married woman . ' ' that be more than I know , ' say ; ' however she choose to pass for such . but married or not marry , such attention as you pay she be improper . I can not believe that you would wish to give offence in my drawing - room , ; but I owe it to myself and my daughter to tell you that I disapprove you conduct . ' open wide he huge protruding eye , and star out of they with a look of well - dignify surprise . ' why , , ' say he , 'I do but fetch she something to eat when she be hungry . ' ' and you have call on she since , ' continue she , look at the culprit with the stern look of a detective policeman in the act of declare himself . turn over in he mind whether it would be well for he to tell this termagant at once that he should call on whom he like , and do what he like ; but he remember that he foot in be not yet sufficiently firm , and that it would be better for he to pacify she . 'I certainly call since at 's house , and certainly see . ' ' yes , and you see she alone , ' say the episcopal Argus . ' undoubtedly I do , ' say , ' but that be because nobody else happen to be in the room . surely it be no fault of mine if the rest of the family be out . ' 'Perhaps not ; but I assure you , , you will fall greatly in my estimation if I find that you allow yourself to be catch by the lure of that woman . I know woman better than you do , , and you may believe I that that signora , as she call herself , be not a fit companion for a strict evangelical , unmarried young clergyman . ' how would have like to laugh at she , have he da ! but he do not dare . so he merely say , 'I can assure you , , the lady in question be nothing to I . ' ' well , I hope not , . but I have consider it my duty to give you this caution ; and now there be another thing I feel myself call upon to speak about ; it be you conduct to the bishop , . ' ' my conduct to the bishop , ' say he , now truly surprise and ignorant what the lady allude to . ' yes , ; you conduct to the bishop . it be by no means what I would wish to see it . ' ' have the bishop say anything , ? ' ' no , the bishop have say nothing . he probably think that any remark on the matter will come better from I , who first introduce you to he lordship 's notice . the fact be , , you be a little inclin to take too much upon yourself . ' a angry spot show itself upon 's cheek , and it be with difficulty that he control himself . but he do do so , and sit quite silent while the lady go on . ' it be the fault of many young man in you position , and therefore the bishop be not inclin at present to resent it . you will , no doubt , soon learn what be require from you , and what be not . if you will take my advice , however , you will be careful not to obtrude advice upon the bishop in any matter concern patronage . if he lordship want
want advice , he know where to look for it . ' and then have add to she counsel a string of platitude as to what be desirable and what not desirable in the conduct of a strictly evangelical , unmarried young clergyman , retreate , leave the chaplain to he thought . the upshot of he thought be this , that there certainly be not room in the diocese for the energy of both himself and , and that it behove he quickly to ascertain whether he energie or hers would prevail . the 's Persecution Early on the follow morning , be summon to the bishop 's dressing - room , and go there fully expect that he should find he lordship very indignant , and spirit up by he wife to repeat the rebuke which she have administer on the previous day . have resolve that at any rate from he he would not stand it , and enter the dressing - room in rather a combative disposition ; but he find the bishop in the most placid and gentle of humour . he lordship complained of be rather unwell , have a slight headache , and be not quite the thing in he stomach ; but there be nothing the matter with he temper . 'Oh , , ' say he , take the chaplain 's proffer hand . ' be to call on I this morning , and I really be not fit to see he . I fear I must trouble you to see he for I ;' and then proceed to explain what it be that must be say to . he be to be tell in fact in the civilest word in which the tiding could be convey , that Harding have refuse the wardenship , the appointment have be offer to and accept by he . again point out to he patron that he think he be perhaps not quite wise in he decision , and this he do sotto voce . but even with this precaution it be not safe to say much , and during the little that he do say , the bishop make a very slight , but still a very ominous gesture with he thumb towards the door which open from he dressing - room to some inner sanctuary . at once take the hint and say no more ; but he perceive that there be to be confidence between he and he patron , that the league desire by he be to be make , and that this appointment of be to be the sacrifice offer on the altar of conjugal obedience . all this read in the slight motion of the bishop 's thumb , and he read it correctly . there be no need of parchment and seal , of attestation , explanations , and profession . the bargain be understand between they , and give the bishop he hand upon it . the bishop understand the little extra squeeze , and a intelligible gleam of assent twinkle in he eye . ' pray be civil to the archdeacon , , ' say he out loud ; ' but make he quite understand that in this matter have put it out of my power to oblige he . ' it would be calumny on to suggest that she be sit in she bed - room with she ear at the keyhole during this interview . she have within she a spirit of decorum which prevent she from descending to such baseness . to put she ear to a key - hole or to listen at a chink , be a trick for a housemaid . know this , and therefore she do not do it ; but she station herself as near to the door as she well could , that she might , if possible , get the advantage which the housemaid would have have , without descende to the housemaid 's artifice . it be little , however , that she hear , and that little be only sufficient to deceive she . she see nothing of that friendly pressure , perceive nothing of that conclude bargain ; she do not even dream of the treacherous resolve which those two false man have make together to upset she in the pride of she station , to dash the cup from she lip before she have drank of it , to seep away all she power before she have taste its sweet ! traitor that they be ; the husband of she bosom , and the outcast whom she have foster and bring into the warmth of the world 's brightest fireside ! but neither of they have the magnanimity of this woman . though two man have thus leagu themselves together against she , even yet the battle be not lose . feel pretty sure that would decline the honour of see he , and such turn out to be the case . the archdeacon , when the palace door be open to he , be greet by a note . present he compliment &c , &c . the bishop be ill in he room , and very greatly regret , & class &c . Slope have be charge with the bishop 's view , and if agreeable to the archdeacon , would do himself the honour &c , &c . the archdeacon , however , be not agreeable , and have read he note in the hall , crumple it up in he hand , and mutter something about sorrow for he lordship 's illness , take he leave , without send as much as a verbal message in answer to 's note . ' ! ' say the archdeacon to himself as he fling himself into he brougham . ' the man be absolutely a coward . he be afraid to see I . Ill , indeed ! ' the
the archdeacon be never ill himself , and do not therefore understand that any one else could in truth be prevent by illness from keep a appointment . he regard all such excuse as subterfuge , and in the present instance he be not far wrong . desire to be drive to he father - in - law 's lodging in the , and hear from the servant that be at he daughter 's , follow he to 's house , and there he find he . the archdeacon be fume with rage when he get into the drawing - room , and have by this time nearly forget the pusillanimity of the bishop in the villainy of the chaplain . ' look at that , ' say he , throw 's crumple note to . 'I be to be tell that if I choose I may have the honour of see , and that too , after a positive engagement with the bishop . ' ' but he say the bishop be ill , ' say . ' Pshaw ! you do not mean to say that you be deceive by such a excuse as that . he be well enough yesterday . now I tell you what , I will see the bishop ; and I will tell he also very plainly what I think of he conduct . I will see he , or else will soon be too hot to hold he . ' be sit in the room , but have hardly notice she in he anger . now say to he , with the greatest innocence , 'I wish you have see , , because I think perhaps it might have do good . ' the archdeacon turn on she with almost brutal wrath . have she at once own that she have accept for she second husband , he could hardly have feel more convinced of she belonging body and soul to the and party than he now do on hearing she express such a wish as this . poor ! ' see he , ' say the archdeacon , glar at she ; ' and why be I be call on to lower myself in the world 's esteem a my own by come in contact with such a man as that ? I have hithertoo live among gentleman , and do not mean to be drag into other company by anybody . ' poor know well what the archdeacon mean , but be as innocent as she own baby . she could not understand how the archdeacon could consider himself to be drag into bad company by condescending to speak to for a few minute when the interest of she father might be serve by do so . be talk for a full hour yesterday with , ' say she , with some little assumption of dignity , ' and I do not find myself to be lower by it . ' 'Perhaps not , ' say he . ' but if you will be good enough to allow I , I shall judge for myself in such matters . and I tell you what , ; it will be much better for you if you will allow yourself to be guide also by the advice of those who be you friend . if you do not you will be apt to find you have no friend leave who can advise you . ' blush up to the root of she hair . but even now she have not the slightest idea of what be pass in the archdeacon 's mind . no thought of love -making or love -receive have yet find its way to she heart since the death of poor ; and if it be possible that such a thought should spre there , the man must be far different from that could give it birth . blush deeply , for she feel she be charge with improper conduct , and she do so with the more inward pain because she father do not instantly rally to she side ; that father for whose sake and love she have submit to be the receptacle of 's confidence . she have give a detailed account of all that have pass to she father ; and though he have not absolutely agree with she about 's view touch the hospital , yet he have say nothing to make she think that she have be wrong in talk to he . she be far too angry to humble herself before she brother - in - law . indeed , she have never accustom herself to be very abject before he , and they have never be confidential ally . 'I do not in the least understand what you mean , , ' say she . 'I do not know that I can accuse myself of do anything that my friend should disapprove . call here expressly to ask what papa 's view be about the hospital ; and as I believe he call with friendly intention I tell he . ' ' friendly intentions ! ' sneer the archdeacon . 'I believe you greatly wrong , ' continue ; ' but I have explain this to papa already ; and as you do not seem to approve of what I say , Grantly , I will with you permission leave you and papa together , ' and so say she walk out of the room . all this make very unhappy . it be quite clear that the archdeacon and he wife have make up they minds that be go to marry . could not really bring himself to think that she would do so , but yet he could not deny that circumstance make it appear that the man 's company be not disagreeable to she . she be now constantly see he , and yet she receive visit from no
no other unmarried gentleman . she always take he part when he conduct be canvass , although she be aware how personally objectionable he be to she friend . then , again , feel that if she should choose to become , he have nothing that he could justly against she do so . she have full right to please herself , and he , as a father could not say that she would disgrase herself by marry a clergyman who stand so well before the world as do . as for quarrelling with he daughter on account of such a marriage , and separate himself from she as the archdeacon have threaten to do , that , with , would be out of the question . if she should determine to marry this man , he must get over he aversion as best he could . he , he own old companion in they old happy home , must still be friend of he bosom , the child of he heart . let who would cast she off , he would not . if it be fate , that he should have to sit in he old age at the same table with a man whom of all man he dislike the most , he would meet he fate as best he might . anything to he would be preferable to the loss of he daughter . such be he feeling , he hardly know how to take part with against the archdeacon , or with the archdeacon against . it will be say that he should never have suspect she . ! he never should have do so . but be by no means a perfect character . he indecision , he weakness , he proneness to be lead by other , he want of self - confidence , he be very far from be perfect . and then it must be remember that such a marriage as that which the archdeacon contemplate with disgust , which we who know so well would regard with equal disgust , do not appear so monstrous to , because in he charity he do not hate the chaplain as the archdeacon do , and as we do . he be , however , very unhappy when he daughter leave the room , and he have recourse to a old trick of he that be customary to he in he time of sadness . he begin play some slow tune upon a imaginary violoncello , draw one hand slowly backwards and forward as though he hold a bow in it , and modulat the unreal chords with the other . ' she will marry that man as sure as two and two make four , ' say the practical archdeacon . 'I hope not , I hope not , ' say the father . ' but if she do , what can I say to she ? I have no right to object to he . ' ' no right ! ' exclaim . ' no right as she father . he be in my own profession , and for atch we know a good man . ' to this the archdeacon would by no means assent . it be not well , however , to argue the case against in she own drawing - room , and so they both walk forth and discuss the matter in all the bearing under the elm tree of the close . also explain to he son - in - law what have be the purport , at any rate the alleged purport , of 's last visit to the widow . he , however , state that he could not bring himself to believe that have any real anxiety such as that he have pretend . 'I can not forget he demeanour to myself , ' say , ' and it be not possible that he idea should have change so soon . ' 'I see it all , ' say the archdeacon . ' the sly tartufe ! he think to buy the daughter by provide for the father . he mean to show how powerful he be , how good he be , and how much he be willing to do for she beaux yeux ; yes , I see it all now . but we will be too many for he yet , ;' he say , turn to he companion with some gravity , and press he hand on the other 's arm . ' it would , perhaps , be better for you to lose the hospital than get it on such term . ' ' lose it ! ' say ; ' why I have lose it already . I do not want it . I have make up my mind to do without it . I will withdraw altogether . I will just go and write a line to the bishop and tell he that I withdraw my claim altogether . ' nothing would have please he better than to be allow to escape from the trouble and difficulty in such a manner . but he be now go too fast for the archdeacon . ' no -- no --no ! we will do no such thing , ' say ; 'we will still have the hospital . I hardly doubt but that we will have it . but not by 's assistance . if that be necessary , we will lose it ; but we will have it , spite of he tooth , if we can . will be at to - morrow ; you must come over and talk to he . ' the two now turn into the cathedral library , which be use by the clergyman of the close as a sort of ecclesiastical club -room , for writing sermon and sometimes letter ; also for read theological work , and sometimes magazine
magazine and newspaper . the theological work be not disturb , perhaps , quite as often as from the appearance of the building the outside public might have be lead to expect . here the two allie settle on they course of action . the archdeacon write a letter to the bishop , strongly worded , but still respectful , in which he put forward he father - in - law 's claim to the appointment , and express he own regret that he have not be able to see he lordship when he call . of I make no mention whatsoever . it be then settle that should go to on the follow day ; and after considerable discussion on the matter , the archdeacon propose to ask there also , so as to withdraw she , if possible , from 's attention . 'A week or two , ' say he , ' may teach she what he be , and while she be there she will be out of harm 's way . will not come there after she . ' be not a little surprised when she brother - in - law come back and very civilly presse she to go out to with she father . she instantly perceive that she father have be fight she battle for she behind she back . she feel thankful to he , and for he sake she would not show she resentment to the archdeacon by refuse he invitation . but she could not , she say , go on the morrow ; she have a invitation to drink tea at the Stanhopes which she have promise to accept . she would , she add , go with she father on the next day , if he would wait ; or she would follow he . ' the ! ' say Grantly ; 'I do not know you be so intimate with they . ' 'I do not know it myself , ' say she , ' till call yesterday . however , I like she very much , and I have promise to go and play chess with some of they . ' ' have they a party there ? ' say the archdeacon , still fearful of . 'Oh , no , ' say ; ' say there be to be nobody at all . but she have learn that have leave I for a few week , and she have lear nt from some one that I play chess , and so she come over on purpose to ask I to go in . ' ' well , that be very friendly , ' say the ex-warden . ' they certainly do look more like foreigner than English people , but I dare say they be no the worse for that . ' the archdeacon be inclin to look upon the with favourable eye , and have nothing to object on the matter . it be therefore arrange that should postpone he visit to Plumstead for one day , and then take with he , the baby , and the nurse . be certainly become of some importance in . by there be much cause for grief and occasional perturbation of spirit in the family , but yet they rarely seem to be grieve or to be disturb . it be the peculiar gift of each of they that each be able to bear he or she own burden without complaint , and perhaps without sympathy . they habitually look on the sunny side of the wall , if there be a gleam on the either side for they to look at ; and , if there be none , they endure the shade with a indifference which , if not stoical , answer the end at which the aim . could not but feel that he have ill - perform he duty as a father and a clergyman ; and could hardly look forward to he own death without grief at the position in which he would leave he family . he income for many year have be as high as 3000 a year , and yet they have among they no other provision than they mother 's fortune of L 10,000 . he have not only spend he income , but be in debt . yet , with all this , he seldom show much outward sign of trouble . it be the same with the mother . if she add little to the pleasure of she child she detract still less : she neither grumble at she lot , nor speak much of she past or future suffering ; as long as she have a maid to adjust she dress , and have those dress well make , nature with she be satisfied . it be the same with she child . never rebuk she father with the prospect of they future poverty , nor do it seem to grieve she that she be become a old maid so quickly ; she temper be rarely ruffle , and , if we might judge by she appearance , she be always happy . the signora be not so sweet - temper , but she possess much endure courage ; she seldom complain -- never , indeed , to she family . though she have a cause for affliction which would have utterly break down the heart of most woman as beautiful as she and as devoid of all religious support , yet , she bear she suffer in silence , or allude to it only to elicit the sympathy and stimulate the admiration of the man with whom she flirt . as to , one would have imagine from the sound of he voice and the gleam of he eye that he have not a sorrow nor a care in the world . have he . he be incapable of anticipate tomorrow 's grief
grief . the prospect of future want no more disturb he appetite than do that of the butcher 's knife disturb the appetite of the sheep . such be the usual tenor of they way ; but there be rare exceptions . occasionally the father would allow a angry glance to fall from he eye , and the lion would send forth a low dangerous roar as though he meditate some deed of blood . occasionally also would become bitter against mankind , more than usually antagonistic to the world 's decency , and would seem as though she be about to break from she mooring and allow herself to be carry forth by the tide of she feeling to utter ruin and shipwreck . she , however , like the rest of they , have no real feeling , could feel no true passion . in that be she security . before she resolve on any contemplate escapade she would make a small calculation , and generally sum up that the or even Barchester close be better than the world at large . they be most irregular in they hour . the father be generally the earliest in the breakfast - parlour , and would soon follow and give he coffee ; but the other breakfast anywhere anyhow , and at any time . on the morning after the archdeacon 's futile visit to the palace , come down stair with a ominously dark look about he eyebrow ; he white lock be rougher than usual , and he breathe thickly and loudly as he take he seat in he arm -chair . he have open letter in he hand , and when come into the room he be still read they . she go up and kiss he as be she wont , but he hardly notice she as she do so , and she know at once that something be the matter . ' what be the meaning of that ? ' say he , throw over the table a letter with a post-mark . be a little frightene as she take it up , but she mind be relieved when she see that it be merely the bill of they italian milliner . the sum total be certainly large , but not so large as to create a important row . ' it be for we clothes , papa , for six month before we come here . the three of we can not dress for nothing you know . ' ' nothing , indeed ! ' say he , look at the figure , which in Milanese denomination be certainly monstrous . ' the man should have send it to I , ' say . 'I wish he have with all my heart -- if you would have pay it . I see enough in it , to know that three quarter of it be for . ' ' she have little else to amuse she , sir , ' say with true good nature . ' and I suppose he have nothing to amuse he , ' say the doctor , throw over another letter to he daughter . it be from some member of the family of , and politely request the father to pay a small trifle of l 700 , be the amount of a bill discount in favour of , and now overdue for a period of nine month . read the letter , slowly fold it up , and put it under the edge of the tea - tray . 'I suppose he have nothing to amuse he but discount bill with . do he think I will pay that ? ' 'I be sure he think no such thing , ' say she . ' and who do he think will pay it ? ' 'as far as honesty go , I suppose it will not much matter if it be never pay , ' say she . 'I dare say he get very little of it . ' 'I suppose it will not much matter either , ' say the father , ' if he go to prison and rot there . it seem to I that that be the other alternative . ' speak the custom of he youth . but he daughter , though she live so long abroad , be much more completely verse in the way of the english world . ' if the man arrest he , ' say she , ' he must go through the court . ' it be thus , thout great family of -- it be thus that we Gentile treat thee , when , in we most extreme need , thou and thine have aid we with mountain of gold as big as lions -- and occasionally with wine - warrant and order for dozen of dressing - case . ' what , and become a insolvent ? ' say the doctor . 'he be that already , ' say , wish always to get over a difficulty . ' what a condition , ' say the doctor , ' for the son of a clergyman of the of . ' 'I do not see why clergyman 's son should pay they debt more than other young man , ' say . 'he be have as much from I since he leave school as be hold sufficient for the eldest son of many a nobleman , ' say the angry father . ' well , sir , ' say , ' give he another chance . ' ' what ! ' say the doctor , 'do you mean that I be to pay that ? ' 'Oh , no ! I would not pay he , he must take he chance ; and if the worst come to the worst , must go abroad . but I want you to be civil to , and let he
he remain here as long as we stop . he have a plan in he head , that may put he on he foot after all . ' just at that moment the door open , and come in whistling . the doctor immediately devote himself to he egg , and allow to whistle himself round to he sister 's side without notice he . give a little sign to he with she eye , first glance at she father , and then at the letter , the corner of which pee out from under the tea - tray . see and understood , and with the quiet motion of a cat abstract the letter , and make himself acquaint with its contents . the doctor , however , have see he , deep as he appear to be merse in he egg -shell , and say in he harshest voice , ' well , sy , do you know that gentleman ? ' ' yes , sir , ' say . 'I have a sort of acquaintance with he , but none that can justify he in trouble you . if you will allow I , sir , I will answer this . ' ' at any rate I sha not , ' say the father , and then he add , after a pause , ' be it true , sir , that you owe the man L 700 ? ' ' well , ' say , 'I think I should be inclin to dispute the amount , if I be in a condition to pay he such of it as I really do owe he . ' ' have he you bill for ? ' say the father , speak very loudly and very angrily . ' well , I believe he have , ' say ; ' but all the money I ever get from he be L 150 . ' ' and what become of the L 550 ? ' ' why , sir ; the commission be 100 , or so , and I take the remainder in paving - stone and rocking - horse . ' ' paving - stone and rocking - horse ! ' say the doctor , ' where be they ? ' 'Oh , sir , I suppose they be in somewhere -- but I will inquire if you wish for they . ' 'he be a idiot , ' say the doctor , ' and it be sheer folly to waste more money on he . nothing can save he from ruin , ' and so say , the unhappy father walk out of the room . ' would the like to see the paving - stone ? ' 'I will tell you what , ' say she . ' if you do not take care , you will find yourself loose upon the world without even a house over you head : you do not know he as well as I do . he be very angry . ' strok he big beard , sip he tea , chat over he misfortunes in a half comic , half serious tone , and end by promise he sister that he would do he very best to make himself agreeable to the . then follow she father to he own room and soften down he wrath , and persuade he to say nothing more about the bill discounter , at any rate for a few week . he even go so far as to say he would pay the , or at any rate settle the bill , if he see a certainty of he son 's securing for himself anything like a decent provision in life . nothing be say openly between they about poor : but the father and the daughter understand each other . they all meet together in the draw - room at nine o'clock , in perfect good humour with each other ; and about that hour be announce . she have never be in the house before , though she have of course call : and now she feel it strange to find herself there in she usual evening dress , enter the drawing - room of these stranger in this friendly unceremonious way , as though she have know they all she life . but in three minute they make she at home . trip downstairs and take she bonnet from she , and come to relieve she from she shawl , and the signora smile on she as she could smile when she choose to be gracious , and the old doctor shook hand with she in a kind and benedictory manner that go to she heart at once , and make she feel that he must be a good man . she have not be seat for above five minute when the door again open , and be announce . she feel rather surprised , because she be tell that nobody be to be there , and it be very evident from the manner of some of they that be unexpected . but still there be not much in it . in such invitation a bachelor or two more or less be always speak of as nobody , and there be no reason why should not drink tea at 's as well as herself . he , however , be very much surprised and not very much gratify at finding that he own embryo spouse make one of the party . he have come there to gratify himself by gazing on 's beauty , and listen to and return she flattery : and though he have not own as much to himself , he still feel that if he spend the evening as he have intend to do , he might probably not thereby advance he suit with . the signora , who have no idea of a rival , receive
receive with she usual mark of distinction . as he take she hand , she make some confidential communication to he in a low voice , declare that she have a plan to communicate to he after tea , and be evidently prepared to go on with she work of reduce the chaplain to a state of captivity . poor be rather beside himself . he think that could not but have learn from he demeanour that he be a admirer of she own , and he have also flatter himself that the idea be not unacceptable to she . what would she think of he if he now devote himself to a married woman ? but be not inclin to be severe in she criticism on he in that respect , and feel no annoyance of any kind , when she find herself seat between and . she have not suspicion of 's intentions ; she have no suspicion even of the suspicion of other people ; but still she feel well pleased not to have too near to she . and she be not ill - pleased to have near she . it be rarely indeed that he fail to make a agreeable impression on strangers . with a bishop indeed who think much of he own dignity it be possible that he might fail , but hardly with a young lady and pretty woman . he possess the tact of become instantly intimate with woman without give rise to any fear of impertinence . he have about he somewhat of the propensity of a tame cat . it seem quite natural that he should be pet , caress , and treat with familiar good nature , and that in return he should purr , and be sleek and graceful , and above all never show he claw . like other tame cat , however , he have he claw , and sometimes , make they dangerous . when tea be over go to the open window and declare loudly that the full harvest moon be much too beautiful to be disregard , and call they to look at it . to tell the truth , there be but one there who car much about the moon 's beauty , and that one be not Charlotte ; but she know how valuable a aid to she purpose the chaste goddess might become , and could easily create a little enthusiasm for the purpose of the moment . and be soon with she . the doctor be now quiet in he arm - chair , and in hers , both prepare for slumber . ' be you a or a Brewsterite , or a tg othermanite , ? ' say , who know a little about everything , and have read about a third of each of the book to which she allude . 'Oh ! ' say ; 'I have not read any of the book , but I feel sure that there be one man in the moon at least , if not more . ' ' you do not believe in the pulpy gelatinous matter ? ' say . 'I hear about that , ' say ; ' and I really think it be almost wick to talk in such a manner . how can we argue about 's power in the other star from the law which he have give for we role in this one ? ' ' how indeed ! ' say . ' why should not there be a race of salamander in ? and even if there be nothing but fish in , why should not the fish there be as wide awake as the man and woman here ? ' ' that would be say very little for they , ' say . 'I be for Whewell myself ; for I do not think that man and woman be worth be repeat in such countless worlds . there may be soul in other star , but I doubt they have any body attach to they . but come , bold , let we put we bonnet on and walk round the close . if we be to discuss sidereal question , we shall do so much better under the towers of the cathedral , than stuck in this narrow window . make no objection , and a party be make to walk out . well know the rule as to three be no company , and she have therefore to induce she sister to allow to accompany they . ' come , , ' she say ; 'I be sure you will join we . we shall be in again in quarter of a hour , . ' read in she eye all that she have to say , know she object , and as she have to depend on she sister for so many of she amusement , she feel that she must yield . it be hard to be leave alone while other of she own age walk out to feel the soft influence of the bright night , but it would be harder still without the sort of sanction which give to all she flirtation and intrigue . 's eye tell she that she must give up just at present for the good of the family , and so obey . but 's eye say nothing of the sort to . he have no objection at all to the tete - a - tete with the signora , which the departure of the other three would allow he , and gently whisper to she , 'I shall not leave you alone . ' 'Oh , yes , ' say she ; ' go --pray go , pray go , for my sake . do not think that I be so selfish . it be understand that nobody be keep within for I . you will understand this too
too when you know I better . pray join they , , but when you come in speak to I for five minute before you leave we . ' understand that he be to go , and he therefore join the party in the hall . he would have have no objection at all to this arrangement , if he could have secure 's arm ; but this be of course out of the question . indeed , he fate be very soon settle , for no sooner have he reach the hall - door , than put she hand within he arm , and walk off with just as naturally as though she be already he own property . and so they saunter forth : first they walk round the close , accord to they avow intent ; then they go under the old arch gateway below 's little church , and then they turn behind the grounds of the bishop 's palace , and so on till they come to the bridge just at the edge of the town , from which passer - by can look down into the garden of 's hospital ; and she and , who be in advance , stop till the other two come up to they . know that the gable - end and old brick chimney which stand up so prettily in the moonlight , be those of 's late abode , and would not have stop on such a spot , in such company , if he could have avoid it ; but would not take the hint which he try to give . ' this be a very pretty place , , ' say ; ' by far the prettiest place near . I wonder you father give it up . ' it be a very pretty place , and now by the deceitful light of the moon look twice larger , twice prettier , twice more antiquly picturesque than it would have do in truth - tell daylight . who do not know the air of complex multiplicity and the mysterious interesting grace which the moon always lend to old gable building half surround , as be the hospital , by fine trees ! as see from the bridge on the night of which we be speak , 's late abode do look very lovely ; and though do not grieve at she father 's have leave it , she feel at the moment a intense wish that he might be allow to return . ' he be go to return to it immediately , be he not ? ' ask . make no immediate reply . much such a question pass unanswered , without the notice of the questioner ; but such be not now the case . they all remain silent as though expect she to reply , and after a moment or two , say , 'I believe it be settle that Harding return to the hospital , be it not ? ' 'I do not think anything about it be settle yet , ' say . ' but it must be a matter of course , ' say ; ' that be , if you father wish it ; who else on earth could hold it after what have occur ? ' quietly make she companion to understand that the matter be one which she could not discuss in the present company ; and then they pass on ; say she would go a short way up the hill out of the town so as to look back on the towers of the cathedral , and as lean upon 's arm for assistance in the walk , she tell he how the matter stand between she father and the bishop . ' and , he , ' say , point on to , ' what part do he take in it ? ' explain how have at first endeavoure to tyrannize over she father , but how he have latterly come round , and do all he could to talk the bishop over in 's favour . ' but my father , ' say she , 'is hardly inclin to trust he ; they all say he be so arrogant to the old clergyman of the city . ' ' take my word for it , ' say , ' you father be right . if I be not very much mistaken , that man be both arrogant and false . ' they stroll up the top of the hill , and then return through the field by a footpath which lead by a small wooden bridge , or rather a plank with a rustic rail to it , over the river to the other side of the cathedral from that at which they have start . they have thus walk round the bishop 's grounds , through which the river run , and round the cathedral and adjacent field , and it be past eleven before they reach the doctor 's door . ' it be very late , ' say , ' it will be a shame to disturb you mother at such a hour . ' ' oh , ' say , laugh , ' you will not disturb mamma ; I dare say she be in bed by this time , and Madeline would be furious if you do not come in and see she . come , , take 's bonnet from she . ' they go up stair , and find the signora alone , reade . she look somewhat sad and melancholy , but not more so perhaps than be sufficient to excite additional interest in the bosom of ; and she be soon deep in whispered intercourse with that happy gentleman , who be allow to find a resting - place on she sofa . the signora have a way of whispering that be peculiarly she
she own , and be exactly the reverse of that which prevail among great tragedian . the great tragedian hiss out a positive whisper , make with bated breath , and produce by inarticulate tongue - form sound , but yet he be audible through the whole house . the signora however use no hiss , and produce all she word in a clear silver tone , but they could only be hear by the ear into which they be pour . hurry and skurry about the room hither and thither , do , or pretend to do many thing ; and then say something about see she mother , run up stair . be then leave alone with , and she hardly feel and hwe fly by she . to give he due credit , he could not have play he card better . he do not make love to she , nor sigh , nor look languishing ; but he be amusing and familiar , yet respectful ; and when he leave at she own door at one o'clock , which he do by the bye with the assistance of the now jealous Slope , she think he be one of the most agreeable man , and the decidedly the most agreeable family , that she have ever meet . the , fellow of , late professor of poetry at , and present vicar of , in the diocese of , must now be introduce personally to the reader . and as he will fill a conspicuous place in this volume , it be desirable that he should be make to stand before the reader 's eye by the aid of such portraiture as the author be able to produce . it be to be regret that no mental method of daguerreotype or photography have yet be discover , by which the character of man can be reduce to write and put into grammatical language with a unerring precision of truthful description . how often do the novelist feel , ay , and the historian also and the biographer , that he have conceive within he mind and accurately depict on the tablet of he brain the full character and personage of a man , and that nevertheless , when he fly to pen and ink to perpetuate the portrait , he word forake , elude , disappoint , and play the deuce with he , till at the end of a dozen page the man describe have no more resemblance to the man conceive than the sign board at the corner of the street have to the of ? and yet such mechanical descriptive skill would hardly give more satisfaction to the reader than the skill of the photographer do to the anxious mother desirous to possess a absolute duplicate of she beloved child . the likeness be indeed true ; but it be a dull , dead , unfeeling , inauspicious likeness . the face be indeed there , and those look at it will know at once whose image it be ; but the owner of the face will not be proud of the resemblance . there be no royal road to learn ; no short cut to the acquirement of any art . let photographers and daguerreotyper do what they will , and improve as they may with further skill on that which skill have already do , they will never achieve a portrait of the human face as we may under the burden which we so often feel too heavy for we shoulders ; we must either bear they up like man , or own ourselves too weak for the work we have undertaken . there be no way of write well and also of writing easily . Labor omnia vincit improbus . such should be the chosen motto of every labourer , and it may be that labour , if adequately endure , may suffice at last to produce even some not untrue resemblance of the . of he doings in the world , and of the sort of fame which he have achieve , enough have already be say . it have also be say that he be forty year of age , and still unmarried . he be the younger son of a country gentleman of small fortune in the north of . at a early age he go to , and be intend by he father for ; but though studious as a boy , he be not studious within the prescribe limit ; and at the age of eighteen he leave school with a character for talent , but without a scholarship . all that he have obtain , over and above the advantage of he character , be a gold medal for verse , and hence be derive a strong presumption on the part of he friend that he be destin to add another name to the imperishable list of English poet . from he go to , and be enter as a commoner at . here he special career very soon commence . he utterly eschew the society of fast man , give no wine party , keep no horse , row no boat , join no row , and be the pride of he college tutor . such at least be he career till he have take he little go ; and then he commence a course of action which , though not less creditable to himself as a man , be hardly so much to the taste of he tutor . he become a member of a vigorous debating society , and render himself remarkable there for humorous energy . though always in earnest , yet he earnestness be always droll . to be true in he idea , unanswerable in he syllogism , and just in he aspiration be not enough for he . he have fail , fail in he own opinion as
as well as that of other when other come to know he , if he could not reduce the argument of he opponent to a absurdity , and conquer both by wit and reason . to say that he object be ever to raise a laugh , would be most untrue . he hate such common and unnecessary evidence of satisfaction on the part of he hearer . a joke that require to be laugh at be , with he , not worth utter . he could appreciate by a keener sense than that of he ear the success of he wit , and would see in the eyes of he auditory whether or no he be understand and appreciate . he have be a religious lad before he leave school . that be , he have addicte himself to a party of religion , and have do so have receive that benefit which most man do who become partisan in such a cause . we be much too apt to look at schism in we church as a unmitigated evil . moderate schism , if there may be such a thing , at any rate call attention to the subject , draw its supporter who would otherwise have be inattentive to the matter , and teach man to think about religion . how great a amount of good of this description have follow that movement of the of which commence with the publication of 's ! as a boy young take up the cudgel on the side of the , and at Oxford he sit for a while at the foot of the great Newman . to this cause he lent all he faculty . for it he concoct verse , for it he make speeches , for it he scintillate the brightest spark of he quiet wit . for it he eat and drank and dress , and have he being . in due process of time he take he degree , and write himself , but he do not do so with any remarkable amount of academical eclat . he have occupy himself too much with high church matter , and the polemics , politics , and outward demonstration usually concurrent with high churchmanship , to devote himself with sufficient vigour to the acquisition of a double first . he be not a double first , nor even a first class man ; but he revenge himself on the university by put first and double firsts out of fashion for the year , and laugh down a species of pedantry which at the age of twenty - three leave no room in a man 's mind for graver subject than conic section or greek accent . greek accent , however , and conic section be esteem necessary at , and there be no admittance there for within the list of its fellows . , however , the richest and the most comfortable abode of don , open its bosom to the young champion of a church militant . be ordain , and become a fellow soon after take he degree , and shortly after that be choose professor of poetry . and now come the moment of he great danger . after many mental struggle , and a agony of doubt which may be well surmise , the great prophet of the confess himself a . leave the of , and with he carry many a waverer . he do not carry off , but the escape which that gentleman have be a very narrow one . he leave for a while that he might meditate in complete peace on the step which appear for he to be all but unavoidable , and shut himself up in a little village on the sea -shore of one of we remotest county , that he might learn by commun with he own soul whether or no he could with a safe conscience remain within the pale of he mother church . thing would have go badly with he there have he be leave entirely to himself . every thing be against he : all he worldly interest require he to remain a protestant ; and he look on he worldly interest as a legion of foe , to get the better of whom be a point of extremest honour . in he the state of ecstatic agony such a conquest would have cost he little ; but it cost he much to get over the idea of choose the of he should be open in he own mind to the charge that he have be lead to such a choice by unworthy motive . then he heart be against he : he love with a strong and eager love the man who have hitherto be he guide , and year to follow he footstep . he taste be against he : the ceremony and pomp of the of , they august feast and solemn fast , invite he imagination and please he eye . he flesh be against he : how great a aid would it be to a poor , weak , wave man to be constrain to high moral duty , self - denial , obedience , and chastity by law which be certain in they enactment , and not to be break without loud , palpable , unmistakable sin ! then he faith be against he : he require to believe so much ; pante so early to give sign of he belief ; deeme it so insufficient to wash himself simply in the water of ; that some great deed , such as that of forsak everything for a true church , have for he allurement almost past withstanding . be at this time a very young man , and when he leave for he far retreat be much too confident in he power of fence , and too apt to look down on the ordinary
ordinary sense of ordinary people , to expect aid in the battle that he have to fight from any chance inhabitant on the spot which he have select . but be good to he ; and there , in that all but desolate place , on the storm - beat shore of that distant sea , he meet one who gradually change he mind , quiet he imagination , and teach he something of a 's duty . when leave , he be inclin to look upon the rural clergyman of most English parish almost with contempt . it be he ambition , should he remain within the fold of the church , to do somewhat towards redeem and rectify they inferiority , and to assist in infusing energy and faith into the heart of ministers , who be , as he think , too often satisfied to go through life without much show of either . and yet it be from such a one that in he extremest need receive that aid which he so much require . it be from a poor curate of a small parish that he first learn to know that the highest law for the governance of a 's duty must act from withing and not from without ; that no man can become a serviceable servant solely by obedience to write edict ; and that the safety which he be about to seek within the gate of be no other than the selfish freedom from personal danger which the bad soldier attempt to gain who counterfeit illness on the eve of battle . return to a humbler but a better and a happier man ; and from that time forth he put he shoulder to the wheel as a clergyman of the for which he have be educate . the intercourse of those among whom he familiarly live keep he staunch to the principle of that system of the to which he have always belong . since he severance from , no one have have so strong a influence over he as the head of he college . during the time of he expect apostasy , have not feel much predisposition in favour of the young fellow . though a high himself within moderate limit , feel no sympathy with man who could not satisfy they faith with the thirty - nine article . he regard the enthusiasm of such as as a state of mind more nearly ally to madness than to religion ; and when he see it evince by a very young man , be inclin to attribute a good deal of it to vanity . himself , though a religious man , be also a thoroughly practical man of the world , and he regard with no favourable eye the tenet of any one who look on the two thing as incompatible . when he find be a half , he begin to regret all that he do towards bestow a fellowship on so unworthy a recipient ; and when again he learn that would probably complete he journey to , he regard with some satisfaction the fact that in such case the fellowship would be again vacant . when , however , return and profess himself a confirm Protestant , the master of again open he arm to he , and gradually he become the pet of the college . for some little time he be saturnine , silent , and unwilling to take any prominent part in university broil ; but gradually he mind recover , or rather make its tone , and he become known as a man always ready at a moment 's notice to take up the cudgel in opposition to anything which savoure of a evangelical bearing . he be great in sermon , great on platforms , great at after dinner conversation , and always pleasant as well as great . he take delight in election , serve on committee , oppose tooth and nail all project of university reform , and talk jovially over he glass of port of the ruin to be commit by the Whigs . the ordeal through which he have go , in resist the blandishment of the lady of , have certainly do much towards the strengthening of he character . although in small and outward matter he be self - confident enough , nevertheless in thing affect the inner man he aim at a humility of spirit which would never have be attractive to he but for that visit to the coast of . this visit he now repeat every year . be a interior view of at the time when he accept the living of . Exteriorly , he be not a remarkable person . he be above the middle height , well make , and very active . he hair which have be jet black , be now tinge with gray , but he face bear no sign of year . it would perhaps be wrong to say that he be handsome , but he face be , nevertheless , high for beauty , and the formation of the forehead too massive and heavy : but he eye , nose and mouth be perfect . there be a continual play of lambent fire about he eye , which give promise of either patho or humour whenever he essay to speak , and that promise be rarely break . there be a gentle play about he mouth which declare that he wit never descende to sarcasm , and that there be no ill - nature in he repartee . be a popular man among woman , but more so as a general than a special favourite . live as a fellow at , marriage with he have be out of the question , and it may be doubt whether he have ever allow he heart to be touch . though belonge to a in which
which celibacy be not the require lot of its ministers , he have come to regard himself as one of those clergyman to whom to be a bachelor be almost a necessity . he have never look for parochial duty , and he career at be utterly incompatible with such domestic joy as a wife and nursery . he look on woman , therefore , in the same light that one see then regard by many Romish priest . he like to have near he that which be pretty and amusing , but woman generally be little more to he than child . he talk to they without put out all he power , and listen to they without any idea that what he should hear from they could either actuate he conduct or influence he opinion . be , the new vicar of , who be go to stay with the , at . reach the day before and , and the family be thus enable to make he acquaintance and discuss he qualification before the arrival of the other guest . be surprised to find that he look so young ; but she tell she younger sister , when they have retire for the night , that he do not talk at all like a young man : and she decide with the authority that seventee have over sixteen , that he be not at all nice , although he eye be lovely . as usual , sixteen implicitly acced to the dictum of seventeen in such a matter , and say that he certainly be not nice . they then branch off on the relative merit of other clerical bachelor in the vicinity , and both determine without any feeling of jealousy between they that a certain be by many degree the most estimable of the lot . the gentleman in question have certainly much in he favour , as , have a comfortable allowance from he father , he could devote the whole proceed of he curacy to violet glove and unexceptionable neck tie . have thus fixedly resolve that the new comer have nothing about he to shake the pre-eminence of the exalt green , the two girl go to sleep in each other 's arm , contente with themselves and the world . Grantly at first sight come too much the same conclusion about she husband 's favourite as she daughter have do , though , in seek to measure he relative value , she do not compare he to ; indeed , she make no comparison by name between he and any one else ; but she remark to she husband that one person 's swan be very often another person 's geese , thereby clearly show that have not yet prove he qualification in swanhood to she satisfaction . ' well , , ' say he , rather offended at hear he friend speak of so disrespectfully , ' if you take for a goose , I can not say that I think very highly of you discrimination . ' 'A goose ! no of course , he be not a goose . I have no doubt he be a very clever man . but you be so matter - of - fact , archdeacon , when it suit you purpose , that one can not trust oneself to any facon de parler . I have know doubout be a very valuable man -- at , and that he will be a good vicar at . all I mean be , that have pass one evening with he , I do not find he to be absolutely a paragon . in the first place , if I be not mistaken , he be a little inclin to be conceit . ' ' of all the man that I know intimately , ' say the archdeacon , ' be , in my opinion , the most free from any taint of self - conceit . he fault be that he be too diffident . ' 'Perhaps so , ' say the lady ; ' only I must own I do not find it out this evening . ' nothing further be say about he . think that he wife be abuse merely because he have praise he ; and know that it be useless arguing for or against any person in favour of , or in opposition to whom the archdeacon have already pronounce a strong opinion . in truth they be both right . be a diffident man in social intercourse with those whom he do not intimately know ; when place in situation which it be he business to fill , and discuss matter with which it be he duty to be conversant , be from habit braze - face enough . when stand on a platform in , no man would be less mazed than he by the eyes of the crowd before he ; for such be the work which he profession have call on he to perform ; but he shrank from a strong expression of opinion in general society , and he do so not uncommonly make it appear that he consider the company not worth the trouble of he energy . he be averse to dictate when the place do not seem to he to justify dictation ; and as those subject on which people wish to hear he speak be such as he be accustom to treat with decision , he generally shunn the trap there be laid to allure he into discussion , and , by do so , not unfrequently subject himself to such charge as those bring against he by . , as he sit at he open window , enjoy the delicious moonlight and gaze at the gray towers of the church , which stand almost within the rectory grounds , little dream that he be the subject of so many friendly
friendly or unfriendly criticism . consider how much we be all give to discuss the character of other , and discuss they often not in the strictest spirit of charity , it be singular how little we be inclin to think that other can speak ill - naturedly of we , and how angry and hurt we be when proof reach we that they have do so . it be hardly too much to say that we all of we occasionally speak of we dearest friend in a manner which those dearest friend would very little like to hear themselves mention ; and that we nevertheless expect that we dearest friend shall invariably speak of we as though they be blind to all we fault , but keenly alive to every shade of we virtue . it do not occur to that he be speak of at all . it seem to he , when he compare himself with he host , that he be a person of so little consequence to any , that he be worth no one 's word or thought . he be utterly alone in the world as regard domestic tie and those inner familiar relation which be hardly possible between other than husband and wife , parent and child , or brothers and sister . he have often discuss with himself the necessity of such bond for a man 's happiness in this world , and have generally satisfied himself with the answer that happiness in this world be not a necessity . herein he deceive himself , or rather try to do so . he , like other , year for the enjoyment of whatever he see enjoyable ; and though he attempt , with the modern stoicism of so many , to make himself believe that joy and sorrow be matter which here should be hold as perfectly indifferent , those thing be not indifferent to he . he be tired of he room and he college life . he regard the wife and child of he friend with something like envy ; he all but covet the pleasant drawing - room , with its pretty window open on to lawn and flower - bed , the apparel of the comfortable house , and -- above all -- the air of home which encompass all . it will be say that no time can have be fitte for such desire on he part as this , of a live among field and garden , of a house which a wife would grase . it be true there be a difference between the opulence of and the modest economy of ; but surely be not a man to sigh after wealth ! of all man , he friend would have unanimously declare he be the last to do so . but how little we friend know we ! in he period of stoical rejection of this world 's happiness , he have cast from he as utter dross all anxiety as to fortune . he have , as it be , proclaim himself to be indifferent to promotion , and those who chiefly admire he talents , and would mainly have exert to secure they they deserv reward , have take he at he word . and now , if the truth must out , he feel himself disappoint -- disappoint not by they but by himself . the daydream of he youth be over , and at the age of forty he feel that he be not fit to work in the spirit of a apostle . he have mistaken himself , and learn he mistake when it be past remedy . he have profess himself indifferent to mitre and diaconal residence , to rich living and pleasant glebe , and now he have to own to himself that he be sigh for the good thing of other man , on whom in he pride he have venture to look down . not for wealth , in its vulgar sense , have he ever sigh ; not for the enjoyment of rich thing have he ever long ; but for the allot share of worldly bliss , which a wife , and child , and happy home could give he , for that usual amount of comfort which he have venture to reject as unnecessary for he , he do now feel that he would have be wiser to search . he know that he talents , he position , and he friend would have win for he promotion , have he put himself in the way of win it . instead of do so , he have allow himself a income of some l 300 a year , should he , by marrying , throw up he fellowship . such , at the age of forty , be the worldly result of labour , which the world have choose to regard as successful . the world also think that be , in he own estimation , sufficiently pay . Alas ! alas ! the world be mistaken ; and be begin to ascertain that such be the case . and here , may I beg the reader not to be hard in the judgement upon this man . be not the state at which he have arrive , the natural result of effort to reach that which be not the condition of humanity ? be not modern stoicism , build though it be on , as great a outrage on human nature as be the stoicism of the ancient ? the philosophy of be build on true law , but on true law misunderstood , and therefore misapply . it be the same with we Stoic here , who would teach we that wealth and worldly comfort and happiness on earth be not worth the search . also , for a doctrine which can find no believe pupil and no true teacher
teacher ! the case of be the more singular , as he belong to a branch of the of well inclin to regard its temporality with avow favour , and have habitually live with man who be accustom to much worldly comfort . but such be he idiosyncrasy , that these very fact have produce within he , in early life , a state of mind that be not natural to he . he be content to be a high , if he could be so on principles of he own , and could strike out a course show a mark difference from those with whom he consort . he be ready to be a partisan as long as he be allow to have a course of action and of thought unlike that of he party . he party have indulge he , and he begin to feel that he party be right and himself wrong , but when such a conviction be too late to be of service to he . he discover , when much be discovery be no longer serviceable , that it would have be worth he while to have work for the usual pay assigne to work in this world , and have earn a wife and child , with a carriage for they to sit in ; to have earn a pleasant dining - room , in which he friend could drink he wine , and the power of walk up in the high street of he country town , with the knowledge that all its tradesman would have gladly welcome he within they door . other man arrive at those conviction in they start of life , and so work up to they . to he they have come when they be too late to be of use . it have be say that be a man of pleasantry and it may be think that such a state of mind as that describe , would be antagonistic to humwe . but surely such be not the case . be the outward mental casing of the man , and have no more to do with the inner mind of thought and feeling than have the rich brocad garment of the priest at the altar with the asceticism of the anchorite below they , whose skin be torment with sackcloth , and whose body be half flayed with rod . Nay , will not such a one often rejoice more than any other in the rich show of outer apparel ? will it not be food for he pride to feel that he groan inwardly , while he shine outwardly ? so it be with the mental effort which man make . those which they show forth daily to the world be often the opposite of the inner workings of the spirit . in the archdeacon 's drawing - room , have sparkle with he usual unaffected brilliancy , but when he retire to he bed - room , he sit there sad , at he open window , repin within himself that he also have no wife , no bairn , no soft award of lawn duly mown for he to be on , no herd of attendant curate , no bowing from the banker 's clerk , no rich rectory . that apostleship that he have think of have evad he grasp , and he be now only vicar of 's , with a taste for a mitre . truly he have fall between two stool . 's and reach the rectory on the follow morning , the archdeacon and he friend be at 's . they have go over that the new vicar might inspect he church , and be introduce to the squire , and be not expect back before dinner . ramble out by himself , and stroll , as be he wont at , about the lawn and round the church ; and as he do so , the two sister naturally fall into conversation about . there be not much sisterly confidence between they . be ten year older than , and have be marry while be yet a child . they have never , therefore , pour into each other 's ear they hope and love ; and now that one be a wife and the other a widow , it be not probable that they would begin to do so . they live too much asunder to be able to fall into that kind of intercourse which make confidence between sister almost a necessity ; and , moreover , that which be so easy at eighteen be often very difficult at twenty - eight . know this , and do not , therefore , expect confidence from she sister ; and yet she longe to ask she whether in real truth be agreeable to she . it be by no means difficult to turn the conversation to . that gentleman have become so famous at , have so much to do with all clergyman connect with the city , and be so specially concerned in the affair of , that it would have be odd if 's daughter have not talk about he . be soon abuse he , which she do with she whole heart ; and be nearly as eager to defend he . she positively dislike the man , would have be delighted to learn that he have take himself off so that she should never see he again , have indeed almost a fear of he , and yet she constantly find herself take he part . the abuse of other people , and abuse of a nature that she feel to be unjust , impos that necessity on she , and at last make 's defence a habitual course of argument with she . from the conversation turn to the , and be listen with some interest to 's account of the
the family , when it drop out that be one of the party . ' what ! ' say the lady of the rectory , ' be there too ? ' merely reply that such have be the case . ' why , , he must be very fond of you , I think ; he seem to follow you everywhere . ' even this do not open 's eye . she merely laugh , and say that she imagine find other attraction at 's . and so they parte . feel quite convinced that the odious match would take place ; and as convinced that that unfortunate chaplain , disagreeable as he must be allow to be , be more sinn against than sinning . the archdeacon of course hear before dinner that have remain the day before at with the view of meeting , and that she have so meet he . he remember how she have positively state that there be to be guest at the , and he do not hesitate to accuse she of deceit . moreover , the fact , or rather the presume fact , of she be deceitful on such a matter , spoke but too plainly in evidence against she as to she imputed crime of receive as a lover . 'I be afraid that anything we can do will be too late , ' say the archdeacon . 'I own I be fairly surprised . I never like you sister 's taste with regard to man ; but still I do not give she credit for -- ugh ! ' ' and so soon , too , ' say Grantly , who think more , perhaps , of she sister 's indecorum in have a lover before she have put off she weed , than she bad taste in have such a lover as . ' well , my dear , I shall be sorry to be harsh , or to do anything that can hurt you father ; but , positively , neither that man nor he wife shall come within my door . ' Grantly sigh , and then attempt to conseal herself and she lord by remark that , after all , the thing be not accomplish yet . now that be at , much might be do to wean she from she fatal passion . poor ! the evening pass off without anything to make it remarkable . discuss the parish of with the archdeacon , and and , who know the parsonage of the parish , join in . also know they , but speak little . do not apparently take much notice of she , and she be not in a humour to receive at that time with any special grace any special favourite of she brother - in - law . she first idea on reach she bedroom be that a much more pleasant family party might be meet at 's than at the rectory . she begin to think that she be get tired of clergyman and they respectable humdrum wearisome mode of living , and that after all , people in the outer world , who have live in , , or elsewhere , need not necessarily be regard as atrocious and abominable . the , she have think , be a giddy , thoughtless , extravagant set of people ; but she have see nothing wrong about they , and have , on the other hand , find that they thoroughly know how to make they house agreeable . it be a thousand pity , she think , that the archdeacon should not have a little of the same savoir vivre . , as we have say , do not apparently take much notice of she ; but yet he do not go to bed without feel that he have be in company with a very pretty woman ; and as be the case with most bachelor , and some marry man , regard the prospect of he month 's visit at in a pleasanter light , when he lear not that a very pretty woman be to share it with he . before they all retire it be settle that the whole party should drive over on the follow day to inspect the parsonage at . the three clergyman be to discuss dilapidation , and the two lady be to lend they assistance in suggest such change as might be necessary for a bachelor 's abode . accordingly , soon after breakfast , the carriage be at the door . there be only room for four inside , and the archdeacon get upon the box . find herself opposite to , and be , therefore , in a manner force into conversation with he . they be soon on comfortable term together ; and have she think about it , she would have think that , in spite of he black cloth , would not have be a bad addition to the family party . now that the archdeacon be away , they could all trifle . begin by tell they in the most innocent manner imaginable a old legend about 's new parish . there be , he say , in day of , a illustrious priestess of , fam through the whole country for cure all manner of disease . she have a well , as all priestess have ever have , which well be extant to this day , and share in the mind of many of the people the sanctity which belong to the consecrate grounds of the parish church . declare that he should look on such tenet on the part of the parishioner as anything but orthodox . and reply that she so entirely disagree with he as to think that no parish be in a proper estate that have not its priestess as well as its priest . ' the duty be never
never well do , ' say she , ' unless they be so divided . ' 'I suppose , papa , ' say , ' that in the oldest time the priestess bear all the sway herself . , perhaps , think that such might be too much the case now if a sacred lady be admit within the parish . ' 'I think , at any rate , ' say he , ' that it be safer to run no such risk . no priestly pride have ever exceed that of sacerdotal female . a very lowly curate , I might , perhaps , essay to rule ; but a curatess would be sure to get the better of I . ' ' there be certainly example of such accident happen , ' say . ' they do say that there be a priestess at who be very imperious in all thing touch the altar . perhaps the fear of such a fate as that be before you eyes . ' when they be join by the archdeacon on the gravel before the vicarage , they descende again to grave dullness . not that be a dull man ; but he frolic humour be of a cumbrous kind ; and he wit , when he be witty , do not generally extend itself to he auditory . on the present occasion , he be soon make speeches about wounded roof and wall , which he declare to be in want of some surgeon 's art . there be not a partition that he do not tap , nor a block of chimney that he do not narrowly examine ; all water - pipe , flue , cistern , and sewer underwent he examination ; and he even descende , in the care of he friend , so far as to bear sundry board in the floor with a bradawl . accompany he through the room , try to look wise in such domestic matter , and the other three also follow . show that she herself have not be priestess of a parish twenty year for nothing , and examine the bell and window pane in a very knowing way . ' you will , at any rate , have a beautiful prospect out of you own window , if this be to be you private sanctum , ' say . she be stand at the lattice of a little room up stair , from which the view certainly be very lovely . it be from the back of the vicarage , and there be nothing to interrupt the eye between the house and the glorious gray pile of the cathedral . the intermediate ground , however , be beautifully stud with timber . in the immediate foreground run the little river which afterwards skirt the city ; and , just to the right of the cathedral the point gable and chimney of 's pee out of the elm which encompass it . 'yes , ' say he , join she . 'I shall have a beautifully complete view of my adversary . I shall sit down before the hostile town , and fire away at they at a very pleasant distance . I shall just be able to lodge a shot in the hospital , should the enemy ever get possession of it ; and as for the palace , I have it within full range . ' 'I never see anything like you clergyman , ' say ; ' you be always think of fight each other . ' ' either that , ' say he , 'or else support each other . the pity be that we can not do the one without the other . but be we not here to fight ? be not our a church militant ? what be all we work but fight , and hard fight , if it be well do ? ' ' but not with each other . ' ' that be as it may be . the same complaint which you make of I for battle with another clergyman of we own church , the would make against I for battle with the error of a priest of . yet , surely , you would not be inclin to say that I should be wrong to do battle with such as he . a pagan , too , with he multiplicity of gods , would think it equally odd that the and the should disagree . ' 'Ah ! but you wage you wars about trifle so bitterly . ' ' war about trifle , ' say he , ' be always bitter , especially among neighbour . when the differences be great , and the party comparative strangers , man quarrel with courtesy . what combatant be ever so eager as two brother ? ' ' but do not such contention bring scandal on the church ? ' ' more scandal would fall on the church if there be no such contention . we have but one way to avoid they -- that of acknowledge a common head of we church , whose word on all point of doctrine shall be authoritative . such a termination of we difficulty be allur enough . it have charms which be irresistible to many , and all but irresistible , I own , to I . ' ' you speak now of the of ? ' say . ' no , ' say he , ' not necessarily the of ; but of a church with a head . have it pleas to vouchsafe to we such a church we path would have be easy . but easy path have not be think good for we . ' he pause and stand silent for a while , think of the time when he have so nearly sacrifice all he have , he power of mind , he free agency
agency , the fresh run water of he mind 's fountain , he very inner self , for a easy path in which no fighting would be need ; and then he continue : ' what you say be partly true ; we contention do bring on we some scandal . the outer world , though it constantly revile we for we human infirmity , and throw in we tooth the fact that be clergymen we be still no more then man , demand of we that we should do we work with godlike perfection . there be nothing godlike about we : we differ from each other with the acerbity common to man -- we allow difference on subject of divine origin to produce among we antipathy and enmity which be anything but divine . this be all true . but what would you have in place of it ? there be no infallible head for a church on earth . this dream of believe man have be try , and we see in and in what have become of it . grant that there be and have be no bickering within the pale of the 's . such a assumption would be utterly untrue ; but let we grant it , and then let we say which church have incur the heaviest scandal . ' there be a quiet earnestness about , as he half acknowledge and half defend himself from the charge bring against he , which surprise . she have be use all she life to listen to clerical discussion ; but the point at issue between the disputant have so seldom be of more than temporal significance as to have leave on she mind no feeling of reverence for such subject . there have always be a hard worldly leaven of the love either of income or power in the strain that she have hear ; there have be no panting for the truth ; no aspiration after religious purity . it have always be take for grant by those around she that they be indubitably right , that there be no ground for doubt , that the hard uphill work of ascertain what the duty of a clergyman should be have be already accomplish in full ; and that what remain for a active militant parson to do , be to hold he own against all comer . she father , it be true , be a exception to this ; but then he be so essentially non-militant in all thing , that she class he in she own mind apart from all other . she have never argue the matter within herself , or consider whether this common tone be or be not faulty ; but she be sick of it without know that she be so . and now she find to she surprise and not without a certain pleasurable excitement , that this new comer among they speak in a manner very different from that to which she be accustom . ' it be so easy to condemn , ' say he , continue the thread of he thought . 'I know no life that must be so delicious as that of a writer for newspaper , or a lead member of the opposition -- to thunder forth accusation against man in power ; show up the worst side of every thing that be produce ; to pick hole in every coat ; to be indignant , sarcastic , jocose , moral , or supercilious ; to damn with faint praise , or crush with open calumny ! what can be so easy as this when the critic have to be responsible for nothing ? you condemn what I do ; but put yourself in my position and do the reverse , and then see if I can not condemn you . ' 'Oh ! , I do not condemn you . ' ' pardon I , you do , -- you as one of the world ; you be now the opposition member ; you be now compose you lead article , and well and bitterly you do it . " let dog delight to bark and bite ; " you fitly begin with a elegant quotation ; " but if we be to have a church at all , in heaven 's name let the pastor who preside over it keep they hand from each other 's throat . lawyer can live without befoul each other 's name ; doctor do not fight duel . why be that clergyman alone should indulge themselves in such unrestrained liberty of abuse against each other ? " and so you go on revil we for we ungodly quarrel , we sectarian propensity , and scandalous difference . it will , however , give you no trouble to write another article next week in which we , or some of we , shall be twit with a unseemly apathy in matter of we vocation . it will not fall on you to reconcile the discrepancy ; you reader will never ask you how the poor parson be to be urgent in season and out of season , and yet never come in contact with man who think widely differently from he . you , when you condemn this foreign treaty , or that official arrangement , will have to incur no blame for the graver fault of any different measure . it be so easy to condemn ; and so pleasant too ; for eulogy charms no listener as detraction do . ' only half follow he in he raillery ; but she catch he meaning . 'I know I ought to apologise for presuming to criticise you , ' she say ; ' but I be think with sorrow of the ill - will that have lately come among we at , and I speak more freely than I should have do .
. ' ' peace on earth and good - will among man , be , like heaven , promise for the future ;' say he , follow rather he own thought than hers . ' when that prophecy be accomplished , there will no longer be any need for clergyman . ' here they be interrupt by the archdeacon , whose voice be hear from the cellar shout to the vicar . , , ' -- and then turn to he wife , who be apparently at he elbow --' where be he go to ? this cellar be perfectly abominable . it would be murder to put a bottle of wine into it till it have be roof , wall , and floor . how on earth old ever get on with it , I can not guess . but then never have a glass of wine that any man could drink . ' ' what be it , archdeacon ? ' say the vicar , run down stair , and leave above to she meditations . ' this cellar must be roof , wall , and floor , ' repeat the archdeacon . ' now mind what I say , and do not let the architect persuade you that it will do ; half of those fellows know nothing about wine . this place as it be now would be damp and cold in winter , and hot and muggy in summer . I would not give a straw for the best wine that ever be mint , after it have alain here a couple of year . ' assent , and promise that the cellar should be reconstruct accord to the archdeacon 's receipt . ' and , , look here ; be such a attempt at a kitchen grate ever see ? ' ' the grate be really very bad , ' say Grantly ; 'I be sure the priestess will not approve of it , when she be bring here to the scene of future duty . really , , no priestess accustom to such a excellent well as that above could put up with such a grate as this . ' ' if there must be a priestess at 's at all , Grantly , I think we shall leave she to she well , and not call down she divine wrath on any of the imperfection rise from we human poverty . however , I own I be amenable to the attraction of a well - cook dinner , and the grate shall certainly be change . ' by this time the archdeacon have again ascend , and be now in the dining - room . ' , ' say he , speak in he usual loud clear voice , and with that tone of dictation which be so common to he ; ' you must positively alter this dining - room , that be , remodel it altogether ; look here , it be just sixteen foot by fifteen ; do anybody ever hear of a dining - room of such proportion ? ' and the archdeacon step the room long - way and cross -way with ponderous step , as though a certain amount of ecclesiastical dignity could be impart even to such a occupation as that by the manner of do it . ' barely sixteen ; you may call it a square . ' ' it would do very well for a round table , ' suggest the ex-warden . now there be something peculiarly unorthodox in the archdeacon 's estimation in the idea of a round table . he have always be accustom to a goodly board of decent length , comfortably elongat itself accord to the number of guest , nearly black with perpetual rubbing , and as bright as a mirror . now round dinner table be generally of oak , or else of such new construction as not to have acquire the peculiar hue which be so pleasing to he . he connect they with what he call the nasty new fangled method of leave cloth on the table , as though to warn people that they be not to sit long . in he eyes there be something democratic and parvenu in a round table . he imagine that dissenter and calico - printer chiefly use they , and perhaps a few literary lions more conspicuous for they wit than they gentility . he be a little flurried at the idea of such a article , be introduce into the diocese by a protege of he own , and at the instigation of he father - in - law . 'a round dinner - table , ' say he , with some heat , 'i the most abominable article of furniture that ever be invent . I hope that have more taste than to allow such a thing in he house . ' poor feel himself completely snub , and of course say nothing further ; but , who have yield submissively in the small matter of the cellar and kitchen grate , find himself oblige to oppose reform which might be of a nature too expensive for he pocket . ' but it seem to I , archdeacon , that I can not very well lengthan the room without pull down the wall , and if I pull down the wall , I must build it up again ; then if I throw out a bow on this side , I must do the same on the other , then if I do it for the ground floor , I must carry it up to the floor above . that will be put a new front to the house , and will cost , I suppose , a couple of hundred pound . the ecclesiastical commissioner will hardly assist I when they hear that my grievance consist in have a dining - room only
only sixteen foot long . ' the archdeacon proceed to explain that nothing would be easier than add six foot to the front of the dining - room , without touch any other of the house . such irregularity of construction in small country house were , he say , rather graceful than otherwise , and he offer to pay for the whole thing out of he own pocket if it cost more than forty pound . , however , be firm , and , although the archdeacon fuss and fume about it , would not give way . Forty pound , he say , be a matter of serious moment to he , and he friend , if under such circumstance they would be good - nature enough to come to he at all , must put up with the misery of a square room . he be willing to compromise matter by disclaim any intention of have a round table . ' but , ' say , ' what if the priestess insist on have both the room enlarge ? ' ' the priestess in that case must do it for herself , . ' 'I have no doubt she will be well able to do so , ' reply the lady ; 'too do that and many more wonderful thing . I be quite sure that the priestess of , when she do come , will not come empty - hand . ' , however , do not appear well inclin to enter into speculative expense on such a chance as this , and therefore , any material alteration in the house , the cost of which could not fairly be make to lie at the door either of the ecclesiastical commission or of the estate of the late incumbent , be taboo . with this essential exception , the archdeacon order , suggest , and carry all point before he in a manner very much to he own satisfaction . a close observer , have there be one there , might have see that he wife have be quite as useful in the matter as himself . no one know better than the appurtenance necessary to a comfortable house . she do not , however , think it necessary to lay claim to any of the glory which she lord and master be so ready to appropriate as he own . have go through they work effectively , and systematically , the party return to Plumstead well satisfied with they expedition . the Thorne of on the follow be to read himself in at he new church . it be agree at the rectory that the archdeacon should go over with he and assist at the reading - desk , and that should take the archdeacon 's duty at . Grantly have she school and she bun to attend to , and profess that she could not be spare ; but be to accompany they . it be further agree also , that they would lunch at the squire 's house , and return home after the afternoon service . , , of , be the squire of 's ; or rather the squire of ; for the domain of the modern landlord be of wider notoriety than the fame of the ancient saint . he be a fair specimen of what that race have come to in we day , which a century ago be , as we be tell , fairly represent by . if that representation be a true one , few class of man can have make faster stride in improvement . , however , be a man possessed of quite a sufficient number of foible to lay he open to much ridicule . he be still a bachelor , be about fifty , and be not a little proud of he person . when live at home at there be not much room for such pride , and there therefore he always look like a gentleman , and like that which he certainly be , the first man in he parish . but during the month or six week which he annually spend in , he try so hard to look like a great man there also , which he certainly be not , that he be put down as a fool by many at he club . he be a man of considerable literary attainment in a certain way and on certain subject . he favourite author be and , and he know more perhaps than any other man in he own county , and the next to it , of the english essayist of the two last century . he possess complete set of the ' Idler ' , the ' Spectator , ' the ' Tatler , ' the ' guardian , ' and the ' Rambler ; ' and would discourse by hour together on the superiority of such publication to anything which have since be produce in we Edinburghs and Quarterlies . he be a great proficient in all question of genealogy , and know enough of almost every gentleman 's family in to say of what blood and lineage be descende all those who have any claim to be consider as possessor of any such luxuries . for blood and lineage he himself have a must profound respect . he count back he own ancestor to some period long antecedent to the ; and could tell you , if you would listen to he , how it have come to pass that they , like the , have be permit to hold they own among the Norman baron . it be not , accord to he show , on account of any weak complaisance on the part of he family towards they Norman neighbour . some of once fortify he own castle , and hold out , not only that , but the then exist cathedral
cathedral of also , against one , in the time of ; and Thorne possess the whole history of the siege write on vellum , and illuminate in a most costly manner . it little signify that no one could read the writing , as , have that be possible , no one could have understand the language . Thorne could , however , give you all the particular in good , and have no objection to do so . it would be unjust to say that he look down in man whose family be of recent date . he do not do so . he frequently consort with such , and have choose many of he friend from among they . but he look on they as great millionaire be apt to look on those who have small income ; as man who have Sophocles at they finger ' end regard those who know nothing of . they might doubtless be good sort of people , entitle to much praise for virtue , very admirable for talent , highly respectable in every way ; but they be without the one great good gift . be 's way of think on this matter ; nothing could ato for the loss of good blood ; nothing could neutralise it be good effect . few indeed be now possess of it , but the possession be on that account the more precious . it be very pleasant to hear Thorne descant on this matter . be you in you ignorance to surmise that such a one be of a good family because the head of he family be a baronet of a old date , he would open he eye with a delightful look of affect surprise , and modestly remind you that baronetcy only date from . he would gently sigh if you speak of the blood of the and ; would hardly allow the claim of the Howard and Lowther ; and have before now allude to the as a family who have hardly yet achieve the full honour of a pedigree . in speak once of a wide spread race whose name have receive the honour of three coronet , scion from which sit for various constituency , some one of whose member have be in almost every cabinet form during this present century , a brilliant race such as there be few in , Thorne call they all ' dirt ' . he have not intend any disrespect to these man . he admire they in many sense , and allow they they privileges without envy . he have merely mean to express he feeling that the stream which run through they not vein be yet purify by time to that perfection , have not become so genuine a ichor , as to be worthy of be call blood in the genealogical sense . when be first introduce to he , have immediately suggest that he be one of the of . reply that he be a very distant relative of the family allude to . to this Thorne surmise that the relationship could not be very distant . assure he that it be so distant that the family kknow nothing of each other . Thorne laugh he gentle laugh at this , and tell that there be not exist no branch of he family separate from the parent stock at a earlier date than the reign of ; and that therefore could not call himself distant . himself be quite clearly a of . ' but , ' say the vicar , ' have be sell to the , and have be in they hand for the last fifty year . ' ' and when it have be there one hundred and fifty , if it unluckily remain there so long , ' say , ' you descendant will not be a whit the less entitle to describe themselves as be of the family of . thank , no can buy that -- and , thank -- no Arabin , and no Thorne , can sell it . ' in politics , Thorne be a unflinching conservative . he look on those fifty - three , who , as tell we , censure free trade in 1852 , as the only patriot leave among the public man of . when that terrible crisis of free trade have arrive , when the repeal of the corn law be carry by those very man whom Thorne have hithertoo regard as the only possible saviour of he country , he be for a time paralyse . he country be lose ; but that be comparatively a small thing . other country have flourish and fall , and the human race still go on improve under 's providence . but now all trust in human faith must for ever be at a end . not only must ruin come , but it must come through the apostasy of those who have be regard as the truest of true believer . politics in , as a pursuit for gentleman , must be at a end . have Thorne be trode under foot by a , he could have borne it as a and a martyr ; but to be so utterly throw over and deceive by those he have so earnestly support , so thoroughly trust , be more than he could endure and live . he therefore cease to live as a politician , and refuse to hold any converse with the world at large on the state of the country . such be 's impression for the first two or three year after 's apostasy ; but by degree he temper , as do that of other , cool down . he begin once more to move about , to frequent the bench and the market , and to be see at dinner , shoulder to shoulder with some of those
those who have so cruelly betraye he . it be a necessity for he to live , and that plan of he for avoid the world do not answer . he , however , have other around he , who still maintain the same staunch principle of protection -- man like himself , who be too true to flinch at the cry of a mob -- have they own way of consol themselves . they be , and feel themselves to be , the only true depository left of certain Eleusinian mystery , of certain deep and wondrous service of worship by which alone the gods could be rightly approach . to they and they only be it now give to know these thing , and to perpetuate they , if that might still be do , by the careful and secret education of they child . we have read how private and peculiar form of worship have be carry on from age to age in family , which to the outer world have apparently adhere to the service of some ordinary church . and so by degree it be with . he learn at length to listen calmly while protection be talk of as a thing dead , although he know within himself that it be still quick with a mystic life . be he without a certain pleasure that such knowledge though give to he should be debar from the multitude . he become accustomed to hear , even among country gentleman , that free trade be after all not so bad , and to bear this without dispute , although conscious within himself that everything good in have go with he old palladium . he have within he something of the feeling of , who glory that he could kill himself because be no longer worthy of they name . Thorne have no thought of killing himself , be a , and still possesse he 4000 a year ; but the feeling be not on that account the less comfortable . Thorne be a sportsman , and have be active though not outrageous in he sport . previous to the great downfall of politics in he country , he have support the hunt by every means in he power . he have preserve game till no goose or turkey could show a tail in the parish of 's . he have plant gorse cover with more care than oak and larch . he have be more anxious for the comfort of he fox than of he ewe and lamb . no meet have be more popular than ; no man 's stable have be more liberally open to the horse of distant man than 's ; no man have say more , write more , or do more to keep the club up . the theory of protection could expand itself so thoroughly in the practice of the country hunt ! but the great ruin come ; when the noble master of the hound support the recreant minister in the house of Lords , and basely surrendere he truth , he manhood , he friend , and he honour for the hope of a garter , then give up the hunt . he do not cut he cover , for that would not have be the act of a gentleman . he do not kill he fox , for that accord to he light would have be murder . he do not say that he cover should not be draw , or he eart stop , for that would have be illegal accord to the by - law prevailing among country gentleman . but he absent himself from home on the occasion of every meet at , leave the cover to they fate , and could not be persuade to take he pink coat out of the press , or he hunter out of he stable . this last for two year , and then by degree he come round . he first appear at a neighbour meet on a pony , dress in he shooting coat , as though he have trot in by accident ; then he walk up one morning on foot to see he favourite gorse draw , and when he groom bring he mare out by chance , he do not refuse to mount she . he be next persuade , by one of the immortal fifty - three , to bring he hunt material over to the other side of the county , and take a fortnight with the hound there ; and so gradually he return to he old life . but in hunt as in other thing he be only support by the inward feeling of mystic superiority to those with whom he share the common breath of outer life . Thorne do not live in solitude at . he have a sister , who be ten year older than himself , and who participate in he prejudice and feeling so strongly , that she be a liive caricature of all he foible . she would not open a modern quarterly , do not choose to see a magazine in she drawing - room , and would not have pollute she finger with a shred of " the " for any consideration . she speak of , , and , as though they be still live , regard foe as the best know novelist of he country , and think of Fielding as a young but meritorious novice in the field of romance . in poetry , she be familiar with the name as late as , and have once be seduce into read the " rape of the lock " ; but she regard as the purest type of she country 's literature in this line . be she favourite insanity . those thing which be the pride of most genealogist be to she contemptible . Arms and motto
motto set she beside herself . Ealfry of have want no motto to assist he in cleave to the brisket ; and 's great grandfather , the gigantic , have require no other arm than those which nature give he to hurl from the top of he own castle a cousin of the base invade . to she all modern English name be equally insignificant . Hengist , , and such like , have for she the only true savour of nobility . she be not contente unless she could go beyond the ; and would certainly have christen she child , have she have child , by the name of the ancient Britons . in some respects she be not unlike 's , and have she be give to curse , she would certainly have do so in the name of , , and . not have submit to the embrace of any polluting , as poor have do , and have assist no parricide , the milk of human kindness be not curdle in she bosom . she never curse , therefore , but bless rather . this , however , she do in a strange uncouth manner , that would have be unintelligible to any peasant but she own . as a politician , Thorne have be so thoroughly disgust with public life by base deed long antecedent to the question , that that have but little move she . in she estimation she brother have be a fast young man , hurry away by a too ardent temperament into democratic tendency . now happily he be bring to sounder view by see the iniquity of the world . she have not yet reconcile herself to the , and still groan in spirit over the defalcation of the as touch the . if ask whom she think the should take as she counsellor , she would probably have name ; and when remind that that venerable man be no longer present in the flesh to assist we , she would probably have answer with a sigh that no now could help we but the dead . in religion , be a pure Druidess . we would not have it understand by that , that she do actually in these latter day assist at any human sacrifice , or that she be in fact hostile to the of . she have adopt the religion as a milder form of the worship of she ancestor , and always appeal to she do so as evidence that she have no prejudice against reform , when it could be show that reform be salutary . this reform be the most modern of any to which she have as yet acced , it be presume that british lady have give up they paint and take to some sort of petticoat before the day of . that further feminine step in advance which combine paint and petticoat together , have not find votary in . but she be a Druidess in this , that she regrett she know not what in the usage and practice of she Church . she sometimes talk and constantly think of good thing go by , though she have but the faintest idea of what those good thing have be . she imagine that a purity have exist which be now go ; that a piety have adorn we pastor and a simple docility we people , for which it may be fear history give she but little true warrant . she be accustom to speak of as though he have be the firmest and most simple - minded of martyr , and of as though the pure Protestant faith of she people have be the one anxiety of she life . it would have be cruel to undeceive she , have it be possible ; but it would have be impossible to make she believe that the one be a time - serve priest , willing to go any length to keep he place , and that the other be in heart a papist , with this sole proviso , that she should be she own pope . and so Thorne go on sighing and regret , look back to the divine right of king as the rule axiom of a golden age , and cherish , low down in the bottom of she heart of heart , a dear unmentioned wish for the restoration of some exil . who would deny she the luxury of she sigh , or the sweetness of she soft regret ! in she person and she dress she be perfect , and well she know she own perfection . she be a small elegantly make old woman , with a face from which the glow of she youth have not depart without leave some streak of a roseate hue . she be proud of she colour , proud of she grey hair which she wear in short crisp curl pee out all around she face from the dainty white cap . to think of all the money that she spend in lace use to break the heart of poor Mr Quiverful with she seven daughter . she be proud of she tooth , which be still white and numerous , proud of she bright cheery eye , proud of she short jaunty step , and very proud of the neat , precise , small foot with which those step be take . she be proud also , ay , very proud , of the rich brocad silk in which it be she custom to ruffle through she drawing - room . we know what be the custom of the lady of -- " and twenty knights of fame hng they shield in . " the lady of be not so martial in she habits , but hardly less costly . she might have boast that nine - and - twenty silken shirts
shirts might have be produce in she chamber , each fit to stand alone . the nine - and - twenty shield of the scottish heroe be less independent , and hardly more potent to withstand any attack that might be make on they . when fully dress might be say to have be arm cap - a-pie , and she be always fully dress , as far as be ever know to mortal man . for all this rich attire Thorne be not indebt to the generosity of she brother . she have a very comfortable independence of she own , which she divide among juvenile relative , the milliner , and the poor , give much the largest share to the latter . it may be imagine , therefore , that with all she little folly she be not unpopular . all she folly have , we believe , be tell . she virtue be too numerous to describe , and not sufficiently interesting to deserve description . while we be on the subject of the Thorne , one word must be say of the house they live in . it be not a large house , nor a fine house , nor perhaps to modern idea a very commodious house ; but by those who love the peculiar colour and peculiar ornament of genuine Tudor architecture it be consider a perfect gem . we beg to own ourselves among the number , and therefore take this opportunity to express we surprise that so little be know by man and woman of the beauty of English architecture . the ruin of the , the Campanile at , 's , , the and , be with we tourist as familiar as household word ; but they know nothing of the glory of , , and . Nay , we much question whether many note traveller , many who have pitch they tent perhaps under , be not still ignorant that there be glory in , and . we beg that they will go and see . 's house be call , and be properly so call ; for the house itself form two side of a quadrangle , which be complete in the other two side by a wall about twenty foot high . this be build of cut stone , rudely cut indeed , and now much worn , but of a beautiful rich tawny yellow colour , the effect of that stonecrop of minute growth , which it have take three centurie to produce . the top of this wall be ornament by huge round stone ball of the same colour as the wall itself . entrance into the court be have through a pair of iron gate , so massive that no one could comfortably open or close they , consequently they be rarely disturb . from the gateway two pat lead obliquly across the court ; that to the left reach the hall - door , which be in the corner make by the angle of the house , and that to the right lead to the back entrance , which be at the further end of the longer portion of the building . with those who be now adeep at contrive house accommodation , it will militate much against , that no carriage could be bring to the hall - door . if you enter at all , you must do so , fair reader , on foot , or at least in a bath - chair . no vehicle draw by horse ever come within that iron gate . but this be nothing to the next horror that will encounter you . on enter the front door , which you do by no very grand portal , you find yourself immediately in the dining - room . what -- no hall ? exclaim my luxurious friend , accustom to all the comfortable appurtenance of modern life . yes , kind sir ; a noble hall , if you will but observe it ; a true old English hall of excellent dimension for a country gentleman 's family ; but , if you please , no dining - parlour . but and Thorne be proud of this peculiarity of they dwelling , though the brother be once all but tempt by he friend to alter it . they delighte in the knowledge that they , like , positively dine in they true hall , even though they so dine tete - a - tete . but though they have never own , they have feel and endeavoure to remedy the discomfort of such a arrangement . a huge screen partition off the front door and a portion of the hall , and from the angle so screen off a second door lead into a passage , which run along the larger side of the house next to the courtyard . either my reader or I must be a bad hand at topography , if it be not clear that the great hall form the ground - floor of the smaller portion of the mansion , that which be to you left as you enter the iron gate , and that it occupy the whole of this wing of the building . it must be equally clear that it look out on a trim mown lawn , through three quadrangular window with stone mullion , each window divide into a larger portion at the bottom , and a smaller portion at the top , and each portion again divide into five by perpendicular stone supporter . there may be window which give a better light than such as those , and it may be , as my utilitarian friend observe , that the giving of light be the desired object of a window . I will not argue the point with he . indeed I cannot . but I shall not the less die in the
the assure conviction that no sort of description of window be capable of impart half as much happiness to mankind as that which have be adopt at . what -- not a oriel ? say . no , ; not even a oriel , beautiful as be a oriel window . it have not about it so perfect a feeling of quiet English homely comfort . let oriel window grase a college , or the half public mansion of a potent peer ; but for the sit room of quiet country lady , of ordinary homely folk , nothing can equal the square mullion window of the architect . the hall be hang round with family female insipidity by , and unprepossessing male Thorne in red coat by ; each have be let into a panel in the wainscoting in the proper manner . at the further end of the room be a huge fire - place , which afford much ground of difference between the brother and sister . a antiquate grate that would hold about a hundred weight of coal , have be stick on the hearth , by 's father . this hearth have of course be intend for the consumption of wood fagot , and the iron dog for the purpose be still stand , though half bury in the masonry of the grate . Thorne be very anxious to revert to the dog . the dear good old creature be always to revert to anything , and have she be systematically indulged , would doubtless in time have reflect that finger be make before fork , and have revert accordingly . but in the affair of the fire - place , would not revert . country gentleman around he , all have comfortable grate in they dining - room . he be not exactly the man to have suggest a modern usage ; but he be not so far prejudiced as to banish those which he father have prepare for he use . Thorne have , indeed , once suggest that with very little contrivance the front door might have be so altered , as to open at least into the passage ; but on hear this , he sister , such be 's name , have be take ill , and have remain so for a week . before she come down stair she receive a pledge from she brother that the entrance should never be change in she lifetime . at the end of the hall opposite to the fire - place a door lead into the drawing - room , which be of equal size , and light with precisely similar window . but yet the aspect of the room be very different . it be papere , and the ceiling , which in the hall show the old rafter , be whiten and finish with a modern cornice . Thorne be draw - room , or , as she always call it , withdraw - room , be a beautiful apartment . the window open on to the full extent of the lovely trim garden ; immediately before the window be plot of flower in stiff , stately , stubborn little bed , each bed surround by a stone coping of its own ; beyond , there be a low parapet wall , on which stand urn and image , fawn , nymph , satyr , and a whole tribe of 's follower ; and then again , beyond that , a beautiful lawn slop away to a sunk fence , which divide the garden from the park . 's study be at the end of the drawing - room , and beyond that be the kitchen and the office . open into both miss Thorne be withdraw - room and 's sanctum from the passage above allude to ; which , as it come to the latter room , wide itself so as to make space for the huge black oak stair , which lead to the upper region . such be the interior of . but have thus describe it , perhaps somewhat too tediously , we beg to say that it be not the interior to which we wish to call the english tourist 's attention , though we advise he to lose no legitimate opportunity of become acquainted with it in a friendly manner . it be the outside of that be so lovely . let the tourist get admission at least into the garden , and fl himself on that soft award just opposite to the exterior angle of the house . he will there get the double frontage , and enjoy that which be so lovely -- the expanse of architectural beauty without the formal dullness of one long line . it be the colour of that be so remarkable . it be all of that delicious tawny hue which no stone can give , unless it have on it the vegetable richness of centurie . Strike the wall with you hand , and you will think that the stone have on it no covering , but rub it carefully , and you will find that the colour come off upon you finger . no colourist that ever yet work from a palette have be able to come up to this rich colouring of year crowd themselves on year . be a high building for a country house , for it possess three story ; and in each storey , the window be of the same sort as that describe , though varie in size , and varie also in they line athwart the house . those of the ground floor be all uniform in size and position . but those above be irregular both in size and place , and this irregularity give a bizarre and not unpicturesque appearance to the building . along the top , on every side , run a low parapet
parapet , which nearly hide the roof , and at the corner be more figure of fawn and satyr . be . but we must say one word of the approach to it , which shall include all the description which we mean to give of the church also . the picturesque old church of 's stand immediately opposite to the iron gate which open into the court , and be all but surround by the branch of lime tree , which form the avenue lead up to the house from both side . this avenue be magnificent , but it would lose much of its value in the eyes of many proprietor , by the fact that the road through it be not private property . it be a public lane between hedgerow , with a broad grass margin on each side of the road , from which the lime tree spring . , therefore , do not stand absolutely surround by its own grounds , though be owner of all the adjacent land . this , however , be the source of very little annoyance to he . men , when they be acquire property , think much of such thing , but they who live where they ancestor have live for year , do not feel the misfortune . it never occur to either or Thorne that they be not sufficiently private , because the world at large might , if it so wish , walk or drive by they iron gate . that part of the world which avail itself of the privilege be however very small . such a year or two since be the of . , we believe , be the inhabitant of many a english country home . may it be long before they number diminish . reads himself in at 's on the mor the archdeacon with he sister - in - law and drive over to , as have be arrange . on they way thither the new vicar declare himself to be considerably disturb in he mind at the idea of thus face he parishioner for the first time . he have , he say , be always subject to mauvaise hont and a annoying degree of bashfulness , which often unfit he for any work of a novel description ; and now he feel this so strongly that he fear he should acquit himself badly in 's reading - desk . he know , he say , that those sharp little eye of Thorne would be on to he , and that they would not approve . all this the archdeacon greatly ridicule . he himself know not , and have never know , what it be to be shy . he could not conceive that , surround as she would be by the peasant of , and a few of the poorer inhabitant of the suburb of , could in any way affect the composure of a man well accustom to address the learn congregation of 's at , and he laugh accordingly at the idea of 's modesty . Thereupon commence to subtilise . the change , he say , from 's to 's be quite as powerful on the spirit as would be that from 's to 's . would not a peer who , by chance of fortune , might suddenly be drive to hered among the navvie be as afraid of the jeer of he companion , as would any navvy suddenly exalt to a seat among the peer ? Whereupon the archdeacon declare with a loud laugh that he would tell Thorne that she new minister have like she to a navvy . , however , pronounce such a conclusion unfair ; a comparison might be very just in its proportion which do not at all assimilate the thing compare . but go in subtilising , regard neither the archdeacon 's raillery nor 's defence . a young lady , he say , would execute with most perfect self - possession a difficult piece of music in a room crowd with strangers , who would not be able to express herself in any intelligible language , even on any ordinary subject and among she most intimate friend , if she be require to do so stand on a box somewhat elevate among they . it be all a affair of education , and he at forty find it difficult to educate himself now . dissent on the matter of the box ; and averr she could speak very well about dress , or baby , or leg of mutton from any box , provide it be big enough for she to stand upon without fear , even though all she friend be listen to she . the archdeacon be sure she would not be able to say a word ; but this prove nothing in favour of . say that he would try the question out with , and get she on a box some day when the rectory might be full of visitor . to this assent , make condition that the visitor should be of they own set , and the archdeacon cogitate in he mind , whether by such a condition it be intend that should be include , resolve also that , if so , the trial should certainly never take place in the rectory draw - room at . and so argue , they drive up to the iron gate of . and Thorne be stand ready dress for church in the hall , and greet they clerical visitor with cordiality . the archdeacon be a old favourite . he be a clergyman of the old school , and this recommend he to the lady . he have always be a opponent of free trade as long as free trade be a open question ; and now that it be no longer so , he , be a
a clergyman , have not be oblige , like most of he lay Tory companion , to read he recantation . he could therefore be regard as a supporter of the immaculate fifty - three , and be on this account a favourite with . the little bell be tinkl , and the rural population be stand about the lane , lean on the church stile , and against the wall of the old court , anxious to get a look at they new minister as he pass from the house to the rectory . the archdeacon 's servant have already proceed they thither with the vestment . they all go together ; and when the lady pass into the church the three gentleman tarry a moment in the lane , that Thorne might name to the vicar with some kind of one - sided introduction , the most lead among he parishioner . ' here be we churchwarden , ; and . have the mill as you go into ; and very good churchwarden they be . ' ' not very severe , I hope , ' say : the two ecclesiastical officer touch they hat , and each make a leg in the approve rural fashion , assure the vicar that they be glad to have the honour of see he , and add that the weather be very good for the harvest . be a man somewhat verse in town life , have a impression of he own dignity , and do not quite like leave he pastor under the erroneous idea that he be a churchwarden keep the child in order during church time . ' Twas thus he understand 's allusion to he severity , and hasten to put matter right by observe that ' look to the youngun , and perhaps sometimes there maybe a thought too much stick go on during sermon . ' 's bright eye twinkle as he catch that of the archdeacon ; and he smile to himself as he observe how ignorant he officer be of the nature of they authority , and of the surveillance which it be they duty to keep even over himself . read the lesson and preach . it be enough to put a man a little out , let he have be ever so use to pulpit reading , to see the know way in which the farmer cock they ear , and set about a mental criticism as to whether they new minister do or do not fall short of the excellence of he who have lately depart from they . a mental and silent criticism it be for the exist moment , but soon to be make public among the elder of 's over the green grave of they child and forefather . the excellence , however , of poor old have not be wonderful , and there be few there who do not deem that do he work sufficiently well , in spite of the slightly nervous affection which at first imped he , and which nearly drive the archdeacon beside himself . but the sermon be the thing to try the man . it often surprise we that very young man can muster courage to preach for the first time to a strange congregation . who be as yet little more than boy , who have but just leave , what indeed we may not call a school , but a seminary intend for they tuition as scholar , whose thought have be mostly of boating , cricket , and wine party , ascend a rostrum high above the head of the submissive crowd , not that they may read 's word to those below , but that they may preach they own word for the edification of they hearer . it seem strange to we that they be not stricken dumb by the new and awful solemnity of they position . how be I , just turn twenty - three , who have never yet pass then thoughtful day since the power of thought first come to I , how be I to instruct these grey beard , who with the weary thinking of so many year have approach so near the grave ? can I teach they they duty ? can I explain to they that which I so imperfectly understand , that which year of study may have make so plain to they ? have my newly acquire privileges , as one of 's ministers , impart to I as yet any fitness for the wonderful work of a preacher ? it must be suppose that such idea do occur to young clergyman , and yet they overcome , apparently with ease , this difficulty which to we appear to be all but insurmountable . we have never be subject in the way of ordination to the power of a bishop 's hand . it may be that there be in they something that sustain the spirit and banish the natural modesty of youth . but for ourselves we must own that the deep affection which feel for he young pupil have not more endear he to we than the bashful spirit which send he mute and inglorious from the pulpit when he rise there with the futile attempt to preach 's gospel . there be a rule in we church which forbid the younger order of we clergyman to perform a certain portion of the service . the absolution must be read by a minister in priest 's order . if there be no such minister present , the congregation can have the benefit of no absolution but that which each may succeed in administering to himself . the rule may be a good one , though the necessity for it hardly come home to the general understanding . but this forbearance on the part of youth would be much more appreciate if it be extend
extend likewise to sermon . the only danger would be that the congregation would be too anxious to prevent they young clergyman from advance themselves to the rank of the ministry . Clergymen who could not preach would be such blessing that they would be bribe to adhere to they incompetence . , however , have not the modesty of youth to impede he , and he succeed with he sermon even better than with the lesson . he take for he text two verse out of the second epistle of : ' Whosoever trangresseth , and abideth not in the doctrine of , not . he that abideth in the doctrine of he hath both the and . if there come any unto you and bring you not this doctrine , receive he not into you house , neither bid he speed . ' he tell they that the house of theirs to which he allude be this they church in which he now address they for the first time ; that they most welcome and proper manner of bid he speed would be they patient obedience to this teaching of the gospel ; but that he could put forward no claim to such conduct on they part unless he teach they the great doctrine of work and faith combine . on this he enlarge , but not very amply , and after twenty minute succeed in send he new friend home to they and pudd well pleased with they new minister . then come the lunch at . as soon as they be in the hall miss Thorne take 's hand , and assure he that she receive he into she house , into the temple , she say , in which she worship , and bade he speed with all she heart . be touch , and squeeze the spinster 's hand without uttere a word in reply . then Thorne express a hope that find the church easy to fill , and have reply that he have no doubt he should do so as soon as he have learn to pitch he voice to the building , they all sit down to the good thing before they . Thorne take special care of . still wear she widow 's weed , and therefore have about she that air of grave and sad maternity which be the lot of recent widow . this open the soft heart of , and make she look on she young guest as though too much could not be do for she . she heape chicken and ham upon she plate , and pour out for she a full bumper of port wine . when , who be not sorry to get it , have drink a little of it , Thorne at once essay to fill it again . to this object , but in vain . Thorne wink and nod and whisper , say that it be the proper thing and must be do , and that she know all about it ; and so she desire to drink it up , and mind any body . ' it be you duty , you know , to support yourself , ' she say into the ear of the young mother ; ' there be more than yourself depend on it ;' and thus she cosher up with cold fowl and port wine . how it be that poor man 's wife , who have no cold fowl and port wine on which to be cosher up , nurse they child without difficulty , whereas the wife of rich man , who eat and drink everything that be good , can not do so , we will for the present leave to the doctor and mother to settle between they . and then be great about tooth . have be troublead for the last few day with he first incipient masticator , and with that freemasonry which exist between lady , Thorne become aware of the fact before have half finish she wing . the old lady prescribe at once a receipt which have be much in vogue in the young day of she grandmother , and warne with solemn voice against the fallacy of modern medicine . ' take he coral , my dear , ' say she , ' and rub it well with carrot - juice ; rub it till the juice dry on it , and then give it to he to play with - - ' ' but he have not get a coral , ' say . ' not get a coral ! ' say , with almost angry vehemence . ' not get a coral ! -- how can you expect that he should cut he tooth ? have you get 's ? ' explain that she have not . it have not be order by , the doctor whom she employ ; and then the young mother mention some shockingly modern succedaneum , which 's new light have teach he to recommend . Thorne look awfully severe . ' take care , my dear , ' say she , ' that the man know what he be about ; take care he do not destroy you little boy . ' but '-- and she voice soften into sorrow as she say it , and speak more in pity than in anger --' but I do not know who there be in now that you can trust . poor dear old , indeed -- ' ' why , , he die when I be a little girl . ' ' yes , my dear , he do , and a unfortunate day it be for . as to those young man that have come up since ' ( , by the by , be quite as old as herself ) , ' one do not know where they come from or who they be ,
, or whether they know anything about they business or not . ' 'I think there be very clever man in , ' say . ' perhaps there may be ; only I do not know they ; and it be admit on all side that medical man be not now what they use to be . they use to be talent , observe , educated man . but now any whipper -snapper out of a apothecary 's shop can call himself a doctor . I believe no kind of education be now think necessary . ' be herself the widow of a medical man , and feel a little inclin to resent all these hard saying . but Thorne be so essentially good - nature that it be impossible to resent anything she say . she therefore sip she wine and finish she chicken . ' at any rate , my dear , do not forget the carrot - juice , and by all means get he a coral at once . my grandmother Thorne have the best tooth in the county , and carry they to the grave with she at eighty . I have hear she say it be all the carrot - juice . she could not bear the doctor . even poor do not please she . ' it clearly never occur to Thorne that some fifty year ago be only a rise man , and therefore as much in need of character in the eyes of the then lady of , as the present doctor be in she own . the archdeacon make a very good lunch , and talk to he host about turnip - driller and new machine for reaping ; while the host , think it only polite to attend to a stranger , and fear that perhaps he might not care about turnip crop on a , moo all manner of ecclesiastical subject . 'I never see a heavier lot of wheat , , than you have get there in the field beyond the copse . I suppose that be guano , ' say the archdeacon . ' yes , guano . I get it from myself . you will find you often have a tolerable congregation of people out here , . they be very fond of 's , particularly of a afternoon , when the weather be not too hot for a walk . ' 'I be under a obligation to they for stay away today , at any rate , ' say the vicar . ' the congregation can never be too small for a maiden sermon . ' 'I get a ton and a half at 's in , ' say the archdeacon , ' and it be a complete take in . I do not believe there be five hundred - weight of guano in it . ' ' that never have anything good , ' say , who have just catch the name during she whispering with . ' and such a nice shop as there use to be in that very house before he come . , do not you remember what good thing old Ambleoff use to have ? ' ' there have be three man since 's time , ' say the archdeacon , ' and each as bad as the other . but who get it for you at , ? ' 'I run up myself this year and buy it out of the ship . I be afraid as the evening get shorter , , you will find the reading desk too dark . I must send a fellow with a axe and make he lop off some of those branch . ' declare that the morning light at any rate be perfect , and deprecate any interference with the lime tree . and then they take a stroll out among the trim parterre , and explain to the difference between a naiad and a dryad , and dilate on vase and the shape of urn . Thorne busy herself among the pansy ; and she brother , finde it quite impracticable to give anything of a peculiarly tone to the conversation , abandon the attempt , and have it out with the archdeacon about the guano . at three o'clock they again go into church ; and now read the service and the archdeacon preach . Nearly the same congregation be present , with some adventurous pedestrian from the city , who have not think the heat of the sin too great to deter they . the archdeacon take he text from the of . 'I beseech thee for my son , whom I have beget in my bond . ' from such a text it may be imagine the kind of sermon which Grantly preach , and on the whole it be neither dull , nor bad , nor out of place . he tell they it have become he duty to look about for a pastor for they ; to supply the place of one who have be long among they ; and that in this manner he regard as a son he whom he have select , as have regard the young disciple whom he send forth . then he take a little merit to himself for have studiously provide the best man he could without reference to patronage or favour ; but he do not say that the best man accord to he view be he who be best able to subdue , and make that gentleman 's situation in too hot to be comfortable . as to the bond , they have consist in the exceeding struggle which he have make to get a good clergyman for they . he deprecate any comparison between himself and , but say that he be entitle to beseech they for they good will towards , in the same manner that the apostle have besotch and he household
household with regard to . the archdeacon 's sermon , text , bless and all , be conclude within the half hour . then they shook hand with they Ullathorne friend , and return to . 'Tbe thus that read himself in at 's . 's very cleverly at the next two week pass pleasantly enough at . the whole party there assemble seem to get on well together . make the house agreeable , and the archdeacon and seem to have forget she injury as regard . have he violoncello , and play to they while he daughter accompany he . , by the help either of or else by that of he coral and carrot - juice , get through he teething trouble . there have be gaiety too of all sort . they have dine at , and the Thorne have dine at the rectory . have be duly put to stand on she box , and in that position have find herself quite unable to express she opinion on the merit of flounce , such have be the subject give to try she elocution . have of course be much in he own parish , look to the doings at he vicarage , call on he parishioner , and take on himself the duty of he new calling . but still he have be every evening at , and Grantly be partly willing to agree with she husband that he be a pleasant inmate in a house . they have also be at a dinner party at 's , of which have make one . he also , moth - like , bur not he wing in the flame of the signora 's candle . , too , have be there , and have felt somewhat displease with the taste , want of taste she call it , show by in pay so much attention to . it be as infallible that Madeline should displease and irritate the woman , as that she should charm and captivate the man . the one result follow naturally on the other . it be quite true that have be charme . he think she a very clever and a very handsome woman ; he think also that she peculiar affliction entitle she to the sympathy of all . he have never , he say , meet so much suffer join to such perfect beauty and so clear a mind . ' Twas thus he speak of the signora come home in the archdeacon 's carriage ; and by no means like to hear the praise . it be , however , exceedingly unjust of she to be angry with , as she have herself spend a very pleasant evening with , who have take she down to dinner , and have not leave she side for one moment after the gentleman come out of the dining - room . it be unfair that she should amuse herself with and yet begrudge she new friend he licence of amuse himself with 's sister . and yet she do so . she be half angry with he in the carriage , and say something about meretricious manners . do not understand the way of woman very well , or else he might have flatter himself that be in love with he . but be not in love with he . how many shade there be between love and indifference , and how little the graduate scale be understood ! she have now be nearly three week in the same house with , and have receive much of he attention , and listen daily to he conversation . he have usually devote at least some portion of he evening to she exclusively . at 's he have devote himself exclusively to another . it do not require that a woman should be in love to be irritate at this ; it do not require that she should even acknowledge to herself that it be unpleasant to she . have no such self - knowledge . she think in she own heart it be only on 's account that she regret that he could condescmend to be amuse by the signora . 'I think he have more mind , ' she say to herself , as she sit watch she baby 's cradle on she return from the party . 'After all , I believe be the pleasanter man of the two . ' Alas for the memory of poor ! be not in love with , nor be she in love with . but she devotion to she late husband be fast fade , when she could revolve in she mind , over the cradle of he infant , the fault and failings of other aspirant to she favour . will any one blame my heroine for this ? let he or she rather thank for all his goodness , -- for he mercy endureth for ever . , in truth , be not in love ; neither be . neither indeed be , though he have already find occasion to say nearly as much as that he be . the widow 's cap have prevent he from make a positive declaration , when otherwise he would have consider himself entitle to do so on a third or fourth interview . it be , after all , but a small cap now , and have but little of the weeping - willow left in its construction . it be singular how these emblem of grief fade away by unseen gradation . each pretend to be the counterpart of the forerunner , and yet the last little bit of crimped white crape that sit so jauntily on the back of the head , be as dissimilar to the first huge mountain of woe which disfigure the face of the weeper , as the state of the be to the jointure of the english dowager
dowager . but let it be clearly understand that be in love with no one , and that no one be in love with . under these circumstance she anger against do not last long , and before two day were over they be both as good friend as ever . she could not but like he , for every hour spend in he company be spend pleasantly . and yet she could not quite like he , for there be always apparent in he conversation a certain feeling on he part that he hardly think it worth he while to be in earnest . it be almost as though he be play with a child . she know well enough that he be in truth a sober thoughtful man , who in some matters and on some occasion could endure a agony of earnestness . and yet to she he be always gently playful . could she have see he brow once cloude she might have learnt to love he . so thing go on at , and on the whole not unpleasantly , till a huge storm darken the horizon , and come down upon the inhabitant of the rectory with all the fury of a water - spout . it be astonish how in a few minute the whole face of the heaven be change . the party break up from breakfast in perfect harmony ; but fierce passion have arisen before the evening , which do not admit of they sit at the same board for dinner . to explain this , it will be necessary to go back a little . it will be remember that the bishop express to in he dressing - room , he determination that should be confirm in he appointment to the hospital , and that he lordship request to communicate this decision to the archdeacon . it will also be remember that the archdeacon have indignantly decline see , and have , instead , write a strong letter to the bishop , in which he all but demand the situation of warden for . to this letter the archdeacon receive a immediate formal reply from , in which it be state , that the bishop have receive and would give he best consideration to the archdeacon 's letter . the archdeacon feel himself somewhat checkmate by this reply . what could he do with a man who would neither see he , nor argue with he by letter , and who have undoubtedly the power of appoint any clergyman he please ? he have consult with , who have suggest the propriety of call in the aid of the master of . ' if , ' say he , ' you and formally declare you intention of wait upon the bishop , the bishop will not dare to refuse to see you ; and if two such man as you see he together , you will probably not leave he without carry you point . ' the archdeacon do not quite like admit the necessity of he be back by the master of before he could obtain admission into the episcopal palace of ; but still he feel that the advice be good , and he resolve to take it . he write again to the bishop , express a hope that nothing further would be do in the matter of the hospital , till the consideration promise by he lordship have be give , and then send off a warm appeal to he friend the master , implor he to come to Plumstead and assist in drive the bishop into compliance . the master have rejoin , raise some difficulty , but not decline ; and the archdeacon again press he point , insist on the necessity for immediate action . unfortunately have the gout , and could therefore name no immediate day , but still agree to come , if it should be finally find necessary . so the matter stood , as regard the party at . but have another friend fight the battle for he , quite as powerful as the master of , and this be . though the bishop have so pertinaciously insist on give way to he wife in the matter of the hospital , do not think it necessary to abandon the object . he have , he think , daily more and more reason to imagine that the widow would receive he overture favourably , and he could not but feel that Hard at the hospital , and place there by he means would be more likely to receive he as a son - in - law , than grow in opposition and disappointment under the archdeacon 's wing at . moreover , to give due credit , he be actuate by greater motive even than these . he want a wife , and he want money , but he want power more than either . he have fully realise the fact that he must come to blow with . he have no desire to remain in as she chaplain . than do so , he would risk the loss of he whole connection with the diocese . what ! be he to feel within he the possession of no ordinary talents ; be he to know himself to be courageous , firm , and , in matter where he conscience do not interfere , unscrupulous ; and yet be contente to be the work factotum of a woman - prelate ? have higher idea of he own destiny . either he or must go to the wall ; and now have come the time when he would try which it would be . the bishop have declare that should be the new warden . as go down stair prepare to see the archdeacon if necessary , but fully satisfied that no such necessity would arise , he declare to himself
himself that should be warden . with the object of carry this point he ride over to , and have a further interview with the worthy expectant of clerical good thing . be on the whole a worthy man . the impossible task of bring up as lady and gentleman fourteen child on a income which be insufficient to give they with decency the common necessity of life , have have a effect upon he not beneficial either to he spirit , or he keen sense of honour . who can boast that he would have support such a burden with a different result ? be a honest , pain - stak , drudge man ; anxious , indeed , for bread and meat , anxious for means to quiet he butcher and cover with returning smile the now sour countenance of the baker 's wife , but anxious also to be right with he own conscience . he be not careful , as another might be who sit on a easier worldly seat , to stand well with those around he , to shin a breath which might sully he name , or a rumour which might affect he honour . he could not afford such nicety of conduct , such moral luxuries . it must suffice for he to be ordinarily honest accord the ordinary honesty of the world 's way , and to let man 's tongue wag as they would . he have feel that he brother clergyman , man whom he have know for the last twenty year , look coldly on he from the first moment that he have show himself willing to sit at the foot of ; he have see that they look grew colder still , when it become bruited about that he be to be the bishop 's new warden at 's hospital . this be painful enough ; but it be the cross which he be doom to bear . he think of he wife , whose last new silk dress be six year in wear . he think of all he young flock , whom he could hardly take to church with he on , for there be not decent shoe and stocking for they all to wear . he think of the well - worn sleeve of he own black coat , and of the stern face of the draper from whom he would fain ask for cloth to make another , do he not know that the credit would be refuse he . then he think of the comfortable house in , of the comfortable income , of he boy send to school , of the girl with book in they hand instead of darning needle , of he wife 's face again cover with smile , and of he daily board again cover with plenty . he think of all these thing ; and do thou also , reader , think of they , and then wonder , if thou canst , that have appear to he to possess all those good gift which would grase a bishop 's chaplain . ' how beautiful upon the mountain be the foot of he that bringeth good tiding . ' why , moreover , should the clergy have look so coldly on ? have they not all show that they regard with complacency the loave and fish of they mother church ? have they not all , by some hook or crook , do better for themselves than he have do ? they be not burden as he be burden . Dr Grantly have five child , and nearly as many thousand a year on which to feed they . it be very well for he to turn up he nose at a new bishop who could do nothing for he , and a chaplain who be beneath he notice ; but it be cruel in a man so circumstance to set the world against the father of fourteen child because he be anxious to obtain for they a honourable support ! he , , have not ask for the wardenship ; he have not even accept it till he have be assure that have refuse it . how hard than that he should be blame for do that which not to have do would have argue a most insane imprudence ! thus in this matter of the hospital poor have he trial ; and he have also he consolation . on the whole the consolation be the more vivid of the two . the stern draper heard of the come promotion , and the wealth of he warehouse be at 's disposal . come event cast they shadow before , and the come event of 's transference to produce a delicious shadow in the shape of a new outfit for and she three elder daughter . such consolation come home to the heart of a man , and quite home to the heart of a woman . whatever the husband might feel , the wife car nothing for the frown of the dean , archdeacon , or prebendary . to she the outside and insides of she husband and fourteen child be everything . in she bosom every other ambition have be swallow up in that maternal ambition of see they and he and herself duly clad and properly feed . it have come to that with she that life have now no other purpose . she reck nothing of the imaginary rights of other . she have no patience with she husband when he declare to she that he could not accept the hospital unless he know that have refuse it . she husband have no right to be quixotic at the expense of fourteen child . the narrow escape of throw away he good fortune which she lord have have , almost paralyse she . now , indeed , they have receive the full promise
promise not only from , but also from . now , indeed , they might reckon with safety on they good fortune . but what if it all have be lose ? what if she fourteen bairn have be restee to the hip in poverty by the morbid sentimentality of they father ? be just at present a happy woman , but yet it nearly take she breath away when she think of the risk they have run . 'I do not know what you father mean when he talk so much of what be due to , ' she say to she eldest daughter . ' do he think that would give he l 450 out of fine feeling ? and what signify it when he offend , as long as he get the place ? he do not expect anything better . it pass I to think how you father can be so soft , while everybody around he be so griping . ' this , while the rest of the world be accuse of rapacity for promotion and disregard for he honour , the inner world of he own household be fall foul of he , with equal vehemence , for he willingness to sacrifice they interest to a false feeling of sentimental pride . it be astonish how much difference the point of view make in the aspect of all that we look at ! such be the feeling of the different member of the family at on the occasion of 's second visit . , as soon as she see he horse come up the avenue from the vicarage gate , hastily pack up she huge basket of needlework , and hurrie herself and she daughter out of the room in which she be sit with she husband . ' it be , ' she say . 'he be come to settle with you about the hospital . I do hope we shall now be able to move at once . ' and she hasten to bid the maid of all work to go to the door , so that the welcome great man might not be keep wait . thus find alone . go off to she kitchen and back settlement with anxious beating heart , almost dread that there might be some slip between the cup of she happiness and the lip of she fruition , but yet comfort herself with the reflection that after what have take place , any such slip could hardly be possible . Slope be all smile as he shook he brother clergyman 's hand , and say that he have ride over because he think it right at once to put in possession of the fact of the matter regard the wardenship of the hospital . as he speak , the poor expectant husband and father see at a glance that he brilliant hope be to be dash to the ground , and that he visitor be now there for the purpose of unsay what on he former visit he have say . there be something in the tone of the voice , something in the glance of the eye , which tell the tale . know it all at once . he maintain he self - possession , however , smile with a slight unmeaning smile , and merely say that he be oblige to for the trouble he be take . ' it have be a troublesome matter from first to last , ' say ; 'and the bishop have hardly know how to act . between ourselves -- but mind this of course must go no farther , . ' say of course that it should not . ' the truth be , that poor Mr Harding have hardly know he own mind . you remember we last conversation , no doubt . ' assure he that he remember it very well indeed . ' you will remember that I tell you that have refuse to return to the hospital . ' declare that nothing could be more distinct in he memory . ' and act on this refusal I suggest that you should take the hospital , ' continue . 'I understand you to say that the bishop have authorise you to offer it to I . ' ' do I ? do I go so far as that ? well , perhaps it may be , that in my anxiety on you behalf I do commit myself further than I should have do . so far as my own memory serve I , I do not think I do go quite so far as that . but I own I be very anxious that you should get it ; and I may have say more than be quite prudent . ' ' but , ' say , in he deep anxiety to prove he case , 'my wife receive as distinct a promise from as one human be could give to another . ' smile , and gently shook he head . he mean that smile for a pleasant smile , but it be diabolical in the eyes of the man he be speak to . ' ! ' he say . ' if we be to go to what pass between the ladie in these matters , we shall really be in a nest of trouble from which we shall never extricate ourselves . be a most excellent lady , kind - hear , charitable , pious , and in every way estimable . but , my dear , the patronage of the diocese be not in she hand . ' for a moment sit panic - stricken and silent . ' be I to understand , then , that I have receive no promise ? ' he say , as soon as he have sufficiently collect he thought . ' if you will allow I , I will tell you exactly
exactly how the matter rest . you certainly do receive a promise conditional on 's refusal . I be sure you will do I the justice to remember that you yourself declare that you could accept the appointment on no other condition than the knowledge that have decline it . ' ' yes , ' say ; 'I do say that , certainly . ' ' well ; it now appear that he do not refuse it . ' ' but surely you tell I , and repeat it more than once , that he have do so in you hearing . ' ' so I understand he . but it seem I be in error . but do not for a moment , , suppose that I mean to throw you over . no . have hold out my hand to a man in you position , with you large family and press claim , I be not now go to draw it back again . I only want you to act with I fairly and honestly . ' ' whatever I do , I shall endeaavor at any rate to act fairly , ' say the poor man , feel that he have to fall back for support on the spirit of martyrdom within he . 'I be sure you will , ' say the other . 'I be sure you have no wish to obtain possession of a income which belong by all rights to another . no man know better than you do 's history , or can better appreciate he character . be very desirous of return to he old position , and the bishop feel that he be at the present moment somewhat hamper , though of course he be not bound , by the conversation which take place on the matter between you and I . ' ' well , ' say , dreadfully doubtful as to what he conduct under such circumstance should be , and fruitlessly strive to hare he nerve with some of that instinct of self -preservation which make he wife so bold . ' the wardenship of this little hospital be not the only thing in the bishop 's gift , , nor be it by many degree the best . and he lordship be not the man to forget any one whom he have once mark with approval . if you would allow I to advise you as a friend -- ' ' indeed I shall be grateful to you , ' say the poor vicar of -- 'I should advise you to withdraw from any opposition to 's claim . if you persist in you demand , I do not think you will ultimately succeed . have all but a positive right to the place . but if you will allow I to inform he lordship that you decline to stand in 's way , I think I may promise you -- though , by the bye , it must not be take as a formal promise -- that the bishop will not allow you to be a poorer man than you would have be have you become warden . ' sit in he arm chair silent , gaze at vacancy . what be he to say ? all this that come from be so true . have a right to the hospital . the bishop have a great many good thing to give away . both the bishop and would be excellent friend and terrible enemie to a man in he position . and then he have no proof of any promise ; he could not force the bishop to appoint he . ' well , , what do you say about it ? ' 'Oh , of course , whatever you think , . it be a great disappointment , a very great disappointment . I will not deny that I be a very poor man , . ' ' in the end , , you will find that it will have be better for you . ' the interview end in receive a full renunciation from of any claim he might have to the appointment in question . it be only give verbally and without witness ; but then the original promise be make in the same way . assure he that he should not be forget , and then ride back to , satisfi that he would now be able to mould the bishop to he wish . in of 's we have most of we heard of the terrible anger of a lioness when , surround by she cub , she guard she prey . few of we wish to disturb the mother of a litter of puppy when mouth a bone in the midst of she young family . and she child be familiar to we , and so be the grief of Constance . , when she first hear from she husband the news which he have to impart , feel within she bosom all the rage of a lioness , the rapacity of the hound , the fury of the tragic queen , and the deep despair of a bereaved mother . , but yet hardly fear , what might have be the tenor of 's discourse , she rush back to she husband as soon as the front door be close behind the visitor . it be well for that he have so escaped , -- the anger of such a woman , at such a moment , would have cow even he . as a general rule , it be highly desirable that lady should keep they temper ; a woman when she storm always make herself ugly , and usually ridiculous also . there be nothing so odious to man as a virago . though love a , he show he love but roughly ; and from the time of downward , no man ever wish
wish to have he wife remarkable rather for forward prowess than retire gentleness . may be lay down as a general rule ; and few woman should allow themselves to deviate from it , and then only on rare occasion . but if there be a time when a woman may let she hair to the wind , when she may loose she arm , and scream out trumpet - tongue to the ear of man , it be when nature call out within she not for she own want , but for the wants of those whom she womb have borne , whom she breast have suck , for those who look to she for they daily bread as naturally as man look to he Creator . there be nothing poetic in the nature of . she be neither a nor a Constance . when angry , she speak out she anger in plain word , and in a tone which might have be modulate with advantage ; but she do so , at any rate , without affectation . now , without know it , she rise to a tragic vein . ' well , my dear ; we be not to have it . ' such be the word with which she ears be greet when she enter the parlour , still hot from the kitchen fire . and the face of she husband speak even more plainly than he word :--" e 'en such a man , so faint , so spiritless , so dull , so dead in look , so woe - begone , 's curtain in the dead of night . " ' what ! ' say she , -- and could not have put more passion into a single syllable ,--' what ! not have it ? who say so ? ' and she sit opposite to she husband , with she elbow on the table , she hand clasp together , and she coarse , solid , but once handsome face stretch over it towards he . she sit as silent as death while he tell he story , and very dreadful to he she silence be . he tell it very lamely and badly , but still in such a manner that she soon understand the whole of it . ' and so you have resign it ? ' say she . 'I have have no opportunity of accept it ,' he reply . 'I have no witness to 's offer , even if that offer would bind the bishop . it be better for I , on the whole , to keep on good term with such man than to fight for what I should never get ! ' ' witness ! ' she scream , rise quickly to she foot , and walk up and down the room . ' do clergyman require witness to they word ? he make the promise in the bishop 's name , and if it be to be break I will know the reason why . do he not positively say that the bishop have send he to offer you the place ? ' ' he do , my dear . but that be now nothing to the purpose . ' ' it be everything to the purpose , . witness indeed ! and then to talk of you honou be question because you wish to provide for fourteen child . it be everything to the purpose ; and so they shall know , if I scream it into they ear from the town cross of . ' ' you forget , , that the bishop have so many thing in he gift . we must wait a little longer . that be all . ' ' wait ! shall we feed the child by waiting ? will wait put and , and , out into the world ? will it enable my poor girl to give up some of they drudgery ? will wait make and fit even to be governess ? will wait pay for the thing we get in last week ? ' ' it be all we can do , my dear . the disappointment be as much to I as to you ; and yet , know , I feel it more for you sake than my own . ' be look full into she husband 's face , and see a small hot tear appear on each of those furrow cheek . this be too much for she woman 's heart . he also have risen , and be stand with he back to the empty grate . she rush towards he , and seize he in she arm , sob aloud upon he bosom . ' yes , you be too good , too soft , too yielding , ' she say at last . ' these man , when they want you , they use you like a cat 's - paw ; and when they want you no longer , they throw you aside like a old shoe . this be twice they have treat you so . ' ' in one way this will be for the better , ' argue he . ' it will make the bishop feel that he be bound to do something for I . ' ' at any rate , he shall hear of it , ' say the lady , again revert to she more angry mood . ' at any rate he shall hear of it , and that loudly ; and so shall she . she little know , if she think I will sit down quietly with the loss after all that pass between we at the palace . if there be any feeling within she , I will make she asham of herself , ' -- and she pace the room again , stampe the floor as she go with she fat
fat heavy foot . ' good heaven ! what a heart she must have within she to treat in such a way as this the father of fourteen unprovided child ! ' proceed to explain that he do not think that have anything to do with it . ' do not tell I , ' say ; 'I know more about it than that . do not all the world know that be bishop of , and that be merely she creature ? be not it she that make I the promise just as though the thing be in she own particular gift ? I tell you , it be that woman who send he over here to - day because , for some reason of she own , she want to go back on she word . ' 'My dear , you be wrong --' ' now , q , do not be so soft , ' she continue . ' take my word for it , the bishop know no more about it than do . ' be the two - year old . ' and if you will take my advice , you will lose no time in go over and see he yourself . ' , however , as might be , he would not allow himself to be talk out of he opinion on this occasion ; and proceed with much minuteness to explain to he wife the tone in which have speak of 's interference in diocesan matters . as he do so , a new idea gradually instil itself into the matron 's head , and a new course of action present itself to she judgement . what if , after all , know nothing of this visit of ? in that case , might it not be possible that that lady would still be staunch to she in this matter , still stand she friend , and , perhaps , possibly carry she through in opposition to ? say nothing as this vague hope occur to she , but listen with more than ordinary patience to what she husband have to say . while he be still explain that in all probability the world be wrong in its estimation of 's power and authority , she have fully make up she mind as to she course of action . she do not , however , proclaim she intention . she shook she head continuously , as he continue he narration ; and when he have complete she rise to go , merely observe that it be cruel , cruel treatment . she then ask if he would mind wait for a late dinner instead of dining at they usual hour of three , and , have receive from he a concession on this point , she proceed to carry she purpose into execution . she determine that she would at once go to the palace ; that she would do so , if possible , before could have have a interview with ; and that she would be either submissive , piteous and pathetic , or indignant violent and exact , accord to the manner in which she be receive . she be quite confident in she own power . strengthen as she be by the pressing wants of fourteen child , she feel that she could make she way through legion of episcopal servants , and force herself , if need be , into the presence of the lady who have so wronge she . she have no shame about it , no mauvaise hont , no dread of archdeacon . she would , as she declare to she husband , make she wail hear in the market - place if she do not get redress and justice . it might be very well for a unmarried young curate to be shameface in such matter ; it might be all right that a smug rector , really in want of nothing , but still look for better preferment , should carry out he affair decently under the rose . but , with fourteen child , have give over be shameface , and , in some thing , have give over be decent . if it be intend that she should be ill use in the manner propose by , it should not be do under the rose . all the world would know of it . in she present mood , be not over careful about she attire . she tie she bonnet under she ching , throw she shawl over she shoulders , arm herself with the old family cotton umbrella , and start for . a journey to the palace be not quite so easy a thing for as for we friend at . Plumstead be nine mile from , and be but four . but the archdeacon could order round he brougham , and he high - trot fast bay gelding would take he into the city within the hour . there be no brougham in the coach - house of Puddingdale Vicarage , no bay horse in the stable . there be no method of locomotion for its inhabitant but that which nature have assign to man . be a broad heavy woman , not young , nor give to walk . in she kitchen , and in the family dormitory , she be active enough ; but she pace and gait be not adapt for the road . a walk into and back in the middle of a day would be to she a terrible task , if not altogether impracticable . there be live in the parish about half a mile from the vicarage on the road to the city , a decent , kindly farmer , well to do as regard this world , and so far mindful of the next that he attend he parish church with decent regularity . to he have before
before now appeal in some of she more pressing family trouble , and have not appeal in vain . at he door she now present herself , and , have explain to he wife that most urgent business require she to go at once to , beg that would take she thither in he tax - cart . the farmer do not reject she plan ; and , as soon as could be get into he collar , they start on they journey . do not mention the purpose of she business , nor do the farmer alloy he kindness by any unseemly question . she merely beg to be put down at the bridge go into the city , and to be take up again at the same place in the course of two hour . the farmer promise to be punctual to he appointment , and the lady , support by she umbrella , take the short cut to the close , and in a few minute be at the bishop 's door . she have feel no dread with regard to the come interview . she have feel nothing but a indignant longing to pour forth she claim , and declare she wrongs , if those claim be not fully admit . but now the difficulty of she situation touch she a little . she have be at the palace once before , but then she go to give grateful thanks . those who have thanks to return for favour receive find easy admittance to the hall of the great . be not always the case with man , or even woman , who have favour to beg . still less easy be access for those who demand the fulfilment of promise already make . have not be slow to learn the way of the world . she know all this , and she know also that she cotton umbrella and all but rag shawl would not command respect in the eyes of the palace servants . if she be too humble , she know well that she would never succeed . to overcome by imperious overbearing with such a shawl as hers upon she shoulders , and such a bonnet on she head , would have require a personal bear very superior to that which nature have endow she . of this also be aware . she must make it know she be the wife of a gentleman and a clergyman , and must yet condescmend to conciliate . the poor lady know but one way to overcome these difficulty at the very threshold of she enterprise , and to this she resorte . low as be the domestic fund at , she still retain possession of a half - crown , and this she sacrifice to the avarice of 's metropolitan sesquipedalian serving - man . she be , she say , of , the wife of the . she wish to see . it be indeed quite indispensible that she should see . look worse than dubious , do not know whether he lady be out , or engage , or in she bed - room ; think it most probable that she be subject to one of these or to some cause that would make she invisible ; but could sit down in the waiting - room , while inquiry be be make of . ' look here , man , ' say ; 'I must see she ;' and she put she card and half - crown -- think of it , my reader , think of it ; she last half - crown -- into the man 's hand , and sit herself down on a chair in the waiting - room . whether the bribe carry the day , or whether the bishop 's wife really choose to see the vicar 's wife , it boot be not now to inquire . the man return , and begge to follow he , usher she into the presence of the mistress of the diocese . at once see that she patroness be in a smiling humour . sit thron upon she brow , and all the joy of dominion hover about she curl . she lord have that morning conteste with she a great point . he have receive a invitation to spend a couple of day with the archbishop . he soul longe for the gratification . not a word , however , in he grace 's note allude to the fact that he be a married man ; and , if he go at all , he must go alone . this necessity would have present a insurmountable bar to the visit , or have militate against the pleasure , have he be able to go without reference to . but this he could not do . he could not order he portmanteau to be pack , and start with he own man , merely tell the lady of he heart that he would probably be back on . there be man --may we not rather say monster ?-- who do such thing ; and there be wife -- may we not rather say slave ?-- who put up with such usage . but and be not among the number . the bishop with some beat about the bush , make the lady understand that he very much wish to go . the lady , without any beating about the bush , make the bishop understand that she would not hear of it . it would be useless here to repeat the argument that be use on each side , and needless to record the result . those who be marry will understand very well how the battle be lose and win ; and those who be single will never understand it till they learn the lesson which experience alone can give . when be show into 's room ,
, that lady have only return a few minute from she lord . but before she leave he she have see the answer to the archbishop 's note write and seal . no wonder that she face be wreathe with smile as she receive . she instantly speak of the subject which be so near the heart of she visitor . ' well , , ' say she , ' be it decide yet when you be to move to ? ' ' that woman ' , as she have a hour or two since be call , become instantly re-endowed with all the graces that can adorn a bishop 's wife . immediately see that she business be to be piteous , and that nothing be to be gain by indignation ; nothing , indeed , unless she could be indignant in company with she patroness . 'Oh , , ' she begin , ' I fear we be not to move to at all . ' ' why not ? ' say the lady sharply , drop at a moment 's notice she smile and condescension , and turn with she sharp quick way to business which she see at a glance be important . and then tell she tale . as she progress in the history of she wrongs she perceive that the heavier she lean upon the blacker become 's brow , but that such blackness be not injuriious to she own cause . when be at Puddingdale vicarage that morne she have regard he as the creature of the lady - bishop ; now she perceive that they be enemy . she admit she mistake to herself without any pain or humiliation . she have but one feeling , and that be confine to she family . she care little how she twist and turn among these new -comer at the bishop 's palace as long as she could twist she husband into the warden 's house . she care not which be she friend or which be she enemy , if only she could get this preference which she so sorely want . she tell she tale , and listen to it almost in silence . she tell how have cozen she husband into resign he claim , and have declare that it be the bishop 's will that none but should be warden . 's brow become blacker and blacker . at last she start from she chair , and begge to sit and wait for she return , march out of the room . 'Oh , , it be for fourteen child -- for fourteen child . ' such be the burden that fall on she ear as she close the door behind she . take a fall it be hardly a hour since have leave she husband 's apartment victorious , and yet so indomitable be she courage that she now return thither panting for another combat . she be greatly angry with what she think be he duplicity . he have so clearly give she a promise on this matter of the hospital . he have be already so absolutely vanquish on that point . begin to feel that if every affair be to be thus discuss and battle about twice and even thrice , the work of the diocese would be too much even for she . without knock at the door she walk quickly into she husband 's room and find he seat at he office table , with opposite to he . between he finger be the very note which he have write to the archbishop in she presence -- and it be open ! yes , he have absolutely violate the seal which have be make sacr by she approval . they be sit in deep conclave , and it be too clear that the purport of the archbishop 's invitation have be absolutely canvass again , after it have be already debat and decide on in obedience to she behest ! rise from he chair , and bow slightly . the two opposing spirit look each other fully in the face , and they know that they be look each at a enemy . ' what be this , bishop , about ? ' say she , come to the end of the table and stand there . do not allow the bishop to answer , but reply himself . 'I have be out to Puddingdale this morning , ma 'am , and have see . have abandon he claim to the hospital , because he be now aware that be desirous to fill he old place . under these circumstance I have strongly advise he lordship to nominate . ' have not abandon anything , ' say the lady , with a very imperious voice . ' he lordship 's word have be pledge to he , and it must be respect . ' the bishop still remain silent . he be anxiously desirous of make he old enemy bite the dust beneath he foot . he new ally have tell he that nothing be more easy for he than to do so . the ally be there now at he elbow to help he , and yet he courage fail he . it be so hard to conquer when the prestige of the former victories be all against one . it be so hard for the cock who have once be beaten out of he yard to resume he courage and again take a proud place upon a dunghill . ' perhaps I ought not to interfere , ' say , ' but yet -- ' ' certainly you ought not , ' say the infuriated dame . ' but yet , ' continue , not regard the interruption , 'I have think it my imperative duty to recommend to the bishop not to slight 's claim . ' should have know he own
own mind , ' say the lady . ' if be not replace at the hospital , he lordship will have to encounter much ill will , not only in the diocese , but in the world at large . besides , take a higher ground , he lordship , as I understand , feel it to be he duty to gratify , in this matter , so very worthy a man and so good a clergyman as . ' ' and what be to become of the Sabbath - day school , and of the service in the hospital ? ' say , with something very nearly approach to a sneer on she face . 'I understand that make no objection to the Sabbath - day school , ' say . ' and as to the hospital service , that matter will be best discuss after he appointment . if he have any personal objection , then , I fear , the matter must rest . ' ' you have a very easy conscience in such matter , , ' say she . 'I should not have a easy conscience ,' he rejoin , ' but a conscience very far from be easy , if anything say or do by I should lead the bishop to act unadvisedly on this matter . it be clear that in the interview I have with , I misunderstand he - - ' ' and it be equally clear that you have misunderstood , ' say she , not at the top of she wrath . ' what business have you at all with these interview ? who desire you to go to this morning ? who commission you to manage this affair ? will you answer I , sir ?-- who send you to this morning ? ' there be a dead pause in the room . have risen from he chair , and be stand with he hand on the back of it , look at first very solemn and now very black . be stand as she have at first place herself , at the end of the table , and as she interrogate she foe she strike she hand upon it with almost more than feminine vigour . the bishop be sit in he easy chair twiddl he thumb , turn he eye now to he wife , and now to he chaplain , as each take up the cudgel . how comfortable it would be if they could fight it out between they without the necessity of any interference on he part ; fight it out so that one should kill the other utterly , as far as the diocesan life be concerned , so that he , the bishop , might know clearly by whom it behove he to be lead . there would be the comfort of quiet in either case ; but if the bishop have a wish as to which might prove the victor , that wish be certainly not antagonistic to . ' better the you know than the devil you do not know ' , be a old saying , and perhaps a true one ; but the bishop have not yet realise the truth of it . ' will you answer I , sir ? ' she repeat . ' who instruct you to call on this morning ? ' there be another pause . ' do you intend to answer I , sir ? ' 'I think , , that under all the circumstance it will be better for I not to answer such a question , ' say . have many tone in he voice , all duly under he command ; among they be a sanctified low tone , and a sanctified loud tone ; and he now use the former . ' do anyone send you , sir ? ' ' , ' say , 'I be quite aware how much I owe to you kindness . I be aware also what be due by courtesy from a gentleman to a lady . but there be higher consideration than either of those , and I hope I shall be forgive if I now allow myself to be actuate solely by they . my duty in this matter be to he lordship , and I can admit of no questioning but from he . he have approve of what I have do , and you must excuse I if I say , that have that approval and my own , I want none other . ' what horrid word be these which greet the ear of ? the matter be indeed too clear . there be premeditate mutiny in the camp . not only have ill - conditioned mind become insubordinate by the fruition of a little power . the bishop have not yet be twelve month in this chair , and rebellion have already rear she hideous head within the palace . Anarchy and misrule would quickly follow , unless she take immediate and strong measure to put down the conspiracy which she have detect . , ' she say , with slow and dignify voice , differ much from that which she have hitherto use , , I will trouble you , if you please , to leave the apartment . I wish to speak to my lord alone . ' also feel that everything depend on the present interview . should the bishop now be repetticoate , he thraldom would be complete and for ever . the present moment be peculiarly propitious for rebellion . the bishop have clearly commit himself by break the seal of the answer to the archbishop ; he have therefore fear to influence he . have tell he that no consideration ought to induce he to refuse the archbishop 's invitation ; he have therefore hope to influence he . he have accept 's resignation , and therefore dread have to
to renew that matter with he wife . he have be screw up to the pitch of assert a will of he own , and might possibly be carry on till by a absolute success he should have be teach how possible it be to succeed . now be the moment for victory or rout . it be now that must make himself master of the diocese , or else resign he place and begin he search for fortune again . he see all this plainly . after what have take place any compromise between he and the lady be impossible . let he once leave the room at she bidding , and leave the bishop in she hand , and he might at once pack up he portmanteau and bid adieu to episcopal honour , , and the . and yet it be not so easy to keep he ground when he be bidden by a lady to go ; or to continue to make a third in a party between husband and wife when the wife express a wish for a tete - a - tete with she husband . , ' she repeat , 'I wish to be alone with my lord . ' ' he lordship have summon I on most important diocesan business , ' say , glance with uneasy eye at . he feel that he must trust something to the bishop , and yet that trust be so woefully misplace . ' my leave he at the present moment be , I fear , impossible . ' ' do you bandy word with I , you ungrateful man ? ' say she . ' my lord , will you do I the favour to beg to leave the room ? ' my lord scratch he head , but for the moment say nothing . this be as much as expect from he , and be on the whole , for he , a active exercise of marital rights . ' my lord , ' say the lady , 'is to leave this room , or be I ? ' here make a false step . she should not have allude to the possibility of retreat on she part . she should not have express the idea that she order for 's expulsion could be treat otherwise than by immediate obedience . in answer to such a question the bishop naturally say in he own mind , that it be necessary that one should leave the room , perhaps it might be as well that do so . he do say so in he own mind , but externally he again scratch he head and again twiddle he thumb . be boil over with wrath . Alas , alas ! could she but have keep she temper as she enemy do , she would have conquer as she have ever conquer . but divine anger get the better of she , as it have do of other heroine , and she fall . ' my lord , ' say she , 'am I to be vouchsaf a answer or be I not ? ' at last he break he deep silence and proclaim himself a Slopeite . ' why , my dear , ' say he , and I be very busy . ' that be all . there be nothing more necessary . he have go to the battle - field , stand the dust and heat of the day , encounter the fury of the foe , and win the victory . how easy be success to those who will only be true to themselves ! see at once the full amount of he gain , and turn on the vanquished lady a look of triumph which she never forget and never forgave . here he be wrong . he should have look humbly at she , and with meek entreating eye have deprecate she anger . he should have say by he glance that he ask pardon for he success , and that he hope forgiveness for the stand which he have be force to make in the cause of duty . so might he perchance have somewhat mollify that imperious bosom , and prepare the way for future term . but mean to rule without term . ah , forgetful , inexperienc man ! can you cause that little trembling victim to be divorce from the woman who possess he ? can you provide that they shall be separate at bed and board ? be he not flesh of she flesh and bone of she bone , and must he not so continue ? it be very well now for you to stand you ground , and triumph as she be drive ignominiously from the room ; but can you be present when those curtain be draw , when that awful helmet of proof have be tie beneath the ching , when the small remnant of the bishop 's prowess shall be cow by the tassel above he head ? can you then intrude yourself when the wife wish 'to speak to my lord alone ? ' but for the moment 's triumph be complete ; for without further parley leave the room , and do not forget to shut the door after she . then follow a close conference between the new ally , to which be say much which it astonished to say and the bishop to hear . and yet the one say it and the other hear it without ill will . there be no mincing of matter now . the chaplain plainly tell the bishop that the world give he credit for be under the governance of he wife ; that he credit and character in the diocese be suffer ; that he would surely get himself into hot water if he allow to interfere in matter which be not suitable for a woman 's power
power ; and in fact that he would become contemptible if he do not throw off the yoke under which he groan . the bishop at first hum and haw , and affect to deny the truth of what be say . but he denial be by silence and quickly break down . he soon admit by silence he state of vassalage , and pledge himself with 's assistance , to change he course . do not make out a bad case for himself . he explain how it grieve he to run counter to a lady who have always be he patroness , who have befriend he in so many way , who have , in fact , recommend he to the bishop 's notice ; but , as he state , he duty be now imperative ; he hold a situation of peculiar confidence , and be immediately and especially attach to the bishop 's person . in such a situation he conscience require that he should regard solely the bishop 's interest , and therefore he have venture to speak out . the bishop take this for what it be worth , and only intend that he should do so . it gild the pill which have to administer , and which the bishop think would be less bitter than that other pill which he have be so long take . ' my lord , ' have he immediate reward , like a good child . he be instruct to write and at once do write another note to the archbishop accept he grace 's invitation . this note , more prudent than the lady , himself take away and post with he own hand . thus he make sure that this act of self - jurisdiction should be as nearly as possible a fait accompli . he beg , and coax , and threaten the bishop with a view of make he also write at once to ; but the bishop , though temporarily emancipate from he wife , be not yet enthrall to . he say , and probably say truly , that such a offer must be make in some official form ; that he be not yet prepare to sign the form ; and that he should prefer see Harding before he do so . , might , however , beg to call upon he . not disappointe with he achievement go he way . he first post the precious note which he have in he pocket , and then pursue other enterprisis in which we must follow he in other chapter . , have receive such satisfaction as be to be derive from slam she husband 's door , do not at once betake herself to . indeed for the first few moments after she repulse she feel that she could not again see that lady . she would have to own that she have be beat , to confess that the diadem have pass from she brow , and the sceptre from she hand ! no , she would send a message to she with the promise of a letter on the next day or the day after . thus resolve , she betake herself to she bed - room ; but here she again change she mind . the air of that sacr enclosure restore she courage , and give she some heart . as Achilles war at the sight of he armour , as 's heart grow strong when he grasp he lance , so do look forward to fresh laurel , as she hey fall on she husband 's pillow . she would not despair . have so resolve , she descende with dignified mien and refresh countenance to . this scene in the bishop 's study take longer in the acting than in the telling . we have not , perhaps , have the whole of the conversation . at any rate be begin to be very impatient , and be think that farmer Subsoil would be tired of wait for she , when return . oh ! who can tell the palpitation of that maternal heart , as the suppliant look into the face of the great lady to see write there either a promise of a house , income , comfort , and future competence , or else the doom of continue and ever increase poverty . poor mother ! poor wife ! there be little there to comfort you ! ' , ' thus speak the lady with considerable austerity , and without sitte down herself . 'I find that you husband have behave in this matter in a very weak and foolish manner . ' Quiverful immediately rise upon she foot , think it disrespectful to remain sit while the wife of the bishop stood . but she be desire to sit down again , and make to do so , so that might stand and preach over she . it be generally consider a offensive thing for a gentleman to keep he seat while another be keep stand before he , and we presume the same law hold with regard to lady . it often be so felt ; but we be inclin to say that it never produce half the discomfort or half the feeling of implied inferiority that be show by a great man who desire he visitor to be seat while he himself speak from he leg . such a solecism in good breeding , when construe into mean this : " the accept rule of courtesy in the world require that I should offer you a seat ; if I do not do so , you would bring a charge against I in the world of be arrogant and ill - mannered ; I will obey the world ; but , nevertheless , I will not put myself on a equality with you . you may sit down ,
, but I will not sit with you . sit , therefore , at my bidding , and I will stand and talk to you . " this be just what mean to say ; and , though she be too anxious and too flurried thus to translate the full meaning of the manoeuvre , do not fail to feel its effect . she be cowed and uncomfortable , and a second time essay to rise from she chair . ' pray be seat , , pray keep you seat . you husband , I say , have be most weak and most foolish . it be impossible , , to help people who will not help themselves . I much fear that I can now do nothing for you in this matter . ' 'Oh ! -- do not say so , ' say the poor woman , again jump up . ' pray be seat , . I much fear that I can do nothing further for you in this matter . you husband have , in a most unaccountable manner , take upon himself to resign that which I be empower to offer he . as a matter of course , the bishop expect that he clergy shall know they own mind . what he may ultimately do -- what we may finally decide on do -- I can not say . know the extent of you family -- ' ' Fourteen child , , fourteen of they ! and hardly bread -- barely bread ! it be hard for the child of a clergyman , it be hard for one who have always do he duty respectably ! ' not a word fall from she about herself ; but the tear come run down she big coarse cheek , on which the dust of the road have leave its trace . have not be portray in these page as a agreeable or amiable lady . there have be no intention to impress the reader much in she favour . it be ordain that all novel should have a male and female angel , and a male and female devil . if it be consider that this rule be obey in these page , the latter character must be suppose to have fall to the lot of . but she be not all devil . there be a heart inside that stiff - rib bodice , though not , perhaps , of large dimension , and certainly not easily accessible . , however , do gain access , and prove herself a woman . whether it be the fourteen child with they probable bare bread and the possible bare back , or the respectability of the father 's work , or the mingle dust and tear on the mother 's face , we will not pretend to say . but be touche . she do not show it as other woman might have do . she do not give - - , or order she a glass of wine . she do not take she to she toilet table , and offer she the use of brush and comb , towel and water . she do not say soft little speech and coax she kindly with equanimity . , despite she rough appearance , would have be as amenable to such little tender care as any lady in the land . but none such be forthcome . instead of that , slap one hand upon the other , and declare -- not with a oath ; for as a lady and a and a she - bishop , she could not swear , -- but with a adjuration , that ' she would not have it done . ' the meaning of this be that she would not have 's promise appointment cozen away by the treachery of and the weakness of she husband . this mean she very soon explain to . ' why be you husband such a fool , ' say she , now dismount from she high horse and sit confidentially down close to she visitor , 'a to take the bait which that man throw to he ? if he have not be so utterly foolish , nothing could have prevent you go to the hospital . ' poor be ready enough with she own tongue in accuse she husband to he face of be soft , and perhaps she do not always speak of he to she child quite so respectfully as she might have do . but she do not like to hear he abuse by other , and begin to vindicate he , and to explain that of course he have take to be a emissary of herself ; that be think to be peculiarly she friend ; and that , therefore , would have be fail in respect to she have he assume to doubt what have say . thus mollify again declare that she ' would not have it do , ' and at last send Mrs Quiverful home with a assurance that , to the furthest stretch of she power and influence in the palace , the appointment of should be insist upon . as she repeat that word ' insist ' , she think of the bishop in he night- cap , and with compress lip slightly shook she head . oh ! my aspiring pastor , divine to whose ear nolo episcopari be the sweetest of word , which of you would be a bishop on such term as these ? get home in the farmer 's cart , not indeed with a light heart , but satisfied that she have do right in make she visit . , as we have say , leave the palace with a feeling of considerable triumph . not that he think that he difficulty be over ; he do not so deceive himself ; but he feel that
that he have play he first move well , as well as the piece on the board would allow ; and that he have nothing with which to reproach himself . he first of all post the letter to the archbishop , and have make that sure he proceed to push the advantage which he have gai . have be at home , he would have call on she ; but he know that she be at , as he write the follow note . it be the beginning of what , he trust , might be a long and tender series of epistle . ' my dear ,-- you will understand perfectly that I can not at present correspond with you father . I heartily wish that I could , and hope the day may be not long distant , when mist shall have clear away , and we may know each other . but I can not preclude myself from the pleasure of send you these few line to say that . have to - day , in my presence , resign any title that he ever have to the wardenship of the hospital , and that the bishop have assure I that it be he intention to offer it to you esteem father . ' will you , with my respectful compliment , ask he , who I believe be a fellow visitor with you , to call on the bishop either on or , between ten and one . this be by the bishop 's desire . if you will so far oblige I as to let I have a line naming either day , and the hour which will suit , I will take care that the servants shall have order to show he in without delay . perhaps I should say no more , -- but still I wish you could make you father understand that no subject will be moo between he lordship and he , which will refer at all to the method in which he may choose to perform he duty . I for one , be persuade that no clergyman could perform it more satisfactorily than he do , or than he will do again . 'On a former occasion I be indiscreet and much too impatient , consider you father 's age and my own . I hope he will not now refuse my apology . I still hope also that with you aid and sweet pious labour , we may live to attach such a school to the old endowment , as may , by 's grace and furtherance , be a blessing to the poor of this city . ' you will see at once that this letter be confidential . the subject , of course , make it so . but , equally , of course , it be for you parent 's eye as well as for you own , should you think it proper to show it to he . ' I hope my darling little friend be as strong as ever , -- dear little fellow . do he still continue he rude assault on those beautiful long silken tress ? 'I can assure you friend miss you from sorely ; but it would be cruel to begrudge you you sojourn among flower and field during this truly sultry weather . ' pray believe I , my dear most sincerely , ' Obadiah Slope . ' , . ' now this letter , take as a whole , and with the consideration that wish to assume a great degree of intimacy with , would not have be bad , but for the allusion to the tress . gentlemen do not write to lady about they tress , unless they be on very intimate term indeed . but could not be expect to be aware of this . he longe to put a little affection into he epistle , and yet he think it injudicious , as the letter would he know be show to . he would have insist that the letter should be strictly private and see by no eye but 's own , have he not feel that such a injunction would have be disobey . he therefore restrain he passion , do not sign himself ' yours affectionately , ' and content himself instead with the compliment to the tress . we will now follow he letter . he take it to 's house , and learn there , from the servant , that thing be to be send out to Plumstead that afternoon , leave it , with many injunction , in she hand . we will now follow so as to complete the day with he , and then return to he letter and its momentous fate in the next chapter . there be a old song which give we some very good advice about court :-- " it be gude to be off with the auld luve before ye be on wi' the new . " of the wisdom of this maxim be ignorant , and accordingly , have write he letter to , he proceed to call upon the . indeed it be hard to say which be the old love and which be the new , have be smite with both so nearly at the same time . perhaps he think it not amiss to have two string to he bow . but two string to 's bow be always dangerous to he on whose behalf they be to be use . a man should remember that between two stool he may fall to the ground . but in sooth be pursue in obedience to he better instinct , and the signora in obedience to he worse . have he win the widow and wear she , no one could have blame he . you , of reader , and I , and 's other friend
friend would have receive the story of such a winning with much disgust and disappointment ; but we should have be angry with , not with . , male and female , dean and chapter and diocesan clergy in full congress , could have find nothing to disapprove of in such a alliance . Convocation itself , that mysterious and mighty synod , could in no wise have fall foul of it . the possession of 1000 a year and a beautiful wife would not al all have hurt the voice of the pulpit character , or lessen the grace and piety of the exemplary clergyman . but not of such a nature be likely to be he dealings with the . in the first place he know that she husband be live , and therefore he could not woo she honestly . then again she have nothing to recommend she to he honest wooing have such be possible . she be not only portionless , but also from misfortune unfitted to be choose as the wife of any man who want a useful mate . be aware that she be a helpless hopeless cripple . but could not help himself . he know that he be wrong in devote he time to the back draw - room in 's house . he know that what take place would if divulge utterly ruin he with . he know that scandal would soon come upon he heel and spread abroad among the black coat of Barchester some tiding , some exaggerate tiding , of the sigh which he pour into the lady 's ear . he know that he be act against the recognise principle of he life , against those law of conduct by which he hope to achieve much higher success . but as we have say , he could not help himself . passion , for the first time in he life , passion be too strong for he . as for the signora , no such plea can be put forward for she , for in truth , she car no more for than she do for twenty other who have be at she foot before he . she willingly , nay greedily , accept he homage . he be the finest fly that have hithertoo afforded to she web ; and the signora be a powerful spider that make wondrous web , and could in no way live without catche fly . she taste in this respect be abominable , for she have no use for the victim when catch . she could not eat they matrimonially as young lady - fly do whose web be most frequently of they mother 's weaving . could she deavor they by any escapade of a less legitimate description . she unfortunate affliction preclude she from all hope of levanting with a lover . it would be impossible to run away with a lady who require three servants to move she from a sofa . the signora be subdue by no passion . she time for love be gone . she have live out she heart , such heart as she ever have ever have , in she early year , at a age when be think of he second book of and he unpaid bill at the buttery hatch . in age the lady be younger than the gentleman ; but in feeling , in knowledge of the affair of love , in intrigue , he be immeasurably she junior . it be necessary to she to have some man at she foot . it be the one customary excitement of she life . she delighte in the exercise of power which this give she ; it be now nearly the only food for she ambition ; she would boast to she sister that she could make a fool of any man , and the sister , as little imbue with feminine delicacy as herself , good naturedly think it but fair that such amusement should be afforde to a poor invalid who be debar from the ordinary pleasure of life . be madly in love , but hardly know it . the signora spit he , as a boy do a cockchafer on a cork , that she might enjoy the energetic agony of he gyration . and she know very well what she be do . have add to he person all such adornment as be possible to a clergyman make a morning visit , such as a clean neck tie , clean handkerchief , new glove , and a soupcon of not necessary scent , call about three o'clock at the doctor 's house . at about this hour the signora be almost always in the back draw - room . the mother have not come down . the doctor be out or in he own room . be out , and at any rate leave the room if any one call whose object be specially with she sister . be she idea of be charitable and sisterly . , as be he custom , ask for , and be tell , as be the servant 's custom , that the signora be in the drawing - room . upstairs he accordingly go . he find she , as he always do , lie on she sofa with a french volume before she , and a beautiful little inlaid writing case open on she table . at the moment of he entrance she be in the act of writing . ' ah , my friend , ' say she , put out she left hand to he across the desk , 'I do not expect you to - day and be this very instant write to you -- ' , take the soft fair delicate hand in he , and very soft and fair and delicate it be , bow over it he huge red head
head and kiss it . it be a sight to see , a deed to record if the author could fitly do it , a picture to put on canva . be big , awkward , cumbrous , and have he heart in he pursuit be ill at ease . the lady be fair , as we have say , and delicate ; every thing about she be fine and refin ; she hand in he look like a rose lie among carrot , and when he kiss it he look as a cow might do on finding such a flower among she food . she be graceful as a couchant goddess , and , moreover , as self - possess as must have be when courte Adonis . oh , that such grace and such beauty should have condescende to waste itself on such a pursuit ! 'I be in the act of write to you , ' say she , ' but now my scrawl may go into the basket ;' and she raise the sheet of gild note paper from off she desk as though to tear it . ' indeed it shall not , ' say he , lay the embargo of half a stone weight of human flesh and blood upon the devoted paper . ' Nothe that you write for my eye , signora , shall be so desecrated , ' and he take up the letter , put that also among the carrot and feed on it , and then proceed to read it . ' gracious I ! , ' say she . ' I hope you do not mean to say that you keep all the trash I write to you . half my time I do not know what I write , and when I do , I know it be only fit for the black of the fire . I hope you have not that ugly trick of keep letter . ' ' at any rate I do not throw they into a waste - paper basket . if destruction be they doom lot , they perish worthily , and be burnt on a pyre , as be of old . ' ' with a steel pen stick through they , of course , ' say she , 'to make the simile more complete . of all the lady of my acquaintance I think be the most absurd . why do she not do as do ? why do she not take out she ship and insist on go with he ? she could not bear to lose the land she have get by a swindle ; and then she could not bear the loss of she lover . so she fall between two stool . , whatever you do , never mingle love and business . ' blush up to he eye , and over he mottled forehead to the very root of he hair . he feel sure that the signora know all about he intention with reference to . he conscience tell he that he be detect . he doom be to be speak ; he be to be punish for he duplicity , and reject by the beautiful creature before he . poor man . he little dreamt that have all he intention with reference to be know to the signora , it would only have add zest to that lady 's amusement . it be all very well to have at she foot , to show she power by make a utter fool of a clergyman , to gratify she own infidelity by thus prove the little strength which religion have in control the passion even of a religious man ; but it would be a increase gratification if she could be make to understand that she be at the same time allur she victim away from another , whose love if secure would be in every way beneficial and salutary . the signora have indeed discover with the keen instinct of such a woman , that be bend on matrimony with , but in alluding to she have not think of it . she instantly perceive , however , from she lover 's blush , what be on he mind , and be not slow in take advantage of it . she look at he full in the face , not angrily , nor yet with a smile , but with a intense and overpower gaze ; and then hold up she forefinger , and slightly shak she head she say :- ' whatever you do , my friend , do not mingle love and business . either stick to you treasure and you city of wealth , or else follow you love like a true man . but never attempt both . if you do , you will have to die with a broken heart as do poor Dido . which be it to be with you , , love or money ? ' be not so ready with a pathetic answer as he usually be with touching episode in he extempore sermon . he feel that he ought to say something pretty , something also that should remove the impression on the mind of he lady love . but he be rather put about how to do it . ' love , ' say he , ' true overpowering love , must be the strongest passion a man can feel ; it must control every other wish , and put aside every other pursuit . but with I love will never act in that way unless it be return ;' and he throw upon the signora a look of tenderness which be intend to make up for all the deficiency of he speech . ' take my advice , ' say she . ' never mind love . after all , what be it ? the dream of a few week .
. that be all it be joy . the disappointment of a life be its . who be ever successful in true love ? success in love argue that the love be false . true love be always despondent or tragical . love . love . Dido love , and what come of it ? Troilus love and cease to be a man . ' ' love and he be foole , ' say the more manly chaplain . 'a man may love and yet not be a Troilus . all woman be not Cressid . ' ' no ; all woman be not Cressids . the falsehood be not always on the woman 's side . be true , but now be she reward ? she lord believe she to be the paramour of the first he who come near she in he absence . be true and be smother . be true and go mad . there be no happiness in love , except at the end of a english novel . but in wealth , money , house , land , goods and chattel , in the good thing of this world , yes , in they there be something tangible , something that can be retain and enjoy . ' 'Oh , no , ' say , feel himself bound to enter some protest against so very unorthodox a doctrine , ' this world 's wealth will make no one happy . ' ' and what will make you happy -- you -- you ? ' say she , raise herself up , and speak to he with energy across the table . ' from what source do you look for happiness ? do not say that you look for none ? I shall not believe you . it be a search in which every human be spend a existence . ' ' and the search be always in vain , ' say . ' we look for happiness on earth , while we ink to be content to hope for it in heaven . ' ' Pshaw ! you preach a doctrine which you know you do not believe . it be the way with you all . if you know that there be no earthly happiness , why do you long to be a bishop or a dean ? why do you want land and income ? ' 'I have the natural ambition of a man , ' say he . ' of course you have , and the natural passion ; and therefore I say that you do not believe the doctrine you preach . be a enthusiast . he believe so that he ambition and passion do not war against he creed . so do the fanatic who pass half he life erect upon a pillar . as for I , I will believe in no belief that do not make itself manifest by outward sign . I will think no preaching sincere that be not recommend by the practice of the preacher . ' be start and horrify , but he feel that he could not answer . how could he stand up and preach the lesson of he master , be there as he be , on the devil 's business ? he be a true believer , otherwise this would have be nothing to he . he have audacity for most thing , but he have not audacity to make a plaything of the 's word . all this the signora understood , and feel much interest as she see she cockchafer whirl round upon she pin . ' you wit delight in such argument , ' say he , ' but you heart and you reason do not quite go along with they . ' ' my heart ! ' say she ; ' you quite mistake the principle of my composition if you imagine that there be such a thing about I . ' after all , there be very little that be false in anything the signora say . if allow himself to be deceive it be he own fault . nothing could have be more open than she declaration about herself . the little write table with she desk be still stand before she , a barrier , as it be , against the enemy . she be sit as nearly upright as she ever do , and he have bring a chair close to the sofa , so that there be only the corner of the table between he and she . it so happen that as she speak she hand lay upon the table , and as answer she he put he hand upon hers . ' no heart ! ' say he . ' that be a very heavy charge which you br against yourself , and one of which I can not find you guilty --' she withdraw she hand , not quickly and angrily , as though insult by he touch , but gently and slowly . ' you be in no condition to give a verdict on the matter , ' say she , 'as you have not try I . no ; do not say that you intend do so , for you know you have no intention of the kind ; nor indeed have I either . as for you , you will take you vow where they will result in something more substantial than the pursuit of such a ghostlike , ghastly love as mine --' ' you love should be sufficient to satisfy the dream of a monarch , ' say , not quite clear as to the meaning of he word . ' say a archbishop , , ' say she . poor fellow ! she be very cruel to he . he go round again upon he cork on this allusion to he profession . he try , however , to smile , and
and gently accuse she of joking on a matter , which be , he say , to he of such vital moment . ' why -- what gull do you man make of we , ' she reply . ' how you fool we to the top of we bent ; and of all man you clergyman be the most fluent of you honeyed caressing word . now look I in the face , , boldly and openly . ' do look at she with a languishing loving eye , and as he do so , he again put forth he hand to get hold of hers . 'I tell you to look at I boldly , ; but confine you boldness to you eye . ' 'Oh , ,' he sigh . ' well , my name be , ' say she ; ' but none except my own family usually call I so . now look I in the face , . be I to understand that you say you love I ? ' Slope never have say so . if he have come there with any for plan at all , he intention be to make love to the lady without uttere any such declaration . it be , however , quite impossible that he should now deny he love . he have , therefore , nothing for it , but to go down on he knee distractedly against the sofa , and swear that he do love she with a love pass the love of man . ' the signora receive the assurance with very little palpitation or appearance of surprise . ' and now answer I another question , ' say she ; ' when be you to be marry to ? ' poor go round and round in mortal agony . in such a condition as he it be really very hard for he to know what answer to give . and yet no answer would be he surest condemnation . he might as well at once plead guilty to the charge bring against he . ' and why do you accuse I of such dissimulation ? ' ' Dissimulation ! I say nothing of dissimulation . I make no charge against you , and make none . pray do not defend yourself to I . you swear that you be devoted to my beauty , and yet you be on the eve of matrimony with another . I feel this to be rather a compliment . it be to that yoyou must defend yourself . that you may find difficult ; unless , indeed , you can keep she in the dark . you clergyman be cleverer than other man . ' ' , I have tell you that I love you , and now you rail at I ? ' ' rail at you . bless the man ; what would he have ? come , answer I this at you leisure , -- not without think now , but leisurely and with consideration , -- be you not go to be marry to ? ' 'I be not , ' say he . and as he say it , he almost hate , with a exquisite hatred , the woman whom he could not help love with a exquisite love . ' but surely you be a worshipper of hers ? ' 'I be not , ' say , to whom the word worshipper be peculiarly distasteful . the signora have conceive that it would be so . 'I wonder at that , ' say she . ' do you not admire she ? to my eyes she be the perfection of English beauty . and then she be rich too . I should have think she be just the person to attract you . come , , let I give you advice on this matter . marry the charming widow ! she will be a good mother to you child and a excellent mistress of a clergyman 's household . ' 'Oh , signora , how can you be so cruel ? ' ' , ' say she , change the voice of she banter which she have be use for one which be expressively earnest in its tone ; 'i that cruelty ? ' ' how can I love another , while my heart be entirely you own ? ' ' if that be cruelty , , what might you say of I if I be to declare that I return you passion ? what would you think if I bound you even by a lover 's oath to do daily penance at this couch of mine ? what can I give in return for a man 's love ? ah , dear friend , you have not realise the condition of my fate . ' be not on he knee all this time . after he declaration of love he have risen from they as quickly as he think consistent with the new position which he now fill , and as he stand be lean on the back of he chair . this outburst of tenderness on the 's part quite overcome he , and make he feel for the moment that he could sacrifice everything to be assure of the love of the beautiful creature before he , maim , lame , and already marry as she be . ' and can I not sympathise with you lot ? ' say he , now seate himself on she sofa , and push away the table with he foot . ' be so near to pity ! ' say she . ' if you pity I , cripple as I be , I shall spurn you from I . ' 'Oh , , I will only love you , ' and again he catch she hand and devoure it with kiss . now she do not draw from he
he , but sit there as he kiss it , look at he with she great eye , just as a great spider would look at a great fly that be quite securely catch . ' suppose be to come to , ' say she , ' would you make he acquaintance ? ' ' ! ' say he . ' would you introduce he to the bishop , and , and the young lady ? ' say she , again have recourse to that horrid quizzing voice which so particularly hate . ' why do you ask I such a question ? ' say he . ' because it be necessary that you should know that there be a . I think you have forgote it . ' 'if I think that you retain for that wretch one particle of the love of which he be never worthy , I would die before I would distract you by tell you what I feel . no ! be you husband the master of you heart , I might perhaps love you ; but you should never know it . ' 'My heart again ! how you talk . and you consider then , that if a husband be not master of he wife 's heart , he have not right to she fealty ; if a wife cease to love , she may cease to be true . be that you doctrine on this matter , as a minister of the of ? ' try hard within himself to cast off the pollution with which he feel that he be defile he soul . he strove to tear himself away from the noxious siren that have bewitch he . he have look for rapturous joy in love this lovely creature , and he already find that he meet with little but disappointment and self - rebuke . he have come across the fruit of the dead Sea , so sweet and delicious to the eye , so bitter and nauseous to the taste . he have put the apple to he mouth , and it have turn to ash between he tooth . yet he could not tear himself away . he know , he could not but know , that weakness of he religion . but she half permit he adoration , and that half permission add such fuel to he fire that all the fountain of piety could not quench it . he begin to feel savage , irritate , and revengeful . he meditate some severity of speech , some taunt that should cut she , as she taunt cut he . he reflect as he stand there for a moment , silent before she , that if he desire to quell she proud spirit , he should do so by be prouder even than herself ; that if he wish to have she at he foot suppliant for he love it behove he to conquer she by indifference . all this pass through he mind . as far as dead knowledge go , he know , or think he know , how a woman should be tame . but when he essay to bring he tactic to bear , he fail like a child . what chance have dead knowledge with experience in any of the transaction between man and man ? what possible between man and woman ? love furiously , insanely , and truly ; but he have never play the game of love . the signora do not love at all , but she be up to every move on the board . it be pitch against a school - boy . and so she continue to insult he , and he continue to bear it . ' the world for love ! ' say she , in answer to some renew rapid declaration of he passion , ' how often have the same thing be say , and how invariably with the same falsehood ! ' ' Falsehood , ' say he . ' do you say that I be false to you ? do you say that my love be not real ? ' ' false ? of course it be false , false as the father of falsehood -- if indeed falsehood need a sire and be not self - beget since the world begin . you be ready to sacrifice the world for love ? come let we see what you will sacrifice . I care nothing for nuptial vow . the wretch , I think you be kind enough to call he so , whom I swore to love and obey , be so base that he can only be think of with repulsive disgust . in the council chamber of my heart I have divorce he . to I that be as good as though aged lord have gloat for month over the detail of he licentious life . I care nothing for what the world can say . will you be as frank ? will you take I to you home as you wife ? will you call I before bishop , dean , and prebendary ? ' the poor torture wretch stood silent , not know what to say . ' what ! you will not do that . tell I then , what part of the world be it that you will sacrifice for my charms ? ' ' be you free to marry , I would take you to my house to - morrow and wish no higher privilege . ' 'I be free ; ' say she , almost start up in she energy . for though there be no truth in she pretend regard for she clerical admirer , there be a mixture of real feeling in the scorn and satire with which she speak of love and marriage generally . 'I be free ; free as the wind . come ,
, will you take I as I be ? have you wish ; sacrifice the world , and prove yourself a true man . ' Slope should have take she at she word . she would have draw back , and he would have have the full advantage of the offer . but he do not . instead of do so , he stand wrapt in astonishment , pass he finger through he lank red hair , and think as he star upon she animated countenance that she wondrous beauty grow more and more wonderful as he gaze on it . ! ! ! , ' she laugh out loud . ' come , , do not talk of sacrifice the world again . people beyond one - and - twenty should never dream of such a thing . you and I , if we have the dregs of any love leave in we , if we have the remnant of a passion remain in we heart , should husband we resource better . we be not in we premiere jeunesse . the world be a very nice place . you world , at any rate , be so . you have all manner of fat rectory to get , and possible bishopric to enjoy . come , confess ; on second thought you would not sacrifice such thing for the smile of a lame lady ? ' it be impossible for he to answer this . in order to be in any way dignify , he feel that he must be silent . ' come , ' say she -- 'do not boody with I : do not be angry because I speak out some home truths . Alas , the world , as I have find it , have teach I bitter truths . come , tell I that I be forgive . be we not to be friend ? ' and she again put she hand to he . he sit himself down on the chair beside she , and take she proffer hand and lean over she . ' there , ' say she , with she sweetest , softest smile -- a smile to withstand which a man should be case in triple steel , ' there ; seal you forgiveness on it , ' and she raise it towards he face . he kiss it again and again , and stretch over she as though desirous of extend the charity of he pardon beyond the hand that be offer to he . she manage , however , to check he ardour . for one so easily allure as this poor chaplain , she hand be surely enough . 'Oh , ! ' say he , ' tell I that you love I -- do you -- do you love I ? ' ' Hush , ' say she . ' there be mother 's step . we tete - a - tete have be of monstrous length . now you have better go . but we shall see you soon again , shall we not ? ' promise that he would call again on the follow day . ' and , ' she continue , ' pray answer my note . you have it in you hand , though , I declare during these two hour you have not be gracious enough to read it . it be about the school and the child . you know how anxious I be to have they here . I have be learn the catechism myself , on purpose . you must manage it for I next week . I will teach they , at any rate , to submit themselves to they spiritual pastor and master . ' say but little on the subject of school , but he make he adieu , and betake himself home with a sad heart , trouble mind , and uneasy conscience . be entertain by and at it will be remember that , when leave he billet doux with , have be inform that it would be send out to she at that afternoon . the archdeacon and have in fact come into town together in the brougham , and it have be arrange that they should call for 's parcel as they leave on they way home . accordingly they do so call , and the maid , as she hand to the coachman a small basket and large bundle carefully and neatly packec , give in at the carriage window 's epistle . the archdeacon , who be sit next to the window , take it , and immediately recognise the hand - writing of he enemy . ' who leave this ? ' say he . call with it himself , you reverence , ' say the girl ; ' and be very anxious that missus should have it to - day . ' so the brougham drive off , and the letter be leave in the archdeacon 's hand . he look at it as though he hold a basket of adder . he could not have think worse of the document have he read it and discover it to be licentious and atheistical . he do , moreover , what so many wise people be accustom to do in similar circumstance ; he immediately condemn the person to whom the letter be write , as though she be necessarily a particep criminis . poor , though by no means inclin to forward 's intimacy with he daughter , would have give anything to have keep the letter from he son - in - law . but that be now impossible . there it be in he hand ; and he look as thoroughly disgust as though he be quite sure that it contain all the rhapsody of a favoured lover . ' it be very hard on I , ' say he , after a
a while , ' that this should go on under my roof . ' now here the archdeacon be certainly the most unreasonable . have invite he sister - in - law to he house , it be a natural consequence of that she should receive she letter there . and if choose to write to she , he letter would , as a matter of course , be send after she . moreover , the very fact of a invitation to one 's house imply confidence on the part of the inviter . he have show that he think to be a fit person to stay with he by he make she to do so , and it be most cruel to she that he should complain of she violat the sanctity of he roof - tree , when the lach commit be none of she committing . feel this ; and feel also that when the archdeacon talk thus about he roof , what he say be most offensive to himself as 's father . if do receive a letter from , what be there in that to pollute the purity of 's household . he be indignant that he daughter should be so judge and so speak of ; and , he make up he mind that even as she must be dearer to he than any other creature on 's earth . he almost break out , and say as much ; but for the moment he restrain himself . ' here , ' say the archdeacon , hand the offensive missile to he father - in - law ; 'I be not go to be the bearer of he love letter . you be she father , and may do as you think fit with it . ' by do as he think fit with it , the archdeacon certainly mean that would be justified in opening and read the letter , and take any step which might in consequence be necessary . to tell the truth , do feel rather a stronger curiosity than be justified by he outraged virtue , to see the contents of the letter . of course he could not open it himself , but he wish to make understand that he , as 's father , would be fully justified in do so . the idea of such a proceeding never occur to . he authority over cease when she become the wife of . he have not the slightest wish to pry into she correspondence . he consequently put the letter into he pocket , and only wish that he have be able to do so without the archdeacon 's knowledge . they both sit silent during the journey home , and then Grantly say , ' perhaps have better give it to she . she can explain to she sister , better than you or I can do , how deep be the disgrace of such a acquaintance . ' 'I think you be very hard upon , ' reply . 'I will not allow that she have disgrac herself , nor do I think it likely that she will do so . she have a right to correspond with whom she please , and I shall not take upon myself to blame she because she get 's a letter from . ' 'I suppose , ' say , ' you do not wish she to marry this man . I suppose you will admit that she would disgrase herself if she do so . ' 'I do not wish she to marry he , ' say the perplex father ; 'I do not like he , and do not think he would make a good husband . but if decide to do so , I shall certainly not think that she have disgrac herself . ' ' good heaven ! ' exclaim , and throw himself back into the corner of he brougham . say nothing more , but commence play a dirge , with a imaginary fiddle bow upon a imaginary violoncello , for which there do not appear to be quite room enough in the carriage ; and he continue the tune , with sundry variation , till he arrive at the rectory door . the archdeacon have be meditat sad thing in he mind . Hitherto he have always look on he father - in - law as a true partisan , though he know he to be a man devoid of all the combative qualification for that character . he have feel no fear that would go over to the enemy , though he have never count much on the ex-warden 's prowess in break the battle rank . now , however , it seem that , with she wile , have completely trepan and bewilder she father , cheat he out of he judgement , rob he of the predilection and taste of life , and cause he to be tolerant of a man whose arrogance and vulgarity would , in a few year since , have be unendurable to he . that the whole thing be as good as arrange between and Slope there be no longer any room to doubt . that know that such be the case , even this could hardly be doubt . it be too manifest that he at any rate suspect it , and be prepared to sanction it . and to tell the truth , such be the case . dislike as much as it be in he nature to dislike any man . have he daughter wish to do she worst to displease he by a second marriage , she could hardly have succeed better than by marry . but , as he say to himself now very often , what right have he to condemn she if she do nothing that be really wrong ? if she like it be she affair
affair . it be indeed miraculous to he , that a woman with such a mind , so educated , so refin , so nice in she taste , should like such a man . then he ask himself whether it be possible that she do so . ah , thou weak man ; most charitable , most , but weakest of man ! why couldst thou not have ask herself ? be she not the daughter of thy loin , the child of thy heart , the most beloved of thee of all humanity ? have she not prove to thee , by year of closest affection , she truth and goodness and filial obedience ? and yet , grope in darkness , hear she name in strain which woun thy love heart , and be unable to defend she as thou shouldst have do ! have not believe , do not believe , that he daughter mean to marry this man ; but he fear to commit himself to such a opinion . if she do do it there would be then no means of retreat . the wish of he heart be -- first , that there should be no truth in the archdeacon 's surmise ; and in this wish he would have afain trust entirely , have he da to do so ; secondly , that the match might be prevent , if unfortunately , it have be contemplate by ; thirdly , that should she be so infatuated as to marry this man , he might justify he conduct , and declare that no cause exist for he separate himself from she . he want to believe she incapable of such a marriage ; he want to show that he so believe of she ; but he want also to be able to say hereafter , that she have do nothing amiss , if she could unfortunately prove herself to be different from what he think she to be . nothing but affection could justify such fickleness ; but affection do justify it . there be but little of the about . he could not sacrifice he even though she should be pollute by the accept addresses of the clerical at the palace . if could be prevent , well and good ; but if not , the father would still open he heart to he daughter , and accept she as she present herself , and all . 's mind be of a stronger calibre , and he be by no means deficient in heart . he love with a honest genuine love he wife and child and friend . he love he father - in - law ; and he be quite prepared to love too , if she would be one of he party , if she would be on he side , if she would regard the Slope and the Proudy as the enemy of mankind , and acknowledge and feel the comfortable merit of the and . he wish to be what he call " safe " with all those whom he have admit to the penetralia of he house and heart . he could luxuriate in no society that be deficient in a certain feeling of faithful staunch high - churchism , which to he be tantamount to freemasonry . he be not strict in he line of definition . he endure without impatience many different shade of - church conservatism ; but with the and he could not go on all four . he be want in , moreover , or perhaps it would be more correct to say , he be not trouble by that womanly tenderness which be so peculiar to . he feeling towards he friend be , that while they stuck to he he would stick to they ; that he would work with they shoulder to shoulder ; that he would be faithful to the faithful . he know nothing of that beautiful love which can be true to a false friend . and thus these two man , each miserable enough in he own way , return to . it be get late when they arrive there , and the lady have already go up to dress . nothing more be say as the two part in the hall . as pass to he own room , he knock at 's door and hand in the letter . the archdeacon hurry to he own territory , there to unbure he heart to he faithful partner . what colloquy take place between the marital chamber and the adjoining dressing - room shall not be detail . the reader , now intimate with the person concerned , can well imagine it . the whole tenor of it also might be read in 's brow as she come down to dinner . , when she receive the letter from she father 's hand , have no idea from whom it come . she have never see 's handwriting , or if so , have forget it ; and do not think of he as she twist the letter as people do twist letter when they do not immediately recognise they correspondent either by the writing or the seal . she be sit at she glass brush she hair , and rise every other minute to play with she boy who be sprawl on the bed , and who engage pretty nearly the whole attention of the maid as well as of the mother . at last , sit before she toilet table , she break the seal , and turn over the leaf see 's name . she first feel surprised , and then annoye , and then anxious . as she read it she become interested . she be so delighted to find that all obstacle to she father 's return to the hospital be apparently remove that she do not observe the fulsome
fulsome language in which the tiding be convey . she merely perceive that she be commission to tell she father that such be the case , and she do not realise the fact that such a commission should not have be make , in the first instance , to she by a unmarried young clergyman . she feel , on the whole , grateful to , and anxious to get on she dress that she might run with the news to she father . then she come to the allusion to she own pious labour , and she say in she heart that be a affect ass . then she go on again and be offend by she boy be call 's darling -- he be nobody 's darling but she own ; or at any rate not the darling of a disagreeable stranger like . Lastly she arrive at the tress and feel a qualm of disgust . she look up in the glass , and there they be before she , long and silken , certainly , and very beautiful . I will not say but that she know they to be so , but she feel angry with they and brush they roughly and carelessly . she crumple the letter with angry violence , and resolve , almost without think of it , that she would not show it to she father . she would merely tell he the contents of it . she then comfort herself again with she boy , and she dress fasten , she go down to dinner . as she trip down the stair she begin to ascertain that there be some difficulty in she situation . she could not keep from she father the news about the hospital , nor could she comfortably confess the letter from before the Grantly . she father have already go down . she have hear he step upon the lobby . she resolve therefore to take he aside , and tell he she little bit of news . poor girl ! she have no idea how severely the unfortunate letter have already be discuss . when she enter the drawing - room the whole party were there , include , and the whole party look glum and sour . the two girl sit silent and apart as though they be aware that something be wrong . even be solemn and silent . have not see he since breakfast . he have be the whole day at 's , and such have be the case it be natural that he should tell how matter be go on there . he do nothing of the kind , however , but remain solemn and silent . they be all solemn and silent . know in she heart that they have be talk about she , and she heart misgave she as she think of and he letter . at any rate she feel it to be quite impossible to speak to she father alone while matter be in this state . dinner be soon announce , and , as be he wont , give he arm . but he do so as though the do it be a outrage on he feeling render necessary by sternest necessity . with quick sympathy feel this , and hardly put she finger on he coat sleeve . it may be guess in what way the dinner - hour be pass . say a few word to , say a few word to , she say a few word to she father , and he try to say a few word to . she feel that she have be try and find guilty of something , though she know not what . she longe to say out to they all , ' well , what be it that I have do ; out with it ; and let I know my crime ; for heaven 's sake let I hear the worst of it ;' but she could not . she could say nothing , but sit there silent , half feel that she be guilty , and try in vain to pretend even to eat she dinner . at last the cloth be draw , and the lady be not long follow it . when they be go the gentleman be somewhat more sociable but not much so . they could not of course talk over 's sins . the archdeacon have indeed so far betraye he sister - in - law as to whisper into 's ear in the study , as they meet there before dinner , a hint of what he fear . he do so with the gravest and saddest of fear , and become grave and apparently sad enough as he hear it . he open he eye and he mouth and say in a sort of whisper , ! ' in the same way as he might have say , the ! ' have he friend tell he that that horrid disease be in he nursery . 'i fear so , I fear so , ' say the archdeacon , and then together they leave the room . we will not accuritely analyse 's feeling on receipt of such astounding tiding . it will suffice to say that he be surprised , vex , sorrowful , and ill at ease . he have not perhaps think very much about , but he have appreciate she influence , and have feel that close intimacy with she in a country house be pleasant to he , and also beneficial . he have speak highly of she intelligence to the archdeacon , and have walk about the shrubbery with she , carry she boy on he back . when have call he darling , be not angry . thus the three man sit over they wine , all think of the same subject , but unable to speak of
of it to each other . so we will leave they , and follow the lady into the draw - room . have receive a commission from she husband , and have undertake it with some unwillingness . he have desire she to speak gravely to , and to tell she that , if she persist in she adherence to , she could no longer look for the countenance of she present friend . probably know she sister better than the doctor do , and assure he that it would be in vain to talk to she . the only course likely to be of any service in she opinion be to keep away from . perhaps she might have add , for she have a very keen eye in such thing , that there might be some ground for hope in keep near . of this , however , she say nothing . but the archdeacon would not be talk over ; he speak much of he conscience , and declare that if would not do it he would . so instigate , the lady undertake the task , state , however , she full conviction that she interference would be worse than useless . and so it prove . as soon as they be in the drawing - room Mr Grantly find some excuse for send she girl away , and then begin she task . she know well that she could exercise but very slight authority over she sister . they various mode of life , and the distance between they residence , have prevent very close confidence . they have hardly live together since be a child . have moreover , especially in latter year , resent in a quiet sort of way , the dictatorial authority which the archdeacon seem to exercise over she father , and on this account have be unwilling to allow the archdeacon 's wife to exercise authority over herself . ' you get a letter just before dinner , I believe , ' begin the eldest sister . acknowledge that she have do so , and feel that she turn red as she acknowledge it . she would have give anything to have keep she colour , but the more she try to do so , the more she signally fail . ' be it not from ? ' say that the letter be from . ' be he a regular correspondent of yours , ? ' ' not exactly , ' say she , already begin to feel angry at the cross-examination . she determine , and why it would be difficult to say , that nothing would induce she to tell she sister what be the subject of the letter . , she know , be instigate by the archdeacon , and she would not plead to any arraignment make against she by he . ' but , dear , why do you get letter from at all , know , as you do , he be a person so distasteful to papa , and to the archdeacon , and indeed to all you friend ? ' ' in the first place , , I do not get letter from he ; and in the next place , as write the one letter which I have get , and as I only receive it , which I could not very well help do , as papa hand it to I , I think you have better ask instead of I . ' ' what be the letter about , ? ' 'I can not tell you , ' say she , ' because it be confidential . it be on business respecte a third person . ' ' it be in no way personal to yourself , then ? ' 'I will not exactly say that , , ' say she , get more and more angry at she sister 's question . ' well I must say it be rather singular , ' say Grantly , affect to laugh , ' that a young lady in you position should receive a letter from a unmarried gentleman of which she will not tell the contents , and which she be asham to show she sister . ' 'I be not asham , ' say , blaze up ; 'I be not asham of anything in the matter ; only I do not choose to be cross -examined as to my letter by any one . ' ' well , dear , ' say the other , 'I can not tell you that I do not think that a proper correspondent for you . ' ' if he be ever so improper , how can I help he have write to I ? but you be all prejudice against he to such a extent , that that which would be kind and generous in another man be odious and impudent in he . I hate a religion that teach one to be so onesided to one 's charity . ' 'I be sorry , , that you hate the religion you find here ; but surely you should remember that in such matter the archdeacon must know more of the world than you do . I do not ask you to respect or comply with I , although I be , unfortunately , so many year you senior ; but surly , in such a matter as this , you might consent to be guide by the archdeacon . he be most anxious to be you friend if you will let he . ' ' in such a matter as what ? ' say very testily . ' upon my word I do not know what this be all about . ' ' we all want you to drop . ' ' you all want I to be illiberal as yourselves . that I shall never be . I see
see no harm in 's acquaintance , and I shall not insult the man by tell he that I do . he have think it necessary to write to I , and I do not want the archdeacon 's advice about the letter . if I do I would ask it . ' ' then , , it be my duty to tell you , ' and now she speak with a tremendous gravity , ' that the archdeacon think that such a correspondence be disgraceful , and that he can not allow it to go on in this house . ' 's eye flash fire as she answer she sister , jump up from she seat as she do so . ' you may tell the archdeacon that wherever I be I shall receive what letter I please and from whom I please . and as for the word disgraceful , if have use it of I he have be unmanly and inhospitable , ' and she walk off to the door . ' when papa come from the dining - room I will thank you to ask he to step up to my bed - room . I will show he 's letter , but I will show it to no one else . ' and so say she retreat to she baby . she have no conception of the crime with which she be charge . the idea that she could be think by she friend to regard Slope as a lover , have never flash upon she . she conceive that they be all prejudiced and illiberal in they persecution of he , and therefore she would not join in the persecution , even though she greatly dislike the man . be very angry as she seat herself in a low chair by she open window at the foot of she child 's bed . 'To dare to say that I have disgrac myself , ' she repeat to herself more than once . ' how papa can put up with that man 's arrogance ! I will certainly not sit down to dinner in this house again unless he beg my pardon for that word . ' and then a think struck she that might perchance hear of she ' disgraceful ' correspondence with , and she turn crimson with pure vexation . oh , if she have know the truth ! if she could have conceive that have be inform as a fact that she be go to marry ! she have not be long in she room before she father join she . as he leave the drawing - room Mr Grantly take she husband into the recess of the window , and tell he how signally she have fail . 'I will speak to she myself before I go to bed , ' say the archdeacon . ' pray do no such thing , ' say she ; ' you can do no good and will only make a unseemly quarrel in the house . you have no idea how headstrong she can be . ' the archdeacon declare that as to that he be quite indifferent . he know he duty and he would do it . be weak in the extreme in such matter . he would not have it hereafter on he conscience that he have not do all that in he lay to prevent so disgraceful a alliance . it be in vain that assu he that speak to angrily would only hasten such a crisis , and render it certain if at present there be any doubt . he be angry , self - will , and sore . the fact that a lady in he household have receive a letter from have wound he pride in the sorest place , and nothing could control he . look worn and woebegone as he enter he daughter 's room . these sorrow worry he sadly . he feel that if they be continue he must go to the wall in a manner so kindly prophesy to he by the chaplain . he knock gently at he daughter 's door , wait till he be distinctly bade to enter , and then appear as though he and not she be the suspect criminal . 's arm be soon within he , and she have soon kiss he forehead and caress he , not with joyous but with eager love . 'Oh , papa , ' she say , 'I do so want to speak to you . they have be talk about I downstairs to - night ; do not you know they have , papa ? ' confess with a sort of murmur that the archdeacon have be speak of she . 'I shall hate Grantly soon --' ' oh , my dear ! ' ' well ; I shall . I can not help it . he be so uncharitable , so unkind , so suspicious of everyone that do not worship himself : and then he be so monstrously arrogant to other people who have a right to they opinion as well as he have to he own . ' ' he be a earnest , eager man , my dear : but he never mean to be unkind . ' ' he be unkind , papa , most unkind . there , I get that letter from before dinner . it be you yourself who give it to I . there ; pray read it . it be all for you . it should have be address to you . you know how they have be talk about it downstairs . you know how they behave to I at dinner . and since dinner have be preach to I , till I could not remain in the room with she . read it , papa ; and then say whether that be a letter that need
need make Dr Grantly so outrageous . ' take he arm from he daughter 's waist , and slowly read the letter . she expect to see he countenance light up with joy as he learn that he path back to the hospital be make so smooth ; but she be doom to disappointment , as have once be the case before on a somewhat similar occasion . he first feeling be one of unmitigated disgust that should have choose to interfere in he behalf . he have be anxious to get back to the hospital , but he would have infinitely sooner resign all pretension to the place , than have own in any manner to 's influence in he favour . then he thoroughly dislike the tone of 's letter ; it be unctuous , false , and unwholesome , like the man . he see , which have fail to see , that much more have be intend than be express . the appeal to 's pious labour as separate from he own grate sadly against he feeling as a father . and then , when he come to the ' darling boy , ' and the ' silken tress ,' he slowly close and fold the letter in despair . it be impossible that should so write unless he have be encourage . it be impossible that should have receive such a letter , and receive it without annoyance , unless she be willing to encourage he . so at least , argue to himself . how hard it be to judge accurately of the feeling of other . , as he come to close the letter , in he heart condemn he daughter for indelicacy , and it make he miserable to do so . she be not responsible for what might write . true . but then she express no disgust at it . she have rather expressed approval of the letter as a whole . she have give it to he to read , as a vindication for herself and also for he . the father 's spirit sank within he as he feel that he could not acquit she . and yet it be the true feminine delicacy of 's mind which bring she on this condemnation . listen to I , lady , and I beseech you to acquit she . she think of this man , this lover of whom she be so unconscious , exactly as she father do , exactly as the do . at least she esteem he personally as they do . but she believe he to be in the main a honest man , and one truly inclin to assist she father . she feel herself bound , after what have pass , to show the letter to . she think it necessary that he should know what have to say . but she do not think it necessary to apologise for , or condemn , or even allude to the vulgarity of the man 's tone , which arise , as do all vulgarity , from ignorance . it be nauseous to she to have such a man like comment on she personal attraction ; and she do not think it necessary to dilate with she father upon what be nauseous . she never suppose they could disagree on such a subject . it would have be painful for to point it out , painful to she to speak strongly against a man of whom , on the whole she be anxious to think and speak well . in encountering such a man she have encounter what be disagreeable , as she might do in walk the street . but in such encounter she never think it necessary to dwell on what disgust she . slowly fold the letter , hand it back to she , kiss she forehead and bay bless she . he then creep slowly away to he own room . as soon as he have leave the passage another knock be give at 's door , and be very demure own maid , enter on tiptoe , want to know would be so kind as to speak to the archdeacon for two minute in the archdeacon 's study , if not disagreeable . the archdeacon 's compliment , and he would not detain she two minute . think it be very disagreeable ; she be tired and fagged and sick at heart ; she present feeling towards be anything but those of affection . she be , however , no coward , and therefore promise to be in the study in five minute . so she arrange she hair , tie on she cap , and go down with a palpitating heart . there be people who delight in serious interview , especially when to they appertain the part of offer advice or administer rebuke , and perhaps the archdeacon be one of these . yet on this occasion he do not prepare himself for the come conversation with much anticipation of pleasure . whatever might be he fault he be not a inhospitable man , and he almost feel that he be sinn against hospitality in upbraiding in he own house . then , also he be not quite sure that he would get the best of it . he wife have tell he that he decidedly would not , and he usually give credit to what he wife say . he be , however , so convinced of what he consider to be the impropriety of 's conduct , and so assure also of he own duty in try to check it , that he conscience would not allow he to take he wife 's advice and go to bed quietly . 's face as she enter the room be not much as to reassure he . as a rule she be always mild in manner and gentle in
in conduct ; but there be that in she eye which make it not a easy task to scold she . in truth she have be little use to scold . no one since she childhood have try it but the archdeacon , and he have generally fail when he do try it . he have never do so since she marriage ; and now , when he see she quiet easy step , as she enter the room , he almost wish he have take he wife 's advice . he begin by apologising for the trouble he be give she . she beg he not to mention it , assure he that walk down the stair be no trouble to she at all , and then take a seat and wait patiently for he to begin he attack . ' my dear Eleanor ,' he say , ' I hope you believe I when I assure you that you have no sincerer friend than I be . ' to this answer nothing , and therefore he proceed . ' if you have a brother of you own I should not probably trouble you with what I be go to say . but as it be I can not but think that it must be a comfort to you to know that you have near you one who be as anxious for you welfare as any brother of you own could be . ' 'I never have a brother , ' say she . 'I know you never have , and it be therefore that I speak to you . ' 'I never have a brother , ' she repeat ; ' but I have hardly feel the want . have be to I both father and brother . ' ' you father be the fondest and most affectionate of man . but --' ' he be -- the fondest and most affectionate of man , and the best of counsellor . while he live I can never want advice . ' this rather put the archdeacon out . he could not exactly contradict what he sister - in - law say about she father ; and yet he do not at all agree with she . he want she to understand that he tender he assistance because she father be a soft good - natured gentleman , not sufficiently know in the way of the world ; but he could not say this to she . so he have to rush into the subject - matter of he proffer counsel without any acknowledgement on she part that she could need it , or would be grateful for it . ' tell I that you receive a letter this even from . ' ' yes ; papa bring it in the brougham . do he not tell you ? ' ' and say that you object to let she know what it be about . ' 'I do not think she ask I . but have she do so I should not have tell she . I do not think it nice to be ask about one 's letter . if one wish to show they one do so without be ask . ' ' true . quite so . what you say be quite true . but be not the fact of you receive letter from , which you do not wish to show to you friend , a circumstance which must excite some -- some surprise -- some suspicion --' ' suspicion ! ' say she , not speak above she usual voice , speak still in a soft womanly tone , but yet with indignation ; ' suspicion ! and who suspect I , and of what ? ' and then there be a pause , for the archdeacon be not quite ready to explain the ground of he suspicion . ' no , , I do not choose to show 's letter to . I could not show it to any one till papa have see it . if you have any wish to read it now , you can do so , ' and she hand the letter to he over the table . this be a amount of compliance which he have not at all expect , and which rather upset he in he tactic . however , he take the letter , peruse it carefully , and then refold it , keep it on the table under he hand . to he it appear to be in almost every respect the letter of a declare lover ; it seem to corroborate he worst suspicion ; and the fact of 's show it to he be all but tantamount to a declaration on she part , that it be she pleasure to receive love - letter from . he almost entirely overlook the real subject - matter of the epistle ; so intent be he on the forthcoming courtship and marriage . 'I will thank you to give it back , please , . ' he take he hand and hold it up , but make no immediate overture to return it . ' and have see this ? ' say he . ' of course he have , ' say she ; ' it be write that he might see it . it refer solely to he business -- of course I show it to he . ' ' and , do you think that that be a proper letter for you -- for a person in you condition -- to receive from ? ' ' quite a proper letter , ' say she , speak , perhaps , a little out of obstinacy ; probably forget at the moment the objectionable mention of she silken curl . ' then , , it be my duty to tell you that I wholly differ from you . ' 'So I suppose , ' say
say she , instigate now by sheer opposition and determination not to succumb . ' you think be a messenger direct from . I think he be a industrious , well - mean clergyman . it be a pity that we differ as we do . but , as we do differ , we have probably better not talk about it . ' here undoubtedly put herself in the wrong . she might probably have refuse to talk to Grantly on the matter in dispute without any impropriety ; but have consent to listen to he , she have no business to tell he that regard as a emissary from the evil one ; nor be she justify in praise , see that in she heart of heart she do not think well of he . she be , however , woun in spirit , and very angry and bitter . she have be subject to contumely and cross-question and ill - usage through the whole evening . no one , not even , not even she father , have be kind to she . all this she attribute to the prejudice and conceit of the archdeacon , and therefore she resolve to set no bounds to she antagonism to he . she would neither give nor take quarter . he have greatly presume in daring to question she about she correspondence , and she be determined to show that she think so . ' Eleanor , you be forget yourself , ' say he , look very sternly at she . ' otherwise you would never tell I that I conceive any man to be a messenger from . ' ' but you do , ' say she . ' nothing be too bad for he . give I that letter , if you please ;' and she stretch out she hand and take it from he . ' he have be do he best to serve papa , do more than any of papa 's friend could do ; and yet , because he be the chaplain of a bishop whom you do not like , you speak of he as though he have no right to the usage of a gentleman . ' ' he have do nothing for you father . ' 'I believe that he have do a great deal ; and , as far as I be concerned , I be grateful to he . I judge people by they act , and he , as far as I can see they , be good . ' she then pause for a moment . ' if you have nothing further to say , I shall be oblige by be permit to say good night -- I be very tired . ' Dr Grantly have , as he think , do he best to be gracious to he sister - in - law . he have endeavoure not to be harsh with she , and have striven to pluck the sting from he rebuke . but he do not intend that she should leave he without hear he . 'I have something to say , ; and I fear I must trouble you to hear it . you profess that it be quite proper that you should receive from such letter as that you have in you hand . and I think very differently . you be , of course , you own mistress , and much as we both must grieve should anything separate you from we , we have no power to prevent you from take step which may lead to such a separation . if you be so wilful as to reject the counsel of you friend , you must be allow to cater for yourself . be it worth you while to break away from all those you have love -- from all who love you -- for the sake of ? ' 'I do not know what you mean , Grantly ; I do not know what you be talk about . I do not want to break away from anybody . ' ' but you will do so if you connect yourself with . , I must speak out to you . you must choose between you sister and myself and we friend , and and he friend . I say nothing of you father , as you may probably understand he feeling better than I do . ' ' what do you mean , ? what be I to understand ? I never hear such wicked prejudice in my life . ' ' it be no prejudice , . I have know the world longer than you have do . be altogether beneath you . you ought to know and feel that he be so . pray --pray think off this before it be too late . ' ' too late ! ' ' or if you will not believe I , ask ; you can not think she be prejudice against you . or even consult you father , he be not prejudice against you . ask --' ' you have not speak to about this ! ' say she , jump up and stand before he . ' , all the world in and about Barchester will be speak of it soon . ' ' but you have speak to about I and ? ' ' certainly I have , and he quite agree with I . ' 'Agree with what ? ' say she . 'I think you be try to drive I mad . ' ' he agree with I and that it be quite impossible you should be receive at as . ' not be favourite with the tragic muse we do not dare to attempt any description of 's face when she first hear the name of pronounce as that which would or should or might at some time appertain to herself .
. the look , such as it be , do not soon forget . for a moment or two she could find no word to express she deep anger and deep disgust ; and , indeed , at this conjuncture , word do not come to she very freely . ' how dare you be so impertinent ? ' at last she say ; and then hurrie out of the room , without give the archdeacon the opportunity of uttere another word . it be with difficulty that she contain herself till she reach she own room ; and then , lock the door , she throw herself on she bed and sob as though she heart would break . but even yet she have no conception of the truth . she have no idea that she father and sister have for day past conceived in sober earnest the idea that she be go to marry the man . she do not even then believe that the archdeacon think that she would do so . by some manoeuvre of she brain , she attribute the origin of the accusation to , and as she do so she anger against he be excessive , and the vexation of she spirit almost unendurable . she could not bring herself to think the charge be make seriously . it appear to she most probable that the archdeacon and have talk over she objectionable acquaintance with ; that , in he jeering sarcastic way , have suggest the odious match as be the severest way of treat with contumely she acquaintance with he enemy ; and that the archdeacon , take the idea from he , think proper to punish she by the allusion . the whole night she lay awake think of what have be say , and this appear to be the most probable solution . but the reflection that should have in any way mention she name in connection with that of be overpower ; and the spiteful ill - nature of the archdeacon , in repeat the charge to she , make she wish to leave he house almost before the day have break . one thing be certain : nothing should make she stay there beyond the follow morning , and nothing should make she sit down in company with . when she think of the man whose name have be link with she own , she cry from sheer disgust . it be only because she would be thus disgusted , thus pain , and shock and cut to the quick , that the archdeacon have speak the horrid word . he want she to make she quarrel with , and therefore he have outrage she by he abominable vulgarity . she determine that at any rate he should know that she appreciate it . be the archdeacon a bit better satisfied with the result of he serious interview than be . he gather from it , as indeed he could hardly fail to do , that she be very angry with he ; but he think that she be thus angry , not because she be suspect of a intention to marry , but because such a intention be impute to she as a crime . Dr Grantly regard this suppose union with disgust ; but it never occur to he that be outraged , because she look at it exactly in the same light . he return to he wife vex and somewhat disconsolate , but , nevertheless , confirm in he wrath against he sister - in - law . ' she whole behaviour , ' say he , ' have be most objectionable . she hand I he love letter to read as though she be proud of it . and she be proud of it . she be proud of have this slavering , greedy man at she foot . she will throw herself and 's money into he lap ; she will ruin she boy , disgrase she father and you , and be a wretch miserable woman . ' he spouse who be sit at she toilet table , continue she avocation , make no answer to all this . she have know that the archdeacon would gain nothing be interfere ; but she be too charitable to provoke he by say so while he be in such deep sorrow . ' this come of a man make a will as that of 's ' he continue . ' be no more fitte to be trust with such a amount of money in she own hand than be a charity - school girl . ' Grantly make no reply . ' but I have do my duty ; I can do nothing further . I have tell she plainly that she can not be allow to form a link of connection between I and that man . from henceforward it will not be in my power to make she welcome at . I can not have 's love letter come here . I think you have better let she understand that as she mind on this subject seem to be irrevocably fix , it will be better for all party that she should return to . now be angry with , nearly as angry as she husband ; but she have no idea of turn she sister out of the house . she , therefore , at length speak out , and explain to the archdeacon in she own mild seduce way , that he be fume and fusse and frett himself very unnecessarily . she declare that thing , if leave alone , would arrange themselves much better than he could arrange they ; and at last succeeded in induce he to go to be in a somewhat less inhospitable state of mind . on the follow morning 's maid be commission to send word into the dining - room that
that she mistress be not well enough to attend prayer , and that she would breakfast in she own room . here she be visit by she father and declare to he she intention of return immediately to . he be hardly surprised by the announcement . all the household seem to be aware that something have go wrong . every one walk about with subdued foot , and people 's shoe seem to creak more than usual . there be a look of conscious intelligence on the face of the woman ; and the man attempt , but in vain , to converse as though nothing be the matter . all this have weigh heavily on the heart of ; and when tell he that she immediate return to be a necessity , he merely sigh piteously , and say that he would be ready to accompany she . but here she object strenuously . she have a great wish , she say , to go alone ; a great desire that it might be see that she father be not implicate in she quarrel with . to this at last he give way ; but not a word pass between they about -- not a word be say , not a question ask as to the serious interview on the preceding evening . there be , indeed , very little confidence between they , though neither of they know why it should be so . once ask he whether he would not call upon the bishop ; but he answer rather tartly that he do not know -- he do not think he should , but he could not say just at present . and so they parte . each be miserably anxious for some show of affection , for some return of confidence , for some sign of the feeling that usually bound they together . but none be give . the father could not bring himself to question he daughter about she suppose lover ; and the daughter would not sully she mouth by repea the odious word with which have arouse she wrath . and so they parte . there be some trouble in arrange the method of 's return . she beg she father to send for a postchaise ; but when Grantly hear of this , she object strongly . if would go away in dudgeon with the archdeacon , why should she let all the servants and all the neighbourhood know that she have do so ? so at last consent to make use of the carriage ; and as the archdeacon have go out immediately after breakfast and be not to return till dinner - time , she also consent to postpone she journey till after lunch , and to join the family at that time . as to the subject of the not a word be say by any one . the affair of the carriage be arrange by , who act as between the two lady ; they , when they meet , kiss each other very lovingly , and then sit down each to she crochet work as though nothing be amiss in all the world . another but there be another visitor at the rectory whose feeling in this unfortunate matter must be somewhat strictly analyse . have hear from he friend of the probability of 's marriage with with amazement , but not with incredulity . it have be say that he be not in love with , and up to this period this certainly have be true . but as soon as he hear that she love some one else , he begin to be very fond of she himself . he do not make up he mind that he wish to have she for he wife ; he have never think of she , and do not know how to think of she , in connection with himself ; but he experience a inward indefinable feeling of deep regret , a gnaw sorrow , and unconquerable depression of spirit , and also a species of self - abasement that he -- he -- have not do something to prevent that other he , that vile he , whom he so thoroughly despise , from carry off he sweet prize . whatever man may have reach the age of forty unmarried without know something of such feeling must have be very successful or else very could hear . have never think of trimm the sail of he bark so that he might sail as convoy to this rich argosy . he have see that be beautiful , but he have not dreamt of make she beauty he own . he know that be rich , but he have no more idea of appropriate she wealth than that of . he have discover that be intelligent , warm - hear , agreeable , sensible , all , in fact , that a man could wish he wife to be ; but the higher be she attraction , the greater she claim to consideration , the less have he imagine that he might possible become the possessor of they . such have be he instinct rather than he thought , so humble and so diffident . now he diffidence be to be reward by he see this woman , whose beauty be to he eye perfect , whose wealth be such as to have deter he from thinking of she , whose widowhood would have silence he have he not be so deter , by he see she become the prey of -- ! on the morning of 's departure he get on he horse to ride over to 's . as he ride he keep mutter to himself a line from :- how little flattering be woman 's love . and then he strove to recall he mind and to think of other affair , he parish
parish , he college , he creed -- but he thought would revert to and the Flemish chieftain : when we think upon it how little flattering be woman 's love , give commonly to whosoe 'er be nearest and prop with most advantage . it be not that should marry any one but he ; he have not put himself forward as a suitor ; but that she should marry -- and so he repeat over and over again : inward light be needful -- day by day want both be mate with the best and loftiest of 's feminine creation , whose love take no distinction but of gender and ridicule the very name of choice . and so he go on trouble much in he mind . he have but a uneasy ride of it that morning , and little good do he do at 's . the necessary alteration in he house be be fast complete , and he walk through the room , and go up and down the stair and ramble through the garden ; but he could not wake himself to much interest about they . he stand still at every window to look out and think upon . at almost every window he have before stood and chat with . she and have be there continually , and while have be give order , and see that order have be comply with , he and have converse on all thing appertain to a clergyman 's profession . he think how often he have lay down the law to she , and how sweetly she have borne with somewhat dictatorial decree . he remembe she listen intelligence , she gentle but quick reply , she interest in all that concern the church , in all that concern he ; and then he strike he riding whip against the window sill , and declare to himself that it be impossible that should marry . and yet he do not really believe , as he should have do , that it be impossible . he should have know she well enough to feel that it be truly impossible . he should have be aware that have that within she which would surely protect she from such degradation . but he , like so many other , be deficient in confidence in woman . he say to himself over and over again that it be impossible that should become , and yet he believe that she would do so . and so he ramble about , and could do and think of nothing . he be thoroughly uncomfortable , thoroughly ill at ease , cross with himself and every body else , and feed in he heart on animosity towards . this be not as it should be , as he know and feel ; but he could not help himself . in truth be now in love with , though ignorant of the fact himself . he be in love , and , though forty year old , be in love without be aware of it . he fume and fret , and do not know what be the matter , as a youth might do at one - and - twenty . and so have do no good at 's , he ride back much earlier than be usual with he , instigate , by some inward unacknowledged hope that he might see before she leave . have not pass a pleasant morning . she be irritate with every one , and not least with herself . she feel that she have be hardly use , but she feel also that she have not play she own card well . she should have hold herself so far above suspicion as to have receive she sister 's innuendoe and the archdeacon 's lecture with indifference . she have not do this , but have show herself angry and sore , and be now asham of she own petulance , and yet unable to discontinue it . the greater part of the morning she have spend alone ; but after a while she father join she . he have fully make up he mind that , come what might , nothing should separate he from he youngest daughter . it be a hard task for he to reconcile himself to the idea of see she at the head of 's table ; but he get through it . , as he argue to himself , be a respectable man and a clergyman ; and he , as 's father , have no right even to endeavou to prevent she from marry such a one . he longe to tell she how he have determined to prefer she to all the world , how he be prepare to admit that she be not wrong , how thoroughly he differ from ; but he could not bring himself to mention 's name . there be yet a chance that they be all wrong in they surmise ; and , be thus in doubt , he could not bring himself to speak openly to she on the subject . he be sit with she in the drawing - room , with he arm round she waist , say now and then some little soft word of affection , and work hard with he imaginary little fiddle - bow , when enter the room . he immediately get up , and the two make some trifle remark to each other , neither think of what he be say , and keep she seat on the sofa mute and moody . be include in the list of those against whom she anger be excited . he , too , have da to talk about she acquaintance with ; he , too , have da to blame she for not make a enemy of he enemy . she have not intend to see
see he before she departure , and be now but little inclin to be gracious . there be a feeling through the whole house that something be wrong . , when he see , could not succeed in look or in speak as though he know nothing of all this . he could not be cheerful and positive and contradictory with she , as be he wont . he have not be two minute in the room before he feel that he have do wrong in return ; and the moment he hear she voice , he thoroughly wish himself back at 's . why , indeed , should he have wish to have atch further to say to the future wife of ? 'I be sorry to hear that you be too leave so soon , ' say he , strive in vain to use he ordinary voice . in answer to this she mutter something about the necessity of she be in , and betake herself industriously to she crochet work . then there be a little more trite conversation between and ; trite , and hard , and vapid , and senseless . neither of they have anything to say to the other , and yet neither at such a moment like to remain silent . at last , take advantage of a pause , escape from the room , and and be leave together . ' you go will be a great break - up to we party , ' say he . she again mutter something which be all but inaudible ; but keep she eye fix upon she work . ' we have have a very pleasant month she , ' say he ; 'at least I have ; and I be sorry it should be so soon over . ' 'I have already be from home longer than I intend , ' she say ; ' and it be time that I should return . ' ' well , pleasant hour and pleasant day must come to a end . it be a pity that so few of they be pleasant ; or perhaps rather --' ' it be a pity , certainly , that man and woman do so much to destroy the pleasantness of they day , ' say she , interrupt he . ' it be a pity that there should be so little charity abroad . ' ' Charity should begin at home , ' say he ; and he be proceed to explain that he as a clergyman could not be what she would call charitable at the expense of those principle which he consider it he duty to teach , when he remember that it would be worse than vain to argue on such a matter with the future wife of . ' but you be just leave we ,' he continue , ' and I will not weary you last hour with another lecture . as it be , I fear I have give you too many . ' ' you should practise as well as preach , ? ' ' undoubtedly I should . so should we all . all of we who presume to teach be bound to do we utmost towards fulfil we own lesson . I thoroughly allow my deficiency in do so ; but I do not quite know now to what you allude . have you any special reason for tell I now that I should practise as well as preach ? ' make no answer . she longe to let he know the cause of she anger , to upbraid he for speaking of she disrespectfully , and then at last forgive he , and so part friend . she feel that she would be unhappy to leave he in she present frame of mind ; but yet she could hardly bring herself to speak to he of . and how could she allude to the innuendo throw out by the archdeacon , and throw out , as she believe , at the instigation of ? she want to make he know that he be wrong , to make he aware that he have ill - treat she , in order that the sweetness of she forgiveness might be enhance . she feel that she like he too well to be contente to part with he in displeasure ; and yet she could not get over she deep displeasure without some explanation , some acknowledgement , on he part , some assurance that he would never again so sin against she . ' why do you tell I that I should practise what I preach ? ' continue he . ' all man should do so . ' ' certainly . that be as it be understand and acknowledge . but you do not say so to all man , or to all clergyman . the advice , good as it be , be not give except in allusion to some special deficiency . if you will tell I my special deficiency , I will endeaavor to profit by the advice . ' she pause for a while , and then look full in he face , she say , ' you be not bold enough , , to speak out to I openly and plainly , and yet you expect I , a woman , to speak openly to you . why do you speak calumny of I to Dr Grantly behind my back ? ' ' ! ' say he , and he whole face become suffused with blood ; ' what calumny ? if I have speak calumny of you , I will beg you pardon , and he to whom I speak it , and 's pardon also . but what calumny have I speak of you to ? ' she also blush deeply . she could not bring herself to ask he whether he have
have not speak of she as another man 's wife . ' you know that best yourself , ' say she ; ' but I ask you as a man of honour , if you have not speak of I as you would not have speak of you own sister ; or rather I will not ask you , ' she continue , finde that he do not immediately answer she . 'I will not put you to the necessity of answer such a question . have tell I what you say . ' ' certainly ask I for my advice , and I give it . he ask I --' 'I know he do , . he ask you whether he would be do right to receive I at , if I continue my acquaintance with a gentleman who happen to be personally disagreeable to yourself and to he ? ' ' you be mistaken , . I have no personal knowledge of ; I have never meet he in my life . ' ' you be not the less individually hostile to he . it be not for I to question the propriety of you enmity ; but I have a right to expect that my name should not have be mix up in you hostility . this have be do , and be do by you in a manner the most injuriious and the most distressing to a woman . I must confess , , that from you I expect a different sort of usage . ' as she speak she with difficulty restrain she tear ; but she do restrain they . have she give way and sob about , as in such case a woman should do , he would have melt at once , implor she pardon , perhaps knelt at she foot and declare he love . everything would have be explain , and would have go back to with a contented mind . how easily would she have forgive and forget the archdeacon 's suspicion have she but hear the whole truth of it from . but then where would have be my novel ? she do not cry , and do not melt . ' you do I a injustice , ' say he . ' my advice be ask by , and I be oblige to give it . ' have be most officious , most impertinent . I have as complete a right to form my acquaintance as he have to form he . what would you have say , have I consult you as to the propriety of banish from my house because he know ? I be sure be quite as objectionable a acquaintance for a clergyman as be for a clergyman 's daughter . ' 'I do not know . ' ' no ; but do . it be nothing to I if he know all the young lord on every racecourse in . I shall not interfere with he ; nor shall he with I . ' 'I be sorry to differ with you , ; but as you have speak to I on this matter , and especially as you blame I for what little I say on the subject , I must tell you that I do differ from you . 's position as a man in the world give he a right to choose he own acquaintance , subject to certain influence . if he choose they badly , those influence will be use . if he consort with person unsuitable to he , he bishop will interfere . what the bishop be to Dr Grantly , be to you . ' 'I deny it . I utterly deny it , ' say , jump from she seat , and literally flash before , as she stand on the drawing - room floor . he have never see she so excited , he have never see she look so beautiful . 'I utterly deny it , ' say she . ' have no sort of jurisdiction over I whatsoever . do you and he forget that I be not altogether alone in this world ? do you forget that I have a father ? Dr Grantly , I believe , always have forget it . ' ' from you , , ' she continue , 'I would have listen to advice because I should have expect it to have be give as one friend may advise another ; not as a schoolmaster give a order to a pupil . I might have differ from you ; on this matter I should have do so ; but have you speak to I in you usual manner and with you usual freedom I should not have be angry . but now -- be it manly of you , , to speak of I in this way --, so disrespectful -- so --? I can not bring myself to repeat what you say . you must understand what I feel . be it just of you to speak of I in such a way , and to advise my sister 's husband to turn I out of my sister 's house because I choose to know a man of whose doctrine you disapprove ? ' 'I have no alternative leave to I , , ' say he , stand with he back to the fire - place , look down intently at the carpet pattern and speak with a slow measure voice , ' but to tell you plainly what do take place between I and . ' ' well , ' say she , finde that he pause for a moment . 'I be afraid that what I may say may pain you . ' ' it can not well do so more than what you have already do , ' say she . ' ask I whether I think it would be prudent for
for he to receive you in he house as the wife of , and I tell he that I think it would be imprudent . believe it to be utterly impossible that and -- ' ' thank you , , that be sufficient . I do not want to know you reason , ' say she , speak with a terribly calm voice . 'I have show to this gentleman the common - place civility of a neighbour ; and because I have do so , because I have not indulge against he in all the rancour and hatre which you and consider due to all clergyman who do not agree with yourselves , you conclude that I be to marry he ; -- or rather you do not conclude so -- no rational man could really come to such a outrageous conclusion without better ground ; -- you have not think so -- but , as I be in a position in which such a accusation must be peculiarly painful , it be make in order that I may be terrify into hostility against this enemy of yours . ' as she finish speak , she walk to the drawing - room window , and step out into the garden . be leave in the room , still occupy in count the pattern on the carpet . he have , however , distinctly heard and accurately mark every word that she have speak . be it not clear from what she have say , that the archdeacon have be wrong in imput to she any attachment to ? be it not clear that be still free to make another choice ? it may seem strange that he should for a moment have have a doubt ; and yet he do doubt . she have not absolutely deny the charge ; she have not expressly say that it be untrue . understand little of the nature of a woman 's feeling , or he would have know how improbable it be that she should make any clearer declaration than she have do . few man do understand the nature of a woman 's heart , till year have rob such understanding of its value . and it be well that it should be so , or man would triumph too easily . stood count the carpet , unhappy , wretchedly unhappy , at the hard word that have be speak to he ; and yet happy , exquisitely happy , as he think that after all the woman whom he so regard be not to become the wife of the man whom he so much dislike . as he stand there he begin to be aware that he be himself in love . Forty year have pass over he head , and as yet 's beauty have never give he a uneasy hour . he present hour be very uneasy . not that he remain there for half or a quarter of that time . in spite of what have say , be , in truth , a manly man . have ascertaine that he love this woman , and have now reason to believe that she be free to receive he love , at least if she pleas to do so , he follow she into the garden to make such wooing as he could . he be not long in find she . she be walk to and for beneath the avenue of elm that stand in the archdeacon 's grounds , skirt the churchyard . what have pass between she and , have not , alas , tend to lessen the acerbity of she spirit . she be very angry ; more angry with he than with any one . how could he have so misunderstood she ? she have be so intimate with he , have allow he such latitude in what he have choose to say to she , have comply with he idea , cherish he view , foster he precept , care for he comforts , make much of he in every way in which a pretty woman can make much of a unmarried man without commit herself or she feeling ! she have be do this , and while she have be do it he have regard she as the affianced wife of another man . as she pass along the avenue , every now and then a unbidden tear would force itself on she cheek , and as she raise she hand to brush it away , she stamp with she little foot upon the sward with very spite to think that she have be so treat . be very near to she when she first see he , that she turn short round and retrace she step down the avenue , try to ry she cheek of all trace of the tell - tale tear . it be a needless endeavour , for be in a state of mind that hardly allow he to observe such trifle . he follow she down the walk , and overtake she just as she reach the end of it . he have not consider how he would address she ; he have not think what he would say . he have only feel that it be wretchedness to he to quarrel with she , and that it would be happiness to be allow to love she . and that he could not lower himself by ask for she pardon . he have do no wrong . he have not calumniate she , not injure she , as she have accuse he of do . he could not confess sins of which have not be guilty . he could only let the past be past , and ask she as to she and he hope for the future . 'I hope we be not to part as enemy ? ' say he . ' there
there shall be no enmity on my part , ' say ; 'I endeavou to avoid all enmity . it would be a hollow pretence be I to say that there can be a true friendship between we after what have just past . people can not make they friend of those whom they despise . ' ' and be I despise ? ' 'I must have be so before you could have speak of I as you do . and I be deceive , cruelly deceive . I believe that you think well of I ; I believe that you esteem I . ' ' thought of you well and esteem you ! ' say he . ' in justify myself before you , I must use stronger word than those . ' he pause for a moment , and 's heart beat with painful violence within she bosom as she wait for he to go on . 'I have esteem , do esteem you , as I never esteem any woman . think well of you ! I never think to think so well , so much of any human creature . speak calumny of you ! insult you ! Wilfully injure you ! I wish it be my privilege to shield you from calumny , insult , and injury . ! ah , I . ' Twere almost better that it be so . better than to worship with a sinful worship ; sinful and vain also . ' and then he walk along beside she , with he hand clasp behind he back , look down on the grass beneath he foot , and utterly at a loss to express he meaning . and walk beside he determine at least to give he no assistance . 'Ah , I ! ' he utter at last , speak rather to himself than to she . 'Ah , I ! these Plumstead walks be pleasant enough , if one could have but heart 's ease ; but without that , the dull dead stone of be far preferable ; and 's too ; , I be begin to think that I mistake myself when I come hither . a priest now would have escape all this . of , of heaven ! how good for we would it be , if thou couldest vouchsafe to we a certain rule . ' ' and have we not get a certain rule , ? ' ' yes -- yes , surely ; " lead we not into temptation , but deliver we from evil . " but what be temptation ? what be evil ? be this evil -- be this temptation ? ' poor ! it would not come out of he , that deep true love of he . he could not bring himself to utter it in plain language that would require and demand a answer . he know not how to say to the woman at he side , ' since the fact be that you do not love that other man , that you be not to be he wife , can you love I , will you be my wife ? ' these be the word which be in he heart , but with all he sigh he could not draw they to he lip . he would have give anything , everything for power to ask this simple question ; but glib as be he tongue in pulpit and on platform , now he could not find a word wherewith to express the plain wish of he heart . and yet understand he as thoroughly as though he have declare he passion with all the elegant fluency of a practise . with a woman 's instinct she follow every bend of he mind , as he speak of the pleasantness of and the stone of , as he allude to the safety of the priest and the hidden peril of temptation . she know that it all mean love . she know that this man at she side , this accomplished scholar , this practise orator , this great polemical combatant , be strive and strive in vain to tell she that he heart be no longer he own . she know this , and feel the joy of know it ; and yet she would not come to he aid . he have offend she deeply , have treat she unworthily , the more unworthily see that he have learn to love she , and could not bring herself to abandon she revenge . she do not ask herself whether or no she would ultimately accept he love . she do not even acknowledge to herself that she now perceive it with pleasure . at the present moment it do not touch she heart ; it merely appease she pride and flatter she vanity . have da to associate she name with that of , and now she spirit be soothe by finding that he would fain associate it with he own . and so she walk on beside he inhal incense , but give out no sweetness in return . 'Answer I this , ' say , stop suddenly in he walk , and step forward so that he face he companion . 'Answer I this question . you do not love ? you do not intend to be he wife ? ' certainly do not go the right way to win such a woman as . just as she wrath be evaporat , as it be disappear before the true warmth of he untold love , he re-kindle it by a most useless repetition of he original sin . have he know what he be about he should never have mention 's name before , till he have make she all he own . then , and not till then , he might have talk of Slope with as much triumph
triumph as he choose . 'I shall answer no such question , ' say she ; ' and what be more , I must tell you that nothing can justify you ask it . good morning ! ' and so say she step proudly across the lawn , and pass through the drawing - room window join she father and sister at lunch in the dining - room . half a hour afterwards she be in the carriage , and so she leave Plumstead without again see . he walk be long and sad among the sombre tree that overshadow the churchyard . he leave the archdeacon 's grounds that he might escape attention , and saunter among the green hillock under which lay at rest so many of the once loving swain and forget beauty of . to he ears 's last word sound like a knell never to be reverse . he could not comprehend that she might be angry with he , indignant with he , remorseless with he , and yet love he . he could not make up he mind whether or no be in truth a favour rival . if not , why should she not have answer he question ? poor -- untatch , illiterate , boorish , ignorant man ! that at forty year of age you should know so little of the workings of a woman 's heart ! the 's and thus the pleasant party of be break up . it have be a very pleasant party as long as they have all remain in good humour with one another . have feel she house to be gayer and brighter than it have be for many a long day , and the archdeacon have be aware that the month have pass pleasantly without attribute the pleasure to any other special merit than those of he own hospitality . within three or four day of 's departure , have also return , and have go to to spend one week there previous to he settling at the vicarage of 's . he have go laden with many message to touch the iniquity of the doings in palace , and the peril in which it be believe the hospital still stand in spite of the assurances contain in 's inauspicious letter . during 's drive into she have not much opportunity of reflect on . she have be constrain to divert she mind both from he sins and he love by the necessity of conversing with she sister , and maintain the appearance of part with she on good term . when the carriage reach she own door , and while she be in the act of give she last kiss to she sister and niece , run out and exclaim : 'Oh ! , -- have you hear ?-- oh ! , have you hear what have happen ? the poor dean ! ' ' good heaven , ' say ; ' what -- what have happen ? ' ' this morning at nine he have a fit of apoplexy , and he have not speak since . I very much fear that by this time he be no more . ' Grantly have be very intimate with the dean , and be therefore much shocked . have not know he so well ; nevertheless she be sufficiently acquainted with he person and manners to feel start and grieve also at the tiding she now receive . 'I will go at once to the deanery , ' say , ' the archdeacon , I be sure , will be there . if there be any news to send you I will let call before he leave town . ' and so the carriage drive off , leave and she baby with . have be quite right . the archdeacon be at the deanery . he have come into Barchester that mor by himself , not care to intrude himself upon , and he also immediately on he arrival have hear of the dean 's fit . there be , as we have before say , a library or read room connect the cathedral with the dean 's home . this be generally call the bishop 's library , because a certain bishop of be suppose to have add it to the cathedral . it be build immediately over a portion of the cloister , and a flight of stair descende from it into the room in which the cathedral clergyman put they surplice on and off . as it also open directly into the dean 's house , it be the passage through which that dignitary usually go to he public devotion . who have or have not the right of entry into it , might be difficult to say ; but the people of believe that it belong to the dean , and the clergyman of believe that it belong to the chapter . on the morning in question most of the resident clergyman who constitute the chapter , and some few other , be here assemble , and among they as usual the archdeacon towere with high authority . he have hear of the dean 's fit before he be over the bridge which lead into the town , and have at once come to the well know clerical trysting place . he have be there by eleven o'clock , and have remain ever since . from time to time the medical man who have be call in come through from the deanery into the library , uttere little bulletin , and then return . there be it appear very little hope of the old man 's rallying , indeed no hope of any thing like a final recovery . the only question be whether he must die at once speechless , unconscious , stricken to death by he first heavy fit ; or whether by due aid of medical
medical skill he might not be so far bring back to this world as to become conscious of he state , and enable to address one prayer to he maker before he be call to meet face to face at the judgement seat . have be send for from . that great man have show himself a wonderful adept at keeping life still move within a old man 's heart in the case of good old , and it might be reasonably expect that he would be equally successful with a dean . in the mean time , and be do they best ; and poor sit at the head of she father 's bed , long , as in such case daughter do long , to be allow to do something to show she love ; if it be only to chafe he foot with she hand , or wait in menial office on those autocratic doctor ; anything so that now in the time of need she might be of use . the archdeacon alone of the attendant clergy have be admit for a moment into the sick man 's chamber . he have crept in with creaking shoe , have say with smother voice a word of consolation to the sorrowing daughter , have look on the distorted face of he old friend with solemn but yet eager scrutinising eye , as though he say in he heart , ' and so some day it will probably be with I ;' and then , have whisper a unmeaning word or two to the doctor , have creak he way back again into the library . ' he will never speak again , I fear , ' say the archdeacon as he noiselessly close the door , as though the unconscious dying man , from whom all sense have fle , would have hear in he distant chamber the spring of the lock which be now so carefully handle . ' indeed ! indeed ! be he so bad ? ' say the meagre little prebendary , turn over in he own mind all the probable candidate for the deanery , and wonder whether the archdeacon would think it worth he while to accept it . ' the fit must have be very violent . ' ' when a man over seventy have a stroke of apoplexy , it seldom come very lightly , ' say the burly chancellor . ' he be a excellent , sweet - temper man , ' say one of the vicar choral . ' heaven know how we shall repair he loss . ' ' he be indeed , ' say a minor canon ; ' and a great bless to all those privileged to take a share of the service of we cathedral . I suppose the government will appoint , . I trust that we may have no stranger . ' ' we will not talk about he successor , ' say the archdeacon , ' while there be yet hope . ' ' oh no , of course not , ' say the minor canon . ' it would be extraordinarily indecorous ; but --' 'i know of no man , ' say the meagre little prebendary , ' who have better interest with the present government than . ' ! ' say two or three at once almost sotto voce . dean of ! ' ' Pooh ! ' exclaim the burly chancellor . ' the bishop would do anything for he , ' say the little prebendary . ' and so would , ' say the vicar choral . ' Pooh ! ' say the chancellor . the archdeacon have almost turned pale at the idea . what if should become dean of ? to be sure there be no adequate ground , indeed no ground at all , for presum that such a desecration could even be contemplate . but nevertheless it be on the card . have interest with the government , and the man carry as it be in he pocket . how should they all conduct themselves if be to become dean of ? the bare idea for a moment struck even Dr Grantly dumb . ' it would certainly not be very pleasant for we to have in the deanery , ' say the little prebendary , chuckl inwardly at the evident consternation which he surmise have create . ' about as pleasant and as probably as have you in the palace , ' say the chancellor . 'I should think such a appointment highly improbable , ' say the minor , ' and , moreover , extremely injudicious . should not you , ? ' 'I should presume such a thing to be quite out of the question , ' say the archdeacon ; ' but at the present moment I be think rather of we poor friend who be lie so near we than of . ' ' of course , of course , ' say the vicar choral with a very solemn air ; 'or course you be . so be we all . poor ; the best of man but -- ' ' it be the most comfortable dean 's residence in , ' say a second prebendary . ' fifteen acre in the grounds . ' it be better than many of the bishop 's palaces . ' ' and full two thousand a year , ' say the meagre doctor . ' it be cut down to L 1200 , ' say the chancellor . ' no , ' say the second prebendary . ' it be to be fiftee . a special case be make . ' ' no such thing , ' say the chancellor . ' you will find I be right , ' say the prebendary . 'I be sure I read it in the report , ' say the minor canon .
. ' Nonsense , ' say the chancellor . ' they could not do it . there be to be no exception but and . ' ' and and , ' say the vicar choral , modestly . ' what say you , Grantly ? ' say the meagre little doctor . ' say about what ? ' say the archdeacon , who have be look as though he be think about he friend the dean , but who have in reality be think about . ' what be the next dean to have , twelve or fifteen ? ' , ' say the archdeacon authoritatively , thereby put a end at once to all doubt and dispute among the subordinate as far as that subject be concerned . ' well I certainly think it be fifteen , ' say the minor canon . ' Pooh ! ' say the burly chancellor . at this moment the door open , and in come . ' how be he ? ' ' be he conscious ? ' ' can he speak ? ' 'i hope , I trust , something better , doctor ? ' say half a dozen voice all at once , each in a tone of extremest anxiety . it be pleasant to see how popular the good old dean be among he clergy . ' no change , gentleman ; not the slightest change -- but a telegraphic message have arrive ,-- will be here by the 9.15 pm train . if any man can do anything will do it . but all that skill can do have be do . ' ' we be sure of that , , ' say the archdeacon ; 'we be quite sure of that . but yet you know -- ' 'Oh , quite right , ' say the doctor , ' quite right -- I should have do just the same -- I advise it at once . I say to Rerechild at once that with such a life and such a man , should be summon -- of course I know that the expense be nothing -- so distinguished , you know , and so popular . nevertheless , all that human skill can do have be do . ' just at this period 's carriage drive into the close , and the archdeacon go down to confirm the news which she have hear before . by the 9.15 pm train do arrive . and in the course of the night a sort of consciousness return to the poor old dean . whether this be due to be a question on which it may be well not to offer a opinion . be very clear in he own mind , but himself be think to have differ from that learn doctor . at any rate , express a opinion that the dean have yet some day to live . for the eight or ten next day , accordingly , the poor dean remain in the same state , half conscious and half comatose , and the attendant clergy begin to think that no new appointment would be necessary for some few month to come . a new candidate for the dean 's illness occasion much mental turmoil in other place besides the deanery and adjoin library , and the idea which occur to the meagre little prebendary about do not occur to he alone . the bishop be sit listlessly in he study when the news reach he of the dean 's illness . it be brotch to he by , who of course be not the last person in to hear it . it be also not slow in find its way to 's ear . it may be presume that there be not just much friendly intercourse between these two rival claimant for he lordship 's obedience . indeed , though live in the same house , they have not meet since the stormy interview between they in the bishop 's study on the preceding day . on that occasion , have be defeat . that from she standard be a subject of great sorrow to that militant lady ; but though defeat , she be not overcome . she feel that she might yet recover she lost ground , that she might yet hurl down to the dust from which she have pick he , and force she sinn lord to sue for pardon in sackcloth and ash . on that memorable day , memorable for he mutiny and rebellion against she high behest , he have carry he way with a high hand , and have really begin to think it possible that the day of he slavery be count . he have begin to hope that he be now about to enter into a free land , a land delicious with milk which he himself might quaff , and honey which would not tantalise he by be only honey to the eye . when bang the door , as she leave he room , he feel himself every inch a bishop . to be sure he spirit have be a little cow by he chaplain 's subsequent lecture ; but on the whole he be highly pleased with himself , and flatter himself that the worst be over . ' Ce n'est que le premier pa qui coute be he reflect ; and now that he first step have be so magnanimously take , all the rest would follow easily . he meet he wife as a matter of course at dinner , where little or nothing be say that could ruffle the bishop 's happiness . he daughter and the servant be present and protecte he . he make one or two trifling remark on the subject of he project visit to the archbishop , in order to show to all concerned that he intend to have he own way ; and the
the very servants perceive the change transfer a little of they reverence from they mistress to they master . all which the master perceive ; and so also do the mistress . but bid she time . after dinner he return to he study where soon find he , and there they have tea together and plan many thing . for some few minute the bishop be really happy ; but as the clock on the chimney piece warn he that the stilly hour of night be draw on , as he look at he chamber candlestick and know that he must use it , he heart sank within he again . he be as a ghost , all whose power of wander free through these upper region cease at cock - crow ; or rather he be the opposite of the ghost , for till cock - crow he must again be a serf . and would that be all ? could he trust himself to come down to breakfast a free man in the morning ? he be nearly a hour later than usual , when he betake himself to he rest . Rest ! what rest ? however , he take a couple of glass of sherry , and mount the stair . far be it from we to follow he thither . there be some thing which no novelist , no historian , should attempt ; some few scene in life 's drama which even no poet should dare to paint . let that which pass between and he wife on this night be understand to be among they . he come down the follow morning a sad and thoughtful man . he be attenuate in appearance ; one might almost say emaciate . I doubt whether he now grizzl look have not palpably become more grey than on the preceding evening . at any rate he have a materially . Years do not make a man old gradually and at a even pace . look through the world and see if this be not so always , except in those rare case in which the human be life and die without joy and without sorrow , like a vegetable . a man shall be possessed of florid youthful blooming health till it matter not what age . thirty -- forty --fifty , then come some nipping frost , some period of agony , that rob the fibre of the body of they succulence , and the hale and hearty man be count among the old . he come down and breakfast alone ; be indispose take she coffee in she bed - room , and she daughter wait upon she there . he eat he breakfast alone , and then , hardly know what he do , he betake himself to he usual seat in he study . he try to solace himself with he come visit to the archbishop . that effort of he own free will at any rate remain to he as a endure triumph . but somehow , now that he have achieve it , he do not seem to care so much about it . it be he ambition that have prompt he to take he place at the arch-episcopal table , and he ambition be now quite dead within he . he be thus seat when make he appearance with breathless impatience . ' my lord , the dean be dead . ' ' good heaven , ' exclaim the bishop , start out of he apathy by a announcement so sad and so sudden . ' he be either dead or now die . he have have a apoplectic fit , and I be tell that there be not the slightest hope ; indeed , I do not doubt that by this time he be no more . ' Bell be ring , and servants be immediately send to inquire . in the course of the morning , the bishop , lean on he chaplain 's arm , himself call at the deanery door . send to all manner of offer of assistance . the send also , and there be immense sympathy between the palace and the deanery . the answer to all inquiry be unvaried . the dean be just the same ; and be expect there by the 9.15 pm train . and then begin to meditate , as other also have do , as to who might possibly be the new dean ; and it occur to he , as it have also occur to other , that it might be possible that he should be the new dean himself . and then the question as to the twelve hundr , or fifteen hundr , or two thousand , run in he mind , as it have run through those of the other clergyman in the cathedral library . whether it might be two thousand , of fifteen , or twelve hundred , it would in any case undoubtedly be a great thing for he , if he could get it . the gratification to he ambition would be greater even than that of he covetousness . how glorious to out - top the archdeacon in he own cathedral city ; to sit above prebendary and canons , and have the cathedral pulpit and all the cathedral service altogether at he own disposal ! but it might be easier to wish for this than to obtain it . , however , be not without some means of forward he view , and he at any rate do not let the grass grow under he foot . in the first place he think -- and not vainly -- that he could count upon what assistance the bishop could give he . he immediately change he view with regard to he patron ; he make up he mind that if he become dean , he would hand
hand he lordship back to he wife 's vassalage ; and he think it possible that he lordship might not be sorry to ry himself of one of he mentor . have also take some step towards make he name know to other man in power . there be a certain chief - commissioner of national school who at the present moment be presume to stand especially high in the good graces of the government big wig , and with he have contrive to establish a sort of epistolary intimacy . he think that he might safely apply to ; and he feel sure that if choose to exert himself , the promise of such a piece of preferment would be have for the asking for . then he also have the press at he bidding , or flatter himself that he have so . the daily have take he part in a very thorough manner in those polemical contests of he with ; he have on more than one occasion absolutely have a interview with a gentleman on the staff of the paper , who , if not the editor , be as good as the editor ; and have long be in the habit of writing tell letter with he initial , and send to he editorial friend with private note sign in he own name . indeed , he and -- such be the name of the powerful gentleman of the press with whom he be connect -- be generally very amiable with each other . 's little productions be always print and occasionally comment upon ; and thus , in a small sort of way , he have become a literary celebrity . this public life have great charms for he , though it certainly also have it be drawback . on one occasion , when speak in the presence of reporter , he have fail to uphold and praise and swear by that special line of conduct which have be upheld and praise and swear by in the , and then he have be much surprised and at the moment not a little irritated to find himself lacerate most unmercifully by he old ally . he be quizze and bespatter and make a fool of , just as though , or rather than if , he have be a constant enemy instead of a constant friend . he have hitherto not learn that a man who aspire to be on the staff of the must surrender all individuality . but ultimately this little castigation have break no bone between he and he friend . be one of those who understand the world too well to show himself angry with such a potentate as the . he have kiss the rod that scour he , and now think that he might fairly look for he reward . he determine that he would at once let know that he be a candidate for the place which be about to be become vacant . more than one place of preferment have lately be give away much in accordance with advice tender to the government in the column of the . but it be in incumbent on first to secure the bishop . he specially feel that it behove he to do this before the visit to the archbishop be make . it be really quite providential that the dean should have fall ill just at the very nick of time . if could be instigate to take the matter up warmly , he might manage a good deal while stay at the archbishop 's palace . feel this very strongly determined to sound the bishop out that very afternoon . he be to start on the follow morning to , and therefore not a moment could be lose with safety . he go into the bishop 's study about five o'clock , and find he still sit alone . it might have be suppose that he have hardly move since the little excitement occasion by the walk to the dean 's door . he still wear on he face that dull dead look of half unconscious suffering . he be do nothing , read nothing , think of nothing , but simply gaze on vacancy when for the second time that day enter he room . ' well , , ' say he , somewhat impatiently ; for , to tell the truth , he be not anxious just at present to have much conversation with . ' you lordship will be sorry to hear that as yet the poor dean have show no sign of amendment . ' 'Oh -- ah --have not he ? poor man ! I be sure I be very sorry . I suppose have not arrive yet ? ' ' no ; not till the 9.15 pm train . ' 'I wonder they do not have a special . they say be very rich . ' ' very rich , I believe , ' say . ' but the truth be , all the doctor in can do no good ; no other good than to show that every possible care have be take . poor Dr Trefoil be not long for this world , my lord . ' 'I suppose not -- I suppose not . ' ' oh no ; indeed , he best friend could not wish that he should outlive such a shock , for he intellect can not possibly survive it . ' ' poor man , poor man ! ' say the bishop . ' it will naturally be a matter of much moment to you lordship who be to succeed he , ' say . ' it would be a great thing if you could secure the appointment for some person of you own way of think on important point . the party hostile to we be very strong here in -- much too strong .
. ' ' yes , yes . if poor be to go , it will be a great thing to get a good man in he place . ' ' it will be everything to you lordship to get a man on whose co-operation you can reckon . only think what trouble we might have if , or , or any of that way of thinking , be to get it . ' ' it be not very probable that -- will give it to any of that school ; why should he ? ' ' no . not probable ; certainly not ; but it be possible . great interest will probably be make . if I might venture to advise you lordship , I would suggest that you should discuss the matter with he grace next week . I have no doubt that you wish , if make know and back by he grace , would be paramount with --' ' well , I do not know that ; - have always be very kind to I , very kind . but I be unwilling to interfere in such matter unless ask . and indeed , if ask , I do not know whom , at this moment , I should recommend . ' , even , feel at present rather abash . he hardly know how to frame he little request in language sufficiently modest . he have recognise and acknowledge , to himself the necessity of shock the bishop in the first instance by the temerity of he application , and he difficulty be how best to remedy that by he adroitness and eloquence . 'I doubte myself , ' say he , ' whether you lordship would have any one immediately in you eye , and it be on this account that I venture to submit to you a idea that I have be turn over in my own mind . if poor must go , I really do not see why , with you lordship 's assistance , I should not hold the preferment myself . ' ' you ! ' exclaim the bishop , in a manner that could hardly have consider complimentary . the ice be now break , and become fluent enough . 'I have be think of look for it . if you lordship will press the matter on the archbishop , I do not doubt but that I shall succeed . you see I shall count upon assistance from the public press ; my name be know , I may say , somewhat favourably know to that portion of the press which be now most influential with the government , and I have friend also in the government . but , it be from you hand that I would most willingly receive the benefit . and , which should ever be the chief consideration in such matter , you must know better than any other person whatsoever what qualifications I possess . ' the bishop sit for a while dumfound . dean of ! the idea of such a transformation of character would never have occur to he own unaided intellect . at first he go on think why , for what reasons , on what account , should be dean of . but by degree the direction of he thought change , and he begin to think why , for what reasons , on what account , should not be dean of . as far as he himself , the bishop , be concerned , he could well spare the service of he chaplain . the little idea of use as a counterpoise to he wife have well nigh evaporate . he have all but acknowledge the futility of the scheme . if indeed he could have sleep in he chaplain 's bed - room instead of he wife 's there might have be something in it . but ---. and thus as have speak , the bishop begin to recognise the idea that that gentleman might become dean of Barchester without impropriety ; not move , indeed , by 's eloquence , for he do not follow the tenor of he speech ; but lead theretoo by he own cogitation . 'I need not say , ' continue , ' that it would be my chief desire to act in all matter connect with cathedral as far as possible in accordance with you view . I know you lordship so well ( and I hope you know I well enough to have the same feeling ) , that I be satisfied that my be in that position would add materially to you own comfort , and enable you to extend the sphere of you useful influence . as I say before , it be not desirable that there should be but one opinion among the dignitary in the same diocese . I doubt much whether I would accept such a appointment in any diocese in which I should be constrain to differ much from the bishop . in this case there would be a delightful uniformity of opinion . ' Slope perfectly well perceive that the bishop do not follow a word that he say , but nevertheless he go on talking . he know it be necessary that should recover from he surprise , and he know also that he must give he the opportunity of appear to have be persuade by argument . so he go on , and produce a multitude of fitting reason all tending to show that no one on earth could make so good a dean of as himself , that the government and the public would assuredly coincide in desiring that he , , should be dean of ; but that for high consideration of ecclesiastical polity , it would be especially desirable that this piece of preferment should be so bestow through the instrumentality of the bishop of the diocese
diocese . ' but I really do not know what i could do in the matter , ' say the bishop . ' if you would mention it to the archbishop ; if you would tell he grace that you consider such a appointment very desirable , that you have it much at heart with a view of put a end to the schism in the diocese ; if you do this with you usual energy , you would probably find no difficulty in induce he grace to promise that he would mention it to - . of course you would let the archbishop know that I be not look for the preferment solely through he intervention ; that you do not exactly require he to ask it as a favour ; that you expect I shall get it through other source , as be indeed the case ; but that you be very anxious that he grace should express he approval of such a arrangement to --' it end by the bishop promise to do as he be tell . not that he so promise without a stipulation . ' about that hospital , ' he say , in the middle of the conference . 'I be never so troublead in my life ; ' which be about the truth . ' you have not speak to since I see you ? ' assure he patron that he have not . ' ah well then -- I think upon the whole it will be better to let have it . it have be half promise to he , and he have a large family and be very poor . I think on the whole it will be better to make out the nomination for . ' ' but , my lord , ' say , still think that be bound to make a fight for he own view on this matter , and remember that it still behove he to maintain he lately acquire supremacy over , lest he should fail in he view regard the deanery , ' but , my lord , I be really much afraid -- ' ' , , 'I can hold out not sort of hope to you in this matter of succeed poor . I will certainly speak to the archbishop , as you wish it , but I can not think -- ' ' well , my lord , ' say , fully understand the bishop , and in he turn interrupt he , ' perhaps you lordship be right about . I have no doubt I can easily arrange matter with , and I will make out the nomination for you signature as you direct . ' ' yes , Slope , I think that will be best ; and you may be sure that any little that I can do to forward you view shall be done . ' and so they parte . have now much business to handle . he have to make he daily visit to the signora . this common prudence should have now induce he to omit , but he be infatuate ; and could not bring himself to be commonly prudent . he determine therefore that he would drink tea at the 's ; and he determine also , or think that he determine , that have do so he would go thither no more . he have also to arrange he matter with . he be of the opinion that would grase the deanery as perfectly as she would the chaplain 's cottage ; and he think , moreover , that 's fortune would excellently repair and dilapidation and curtailment in the dean 's stipend which might have be make by that ruthless ecclesiastical commission . touch he hope now soar high . be one of the numerous multitude of swain who think that all be fair in love , and he have accordingly not refrain from use the service of 's own maid . from she he have learn much of what have take place at ; not exactly with truth , for the 'own maid ' have not be able to divine the exact truth , but with some sort of similitude to it . he have be tell that the archdeacon and and and have all quarrelled with ' missus ' for have receive a letter from ; that ' missus ' have positively refuse to give the letter up ; that she have receive from the archdeacon the option of give up either and he letter , or the society of rectory ; and that ' missus ' have declare with much indignation , that ' she do not care a straw for the society of Plumstead rectory , ' and that she would not give up for any of they . consider the source from whence this come , it be not quite so untrue as might have be expect . it show pretty plainly what have be the nature of the conversation in the servants ' hall ; and couple as it be with the certainty of 's sudden return , it appear to to be so far worthy of credit as to justify he in think that the fair widow would in all human probability accept he offer . all this work have therefore to be do . it be desirable he think that he should make he offer before it be know that be finally appoint to the hospital . in he letter to he have plainly declare that be to have the appointment . it would be very difficult to explain this away ; and be he to write another letter to , tell the truth and throw the blame on the bishop , it would naturally injure he in she estimation . he determine therefore to let that matter disclose itself as it would , and to lose no time in throw himself
himself at she foot . then he have to solicit the assistance of and , and he go directly from the bishop 's presence to compose he letter to those gentleman . as be esteem as a adept at letter writing , they shall be give in full . ' , , 185 -, ' ( private ) 'my dear , -- I hope that the intercourse which have be between we will preclude you from regard my present application as a intrusion . you can not I imagine have yet hear that poor dear old have be seize with apoplexy . it be a subject of profound grief to every one in , for he have always be a excellent man --excellent as man and as a clergyman . he be , however , full of year , and he life could not under any circumstance have be much longer spare . you may probably have know he . ' there be , it appear , no probable chance of he recovery . be , I believe , at present with he . at any rate the medical man here have declare that one or two day more must limit the tether of he mortal coil . I sincerely trust that he soul may we its flight to that have where it may for ever be at rest and for ever be happy . ' the bishop have be speak to I about the preferment , and he be anxious that it should be confer on I . I confess that I can hardly venture , at my age , to look for such advancement ; but I be so far encourage by he lordship , that I believe I shall be induced to do so . he lordship go to tomorrow , and be intent on mention the subject to the archbishop . 'I know well how deservedly great be you weight with the present government . in any matter touche church preferment you would of course be listen to . now that the matter have be put into my head , I be of course anxious to be successful . if you can assist I by you good word , you will confer on I one additional favour . 'I have better add , that - can not as yet know of this piece of preferment have fall in , or rather of the certainty of falling ( for poor dear Dr Trefoil be past hope ) . should - first hear it from you , that might probably bee think to give you a fair claim to express you opinion . ' of course we grand object be , that we should all be of one opinion in church matter . this be most desirable at ; it be this that make we good bishop so anxious about it . you may probably think it expedient to point this out to - if it shall be in you power to oblige I by mention the subject to he lordship . ' believe I , my dear , ' you most faithful servant , Obadiah Slope . ' he letter to be write in quite a different strain . conceive that he completely understand the difference in character and position of the two man whom he address . he know that for such a man as Fitzwhiggin a little flummery be necessary , and that it might be of the easy every day description . accordingly , he letter to be write current calamo , with very little trouble . but to such a man as it be not so easy to write a letter that should be effective and yet not offensive , that should carry its point without undue interference . it be not difficult to flatter , or , but very difficult to flatter Towers without let the flattery declare itself . this , however , have to be do . moreover , this letter must in appearance at least , be write without effort , and be fluent , unconstrained , and demonstrative of no doubt or fear on the part of the writer . Therefor the epistle to be study , and recopy , and elaborate at the cost of so many minute , that have hardly time to dress himself and reach 's that evening . when dispatch it run as follow :- ' , 185 - ( he purposely omit any allusion to the ' palace ' , think that might not like it . a great man , he remember , have be once much condemn for date a letter from . ) ' ( private ) 'My dear Sir ,-- we be all a good deal shock here this morning by hear that poor old have be stricken with apoplexy . the fit take he about 9 am . I be write now to save the post , and he be still alive , but past all hope , or possibility , I believe , of liive . be here , or will be very shortly ; but all that even can do , be to ratify the sentence of he less distinguished breth that nothing can be do . poor 's race on this side of the grave be run . I do not know whether you know he . he be a good , quiet , charitable man , of the old school of course , as any clergyman over seventy year of age must necessarily be . ' but I do not write merely with the object of send you such news as this : doubtless some one of you Mercuries will have see and hear and report so much ; I write , as you usually do yourself , rather with a view to the future than to the past . ' Rumou be already rife she as to 's successor , and among those
those name as possible future dean you humble servant be , I believe , not the least frequently speak of ; in short , I be look for the preferment . you may probably know that since come to this diocese , I have exert myself a good deal ; and I may certainly say not without some success . he and I be nearly always of the same opinion on point of doctrine as well as church discipline , and therefore I have have , as he confidential chaplain , very much in my own hand ; but I confess to you that I have a higher ambition than to remain the chaplain of any bishop . ' there be no position in which more energy be now need than in those of we deans . the whole of we enormous cathedral establishment have be allow to go to sleep , -- nay , they be all but dead and ready for the sepulchre ! and yet of what prodigious moment they might be make , if , as we intend , they be so managed as to lead the way and show a example for all we parochial clergy ! ' the bishop here be most anxious for my success ; indeed , he go to - morrow to press the matter on the archbishop . I believe also I may count on the support of at least one of the most effective member of the government . but I confess the support of the , if I be think worthy of it , would be more gratify to I than any other ; more gratify if by it I should be successful ; and more gratify also , if , although , so support , I should be unsuccessful . ' the time have , in fact , come in which no government can venture to fill up the high place of the Church in defiance of the public press . the age of honourable bishop and noble dean have go by ; and any clergyman however humbly bear can now hope for success , if he industry , talent , and character , be sufficient to call forth the manifest opinion of the public in he favour . ' at the present moment we all feel that any counsel give in such matter by the have the greatest weight , -- be , indeed , generally follow ; and we feel also -- I be speak of clergyman of my own age and stand -- that it should be so . there can be no patron less interested than the , and no that more thoroughly understand the wants of the people . 'I be sure you will not suspect I of ask from you any support which the paper with which you be connect can not conscientiously give I . my object in writing be to let you know that I be a candidate for the appointment . it be for you to judge whether or no you can assist my view . I should not , of course , have write to you on such a matter have I not believe ( and I have have good reason so to believe ) that the approve of my view on ecclesiastical polity . ' the bishop express a fear that I may be consider too young for such a station , my age be thirty - six . I can not think that at the present day any hesitation need be feel on such a point . the public have lose it be love for antiquated servants . if a man will ever be fit to do good work he will be fit at thirty - six year of age . ' believe I very faithfully yours , Obadiah . Tower , , ' . ' have thus exert himself , post he letter , and pass the remainder of the evening at the foot of he mistress . Slope will be accuse of deceit in he mode of canvassing . it will be say that he lie in the application he make to each of he three patron . I believe it must be own that he do so . he could not hesitate on account of he youth , and yet , be quite assure that he be not too young . he could not count chiefly on the bishop 's support , and chiefly also on that of the newspaper . he do not think that the bishop be go to press the matter on the archbishop . it must be own that in he canvassing be as false as he well could be . let it , however , be ask of those who be conversant with such matter , whether he be more false than man usually be on such occasion . we English gentleman hate the name of a lie ; but how often do we find public man who believe each other 's word ? the next week pass over at with much apparent tranquillity . the heart , however , of some of the inhabitant be not so tranquil as the street of the city . the poor old dean still continue to live , just as have prophesy that he would do , much to amazement , and some thought , disgust , of . the bishop still remain away . he have stay a day or two in town , and have also remain longer at the archbishop 's than he have intend . have as yet receive no line in answer to either of he letter ; but he have lear not the cause of this . be stalk a deer , or attend the , in the Highland ; and even the indefatigable have steal a autumn holiday , and have make one of the yearly tribe who now ascend . learn that he
he be not expect back till the last day of . be throw much with the , of whom she become fonder and fonder . if ask , she would have say that be she special friend , and so she would have think . but , to tell the truth , she like nearly as well ; she have no more idea of regard he as a lover than she would have have of look at a big tame dog in such a light . have become very intimate with she , and make little speech to she , and say little thing of sort very different from the speech and sayings of other man . but then this be almost always do before he sister ; and he , with he long silken beard , he light blue eye and strange dress , be so unlike other man . she admit he to a kind of familiarity which she have never know with any one else , and of which she by no means understand the danger . she blush once at finding that she have call he , and on the same day only barely remember she position in time to check herself from playing upon he some personal practical joke to which she be instigate by . in all this be perfectly innocent , and could hardly be call guilty . but every familiarity into which be entrap be deliberately plan by he sister . she know well how to play she game , and play it without mercy ; she know , none so well , what be she brother 's character , and she would have hand over to he the young widow , and the young widow 's money , and the money of the widow 's child , without remorse . with she pretend friendship and warm cordiality , she strove to connect so closely with she brother as to make it impossible that she should go back even if she wish it . but know really nothing of 's character ; do not even understand that there be such character . she do not comprehend that a young and pretty woman could be playful and familiar with a man such as , and yet have no idea in she head , no feeling in she heart that she would have be asham to own to all the world . do not in the least conceive that she new friend be a woman whom nothing could entrap into a inconsiderate marriage , whose mind would have revolt from the slightest impropriety have she be aware that any impropriety exist . , however , have tact enough to make herself and she father 's house very agreeable to . there be with they all a absence of stiffness and formality which be peculiarly agreeable to Eleanor after the great dose of clerical arrogance which she have lately be constrain to take . she play chess with they , walk with they , and drank tea with they ; study or pretend to study astronomy ; assist they in writing story in rhyme , in turn prose tragedy into comic verse , or comic story into would - be tragic poetry . she have no idea before that she have any such talents . she have not conceive the possibility of she do such thing as she now do . she find with the new amusement and employment , new pursuit , which in themselves could not be wrong , and which be exceedingly allur . be it not a pity that people who be bright and clever should so often be exceedingly improper ? and that those who be never improper should so often be dull and heavy ? now be always bright , and never heavy : but she propriety be doubtful . but during all this time Eleanor by no means forget , nor do she forget . she have part from in she anger . she be still angry at what she regard as he impertinent interference ; but nevertheless she look forward to meet he again ; and also look forward to forgive he . the word that have utter still sound in she ear . she know that if not intend for a declaration of love , they do signify that he love she ; and she feel also that if he ever do make such a declaration , it might be that she should not receive it unkindly . she be still angry with he , very angry with he ; so angry that she would bit she lip and stamp she foot as she think of what he have say and do . but nevertheless she year to let he know that he be forgive ; all that she require be that he should own that he have sinn . she be to meet he at on the last day of the present month . Thorne have invite all the country round to a breakfast on the lawn . there be to be tent and archery , and dance for the ladie on the lawn , and for the swain and girl in the paddock . there be to be fiddler and fifer , races for the boy , pole to be climb , ditch full of water to be jump over , horse - collar to be grin through ( this latter amusement be a addition of the steward , and not arrange by in the original programme ) , and every game to be play which , in a long course of reading , Thorne could ascertain to have be play in the good day of . everything of more modern growth be to be taboo , if possible . on one subject Thorne be very unhappy . she have be turn in she mind the matter of the bull - ring , but could
could not succeed in make anything of it . she would not for the world have do , or allow to be do , anything that be cruel ; as to the promote the torture of a bull for the amusement of she young neighbour , it need hardly be say that Thorne would be the last to think of it . and yet , there be something so charme in the name . a bull - ring , however , without a bull would only be a memento of the decadence of the time , and she feel herself constrain to abandon the idea . Quintains , however , she be determined to have , and have pole and swivel and bag of flou prepare accordingly . she would no doubt have be anxious for something small in the way of a tournament ; but , as she say to she brother , that have be try , and the age have prove itself too decidedly inferior to its fore - runner to admit of such a pastime . Thorne do not seem to participate in she regret , feel perhaps that a full suit of chain- armou would have add but little to he own personal comfort . this party at have be plan in the first place as a sort of welcome to on he entrance into 's parsonage ; a intend harvest - home gala for the labourer and they wife and child have subsequently be amalgamate with it , and thus it have grow into its present dimension . all the party have of course be ask , at the time of the invitation have intend to have go with she sister . now she plan be alter , and she be go with the . the Proudy be also to be there ; and as have not be include in the invitation to the palace , the signora , whose impudence never desert she , ask permission of to bring he . this permission miss Thorne give , have no other alternative ; but she do so with a trembling heart , fear would be offend . immediately on he return she apologise , almost with tear , so dire a enmity be presume to rage between the two gentleman . but comfort by a assurance that he should meet with the greatest pleasure imaginable , and make she promise that she would introduce they to each other . but this triumph of 's be not so agreeable to , who since she return to have do she best to avoid he . she would not give way to the folk when they so ungenerously accuse she of be in love with this odious man ; but , nevertheless , know that she be so accused , she be fully alive to the expediency of keep out of he way and drop he by degree . she have see very little of he since she return . she servant have be instruct to say to all visitor that she be out . she could not bring herself to specify particularly , and in order to order to avoid he she have thus debar herself from all she friend . she have accept , and , by degree , a few other also . once she have meet he at the 's ; but , as a rule , 's visit there have be make in the morning , and hers in the evening . on that one occasion have manage to preserve she from any annoyance . this be very good - nature on the part of , as think , and also very sharp - wit , as have tell she friend nothing of she reason for wish to avoid that gentleman . the fact , however , be , that have learnt from she sister that would probably put himself forward as a suitor for the widow 's hand , and she be consequently sufficiently alive to the expediency of guard 's future wife from any danger in that quarter . nevertheless the be pledge to take with they to . a arrangement be therefore necessarily make , which be very disagreeable to . , with herself , , and , be to go together , and be to follow with he sister . it be clearly visible to 's face that this assortment be very disagreeable to she ; and , who be much encourage thereby in she own little plan , make a thousand apology . 'I see you do not like it , dear , ' say she , ' but we could not manage it otherwise . would give he eye to go with you , but can not possibly go without he . could we possibly put and in the same carriage without anyone else . they would both be ruin for ever , you know , and not admit inside gate , I should imagine , after such a impropriety . ' ' of course that would not do , ' say ; ' but could not I go in the carriage with the signora and you brother ? ' ' impossible ! ' say . ' when she be there , there be only room for two . ' the signora , in truth , do not care to do she travel in the presence of strangers . ' well , then , ' say , ' you be all so kind , , and so good to I , that I be sure you will not be offend ; but I think I shall not go at all . ' ' not go at all !-- what nonsense !-- indeed you shall . ' it have be absolutely determine in family council that should propose on that very occasion . ' or I can take a fly , ' say . ' you know that
that I be not embarrasse by so many difficulty as you young lady . I can go alone . ' ' Nonsense , my dear . do not think of such a thing ; after all it be only for a hour or so , and to tell the truth , I do not know what it be you dislike so . I think you and be great friend . what be it you dislike ? ' 'Oh ; nothing particular , ' say ; ' only I think it would be a family party . ' ' of course it would be much nicer , much more snug , if would go with we . it be he that be badly treat . I can assure you he be much more afraid of Slope than you be . but you see can not go without he , -- and she , poor creature , go out so seldom ! I be sure you do not begrudge she this , though she vagary do knock about we own party a little . ' of course make a thousand protestation , a utter a thousand hope that Madeline would enjoy herself . and of course she have to give way , and undertake to go in the carriage with . in fact , she be drive either to so this , or to explain why she would not do so . now she could not bring herself to explain to all that have pass at . but it be to she a sore necessity . she think of a thousand little scheme for avoid it ; she would plead illness , and not go at all ; she would persuade to go although not ask , and then make a necessity of have a carriage of she own to take she sister - in - law ; anything , in fact , she could do rather than be see in the same carriage with . however , when the momentous morning come she have no scheme mature , and then hand she into 's carriage , and follow she step , sit opposite to she . the bishop return on the eve of the party , and be receive at home with radiant smile by the partner of all he car . on he arrival he crept up to he dressing - room with somewhat of a palpitat heart ; he have overstay he allot time by three day , and be not without fear of penalties . nothing , however , could be more affectionately cordial than the greeting he receive ; the girl come out and kiss he in a manner that be quite soothing to he spirit ; and , arm , and almost in word call he she dear , darling , good , pet , little bishop . all this be a very pleasant surprise . have somewhat change she tactic ; not that she have see any cause to disapprove of she former line of conduct , but she have now bring matter to such a point that she calculate that she might safely do so . she have get the better of , and she now think well to show she husband that when allow to get the better of everybody , when obey by he and permit to rule over other , she would take care that he should have he reward . have not a chance against she ; not only could she stun the poor bishop by she midnight anger , but she could assuage and soothe he , if she so willead by daily indulgence . she could furnish he room for he , turn he out as smart a bishop as any on the bench , give he good dinner , warm fire , and a easy life ; all this she would do if he would but be quietly obedient . but if not -- ! to speak sooth , however , he suffering on that dreadful night have be as poignant , as to leave he little spirit for further rebellion . as soon as he have dress himself she return to he room . ' I hope you enjoy yourself at --' say she , seat herself on one side of the fire while he remain in he arm -chair on the other , strok the calf of he leg . it be the first time he have have a fire in he room since the summer , and it pleas he ; for the good bishop love to be warm and cosy . nothing could be more polite than the archbishop ; and have be equally charme . be delighted to hear it ; nothing , she declare , pleas she so much as to think she bairn respectit like the lave . she do not put it precisely in these word , but what she say come to the same thing ; and then , have pet and fond she little man sufficiently , she proceed to business . ' the poor dean be still alive , ' say she . ' so I hear , so I hear , ' say the bishop . 'I will go to the deanery directly after breakfast to - morrow . ' ' we be go to this party at to - morrow morning , my dear ; we must be there early , you know , -- by twelve o'clock I suppose . ' 'Oh , -- ah ! ' say the bishop ; ' then I will certainly call the next day . ' be much say about it at --? ' ask . ' about what ? ' say the bishop . ' fill up the dean 's place , ' say . as she speak a spark of the wont fire return to she eye , and the bishop feel himself to be a
a little less comfortable than before . ' fill up the dean 's place ; that be , if the dean die ?--very little , my dear . it be mention , just mention . ' ' and what do you say about it , bishop ? ' ' why I say that I think that if , that be , should -- should the dean die , that be , I say I think - - ' as he go on stammering and flounder , he see that he wife 's eye be fix sternly on he . why should he encounter such evil for a man whom he love so slightly as ? why should he give up he enjoyment and he ease , and such dignity as might be allow to he , to fight a lose battle for a chaplain ? the chaplain after all , if successful , would be as great a tyrant as he wife . why fight at all ? why contend ? why be uneasy ? from that moment he determine to fl to the wind , and take the goods the gods provide . 'I be tell , ' say , speak very slowly , ' that be look to be the new dean . ' ' yes , --certainly , I believe he be , ' say the bishop . ' and what do the archbishop say about that ? ' ask . ' well , my dear , to tell the truth , I promise to speak to the archbishop . speak to I about it . it be very arrogant of he , I must say , -- but that be nothing to I . ' ' arrogant ! ' say ; ' it be the most impudent piece of pretension I ever hear in my life . dean of , indeed ! and what do you do in the matter , bishop ? ' ' why , my dear , I do speak to the archbishop . ' ' you do not mean to tell I , ' say , ' that you be go to make yourself ridiculous by lend you name to such preposterous attempt as this ? of indeed ! ' and she toss she head , and put she arm a -kimbo , with a air of confident defiance that make she husband quite sure that never would be of . in truth , be all but invincible ; have she marry , it may be doubt whether that arch wife - tamer would have be able to keep she leg out of those garment which be presume by man to be peculiarly unfitted for feminine use . ' it be preposterous , my dear . ' ' then why have you endeavoure to assist he ? ' ' why , -- my dear , I have not assist he -- much . ' ' but why have you do it at all ? why have you mix you name up in any thing so ridiculous ? what be it you do say to the archbishop ? ' ' why , I do just mention it ; I just do say that -- that in the event of the poor dean 's death , would -- would -- ' ' would what ? ' 'I forget how I put it ,-- would take it if he could get it ; something of that sort . I do not say much more than that . ' ' you should not have say anything at all . and what do the archbishop say ? ' ' he do not say anything ; he just bow and rub he hand . somebody else come up at the moment , and as we be discuss the new parochial universal school committee , the matter of the new dean drop ; after that I do not think it be wise to renew it . ' ' kRenow it ! I be very sorry you ever mention it . what will the archbishop think of that ? ' ' you may be sure , my dear , that the archbishop think very little about it . ' ' but why do you think about it , bishop ? how could you think of make such a creature as that of ?-- of ! I suppose he will be look for bishopric some of these day -- a man that hardly know who he father be ; a man that I find without bread to he mouth , or a coat to he back . of indeed ! I will dean he . ' consider herself to be in politics a pure Whig ; all she family belong to the . now among all rank of and ( should , I think , be rank among the former , on the score of she great strength of mind ) , no one be so hostile to lowly bear pretender to high station as the pure . the bishop think it necessary to exculpate himself . ' why , my dear , ' say he , ' it appear to I that you and do not get on quite as well as you use to do . ' ' get on ! ' say , move she foot uneasily on the hearth - rug , and compresse she lip in a manner that betoken such danger to the subject of they discourse . 'I begin to find that he be objectionable to you , '-- 's foot work on the hearth - rug with great rapidity ,-- 'and that you would be more comfortable if he be out of the palace ,' smile , as a hyena may probably smile before he begin he laugh ,-- 'and therefore I think that if he get this place , and so cease to be my chaplain , you might be pleased at such
such a arrangement . ' and then the hyena laugh loud . please at such a arrangement ! please at have she enemy convert into a dean with twelve hundr a year ! , when she describe the customs of she native country ( I be quote from 's edition ) , assure she astonished auditor that in she land captive , when take , be eat . ' you pardon they ! ' say . ' we do indeed , ' say the mild . ' we eat they ! ' say she of , with terrible energy . be the of ; she have no idea of not eat . pardon he ! merely get rid of he ! make a dean of he ! it be not so they do with they captive in she country , among people of she sort ! have no such mercy to expect ; she would pick he to the very last bone . 'Oh , yes , my dear , of course he will cease to be you chaplain , ' say she . 'After what have pass , that must be a matter of course . I could not for a moment think of live in the same house with such a man . besides , he have show himself quite unfit for such a situation ; make broil and quarrel among the clergy , get you , my dear , into scrape , and take upon himself as though he be as good as bishop himself . of course he will go . but because he leave the palace , that be no reason why he should get into the deanery . ' 'Oh , of course not ! ' say the bishop ; ' but to save appearance you know , my dear -- ' 'I do not want to save appearance ; I want to appear just what he be -- a false , designing , mean , intrigue man . I have my eye on he ; he little know what I see . he be misconduct himself in the most disgraceful way with that lame italian woman . that family be a disgrace to , and be a disgrace to ! if he do not look well to it , he will have he gown stripp off he back instead of have a dean 's hat on he head . Dean , indeed ! the man have go mad with arrogance . the bishop say nothing further to excuse either himself or he chaplain , and have show himself passive and docile be again take into favour . they soon go to dinner , and he spend the pleasantest evening he have have in he own house for a long time . he daughter play and sang to he as he sip he coffee and read he newspaper , and ask good - nature little question about the archbishop ; and then he go happily to bed , and sleep as quietly as though have be herself . while shave himself in the morning and prepare for the festivity of , he fully resolve to run no more tilts against a warrior so fully armed at all point as be . -- the and of , as we have say , have but a sad walk of it under the tree of Plumstead churchyard . he do not appear to any of the family till dinner time , and then he assume , as far as they judgment go , to be quite himself . he have , as be he wont , ask himself a great many question , and give himself a great many answer ; and the upshot of this be that he have set himself down for a ass . he have determine that he be much too old and much to rusty to commence the manouvre of lovemaking ; that he have let the time slip through he hand which should have be use for such purpose ; and that now he must lie on he bed as he have make it . then he ask himself whether in truth he do love this woman ; and he answer himself , not without a long struggle , but at last honestly , that he certainly do love she . he then ask himself whether he do not also love she money ; and he again answer himself that he do so . but here he do not answer honestly . it be and ever have be he weakness to look for impure motive for he own conduct . no doubt , circumstance as he be , with a small living and a fellowship , accustom as he have be to collegiate luxuries and expensive comforts , he might have hesitate to marry a penniless woman have he feel ever so strong a predilection for the woman herself ; no doubout 's fortune put all such difficulty out of the question ; but it be equally without doubt that he love for she have crept upon he without the slightest idea on he part that he could ever benefit he own condition by share she wealth . when he have stand on the hearth - rug , count the pattern , and count also the future chance of he own life , the remembrance of 's comfortable income have not certainly damp he first assure feeling of love for she . and why should it have do so ? need it have do so with the purest of man ? be that as it may , decide against himself ; he decide that it have do so in he case , and that he be not the purest of man . he also decide , which be more to he purpose , that do not care a straw for he , and that very probably do not care a straw for
for he rival . then he make up he mind not to think of she any more , and go on thinking of she till he be almost in a state to dry himself in the little brook which be at the bottom of the archdeacon 's grounds . and ever and again he mind would revert to the , and he would make comparison between she and , not always in favour of the latter . the signora have listen to he , and flatter he , and believe in he ; at least she have tell he so . have also listen to he , but have never flatter he ; have not always believe in he : and now have break from he in violent rage . the signora , too , be the more lovely woman of the two , and have also the additional attraction of she affliction ; for to he it be a attraction . but he never could have love the as he feel that he now love ! and so he fling stone into the brook , instead of flinging in himself , and sit down on its margin as sad a gentleman as you shall meet in a summer 's day . he hear the dinner - bell ring from the churchyard , and he know that it be time to recover he self possession . he feel that he be disgrac himself in he own eye , that he have be id he time and neglect the high duty which he have take upon himself to perform . he should have spend the afternoon among the poor at 's , instead of wandering about , a ancient love - lorn swain , deject and sigh , full of imaginary sorrow and Wertherian grief . he be thoroughly asham of himself , and determined to lose no time in retrieve he character , so damaged in he own eye . thus when he appear at dinner he be as animated as ever , and be the author of most of the conversation which grac the archdeacon 's board on that evening . be ill at ease and sick at heart , and do not care to appear more comfortable than he really be ; what little he do say be say to he daughter . he think the archdeacon and have leagu together against 's comfort ; and he wish now be to break away from the pair , and undergo in he Barchester lodging whatever Fate have in store for he . he hate the name of the hospital ; he attempt to regain he lose inheritance there have bring upon he so much suffer . as far as he be concerned , be now welcome to the place . and the archdeacon be not very lively . the poor dean 's illness be of course discuss in the first place . do not mention 's name in connexion with the expect event of 's death ; he do not wish to say anything about just at present , nor do he wish to make know he own sad surmise ; but the idea that he enemy might possibly become of make he very gloomy . should such a even take place , such a dire catastrophe come about , there would be a end to he life as far as he life be connect with the city of . he must give up all he old haunt , all he old habit , and live quietly as a retire rector at . it have be a severe trial for he to have in the palace ; but with also in the deanery , he feel that he should be unable to draw he breath in close . thus it come to pass that in spite of the sorrow at he heart , be apparently the gayest of the party . both and be in a slight degree angry with he on account of he want of gloom . to the one it appear as though he be triumph at 's banishment , and to the other that he be not affect as he should have be by all the sad circumstance of the day , 's obstinacy , 's success , and the poor dean 's apoplexy . and so they be all at cross purpose . leave the room almost together with the ladie , and the archdeacon open he heart to . he still harp upon the hospital . ' what do that fellow mean , ' say he , ' by say in he letter to , that if would call on the bishop it would be all right ? of course I would not be guide by anything he might say ; but still it may be well that should see the bishop . it would be foolish to let the thing slip through we finger because be determined to make a fool of herself . ' hint that he be not quite so sure that would make a fool of herself . he say that he be not convinced that she do regard so warmly as she be suppose to do . the archdeacon question and cross -question he about this , but elicit nothing ; and at least remain firm in he own conviction that he be destin , malgre lui , to be the brother - in - law of . strongly advise that should take no step regard the hospital in connexion with , or in consequence of , 's letter . ' if the bishop really mean to confer the appointment on , ' argue , ' he will take care to let he have some other intimation than a message convey through a letter to a lady . Hard to present himself at the palace he might merely be play 's game ; ' and thus it be settle
settle that nothing should be do till the great 's arrival , or at any rate without that potentate 's sanction . it be droll how these man talk of as though he be a puppet , and plan they intrigue and small ecclesiastical manouvre without dreaming of take he into they confidence . there be a comfortable house and income in question , and it be very desirable , and certainly very just , that should have they ; but that , at present , be not the main point ; it be expedient to beat the bishop , and if possible to smash . have set up , or be suppose to have set up , a rival candidate . of all thing the most desirable would have be to have have 's appointment publish to the public , and then annull by the clamour of a indignant world , loud in the defence of 's rights . but of such a event the chance be small ; a slight fraction only of the world would be indignant , and that fraction would be one not accustom to lould speak . and then the preferment have in a sort of way be offer to , and have in a sort of way be refuse by he . 's wicked , cunning hand have be peculiarly conspicuous in the way in which this have be bring to pass , and it be the success of 's cunning which be so painfully grat the feeling of the archdeacon . that which of all thing he must dread be that he should be out - generall by : and just at present it appear probable that would turn he flank , steal a march on he , cut off he provision , carry he strong town by a coup de main , and at last beat he thoroughly in a regular pitched battle . the archdeacon feel that he flank have be turn when desire to wait on instead of the bishop , that a march have be steal when be induce to refuse the bishop 's offer , that he provision would be cut off when get the hospital , that be the strong town doom to be take , and that , as of , would be regard by all the world as the conqueror in that final conflict . be the Deus ex machina who be to come down upon the Barchester stage , and bring about deliverance from these terrible evils . but how can melodramatic denoument be properly bring about , how can vice and be punished , and virtue and the archdeacon be reward , while the avenging be lay up with the gout ? in the mean time evil may be triumphant , and poor innocence , transfix to the earth by a arrow from 's quiver , may be dead upon the ground , not to be resuscitate even by . two or three day after 's departure , go to , and soon find himself close with the august head of he college . it be quite clear that be not very sanguine as to the effect of he journey to , and not over anxious to interfere with the bishop . he have have the gout but be very nearly convalescent , and at once see that have the mission be one of which the master thoroughly approve , he would before this have be at . as it be , be resolve to visit he friend , and willingly promise to return to with . he could not bring himself to believe that there be any probability that would be make of . , he say , have reach even he ear not at all favourable to that gentleman 's character , and he express himself strongly of the opinion that any such appointment be quite out of the question . at this stage of the proceeding , the master 's right - hand man , , be call in to assist at the conference . be the Tutor of , and moreover a great man at . though universally know by a species of nomenclature as very undignified . be one who maintain a high dignity in the . he be , as it be , the leader of the tutor , a body of man who consider themselves collectively as be by very little , if at all , second in importance to the head themselves . it be not always the case that the master , or warden , or provost , or principal can hit it off exactly with he tutor . a tutor be by no means indispose to have a will of he own . but at they be great friend and firm ally at the time of which we be write . be a hale strong man of about forty - five ; short in stature , swarthy in face , with strong sturdy black hair , and crisp black beard , of which very little be allow to show itself in the shape of whisker . he always wear a white neckcloth , clean indeed , but not tie with that scrupulous care which now distinguish some of we younger clergy . he be , of course , always clothed in a seemly suit of solemn black . be a decent cleanly liver , not over addicte to any sensuality ; but nevertheless a somewhat warmish hue be begin to adorn he nose , the peculiar effect , as he friend averr , of a certain pipe of port introduce into the cellar of Lazarus the very same year in which the tutor enter in as a freshman . there be also , perhaps with a little redolence of port wine , as it be the slightest possible twang , in 's voice . in these day be not a very happy man
man ; reform have long be he bugbear , and now be he bane . it be not with he as with most other , a affair of politics , respecte which , when the need exist , he could , for party 's sake or on behalf of principle , maintain a certain amount of necessary zeal ; it be not with he a subject for dilettante warfare , and courteous common - place opposition . to he it be life and death . he would willingly have be a martyr in the cause , have the cause admit of martyrdom . at the present day , unfortunately , public affair will allow of no martyr , and therefore it be that there be such a deficiency of zeal . could gentleman of 10,000 a year have die on they own door - step in defence of protection , no doubt some half - dozen glorious old baronet would have so fall , and the school of protection would at this day have be crowd with scholar . who can fight strenuously in any combat in which there be no danger ? would have willingly be impal before a committee of the , could he by such self - sacrifice have infus he own spirit into the component member of the hebdomadal board . be one of those who in he heart approve of the credit system which have of old be in vogue between the student and tradesman of the . he know and acknowledge to himself that it be useless in these degenerate day publicly to contend with the on such a subject . the have undertaken to rule the , and be well aware that the be too powerful for he . but in secret , and among he safe companion , he would argue that the system of credit be a ordeal good for young man to undergo . the bad man , say he , and the weak and worthless , blunder into danger and burn they foot ; but the good man , they who have any character , they who have that within they which can reflect credit in they , they come through scatheless . what merit will there be to a young man to get through safely , if he guard and protect and restrain like a school - boy ? by so do , the period of the ordeal be only postpone , and the manhood of the man will be defer from the age of twenty to that of twenty - four . if you bind he with leading - string at college , he will break loose while eat for the bar in ; bind he there , and he will break loose afterwards , when he be a married man . the wild oat must be sow somewhere . ' Tbe thus that would argue of young man ; not , indeed , with much consistency , but still with some practical knowledge of the subject gather from long experience . and now proffer such wisdom as he have for the assistance of and . ' quite out of the question , ' say he , argue that could not possibly be make the new of . ' so I think , ' say the master . ' he have no standing , and , if all I hear be true , very little character . ' 'as to character , ' say , 'I do not think much of that . they rather like loose parson for deans ; a little fast living , or a dash of infidelity , be no bad recommendation to a cathedral close . but they could not make ; the last two deans have be Cambridge man ; you will not show I a instance of they make three man run from the same . we do not get out share , and never shall , I suppose ; but we must at least have one out of the three . ' ' these sort of rule be all go out by now , ' say . ' everything have go by , I believe , ' say . ' the cigar have be smoke out , and we be the ash . ' ' speak for yourself , , ' say the master . 'I speak for all , ' say the tutor stoutly . ' it be come to that , that there will be no life leave anywhere in the country . no one be any longer fit to rule himself , or those belong to he . the government be to find we all in everything , and the press be to find the government . nevertheless , will not be of . ' ' and who will be the warden of the hospital ? ' say . 'I hear that be already appointed , ' say . 'I think not , ' say the master . ' and I think , moreover , that will not be so short - sighted as to run against such a rock ; should himself have sense enough to prevent it . ' ' but perhaps may have no objection to see he patron on a rock , ' say the suspicious tutor . ' what could he get by that ? ' ask . ' it be impossible to see the double of such a man , ' say . ' it seem quite clear that be altogether in he hand , and it be equally clear that he have be move heaven and earth to get this into the hospital , although he must know that such a appointment would be most damage to the bishop . it be impossible to understand such a man , and dreadful to think , ' add , sigh deeply , ' that the welfare and fortune of good man may
may depend on he intrigue . ' or be not in the least aware , nor even be that this , of whom they be talk , have be use he utmost effort to put they own candidate into the hospital ; and that in lieu of be a permanent in the palace , he own expulsion therefrom have be already decide on by the high power of the diocese . 'I will tell you what , ' say the tutor , ' if this be thrust into the hospital and must die , I should not wonder if the government be to make of . they would feel bound to do something for he after all that be say when he resign . ' at the moment make no reply to this suggestion ; but it do not the less impress itself on he mind . if could not be warden of the hospital , why should he not be of ? and so the conference end without any very fixed resolution , and and prepare for they journey to Plumstead on the morrow . 's the day of the party arrive , and all the world be there ; or at least so much of the world as have be include in 's invitation . as we have say , the bishop return home on the previous evening , and on the same evening , and by the same train , come and from . the archdeacon with he brougham be in waiting for the master of , so that there be a goodly show of church dignitary on the platform of the railway . the be finally arrange in the odious manner already describe , and get into the doctor 's waiting carriage full of apprehension and presentiment of further misfortune , whereas enter the vehicle elate with triumph . he have receive that morn a civil note from ; not promise much indeed ; but then knew , or fancie that he know , that it be not etiquette for government officer to make promise . though promise nothing he imply a good deal ; declare he conviction that would make a excellent dean , and wish he every kind of success . to be sure he add that , not be in the cabinet , he be never consult on such matter , and that even if he speak on the subject he voice would go for nothing . but all this take for the prudent reserve of official life . to complete he anticipat triumph , another letter be bring to he just as he be about to start to . also enjoy the idea of hand out of 's carriage before the multitude at gate , as much as dread the same ceremony . he have fully make up he mind to throw himself and he fortune at the widow 's foot , and have almost determined to select the present propitious morning for do so . the signora have of late be less than civil to he . she have indeed admit he visit , and listen , at any rate without anger , to he love ; but she have torture he , and revil he , jeer at he and ridicule he , while she allow he to call she the most beautiful of living woman , to kiss she hand , and to proclaim himself with reiterate oath she adorer , she slave , and worshipper . Thorne be in great perturbation , yet in great glory , on the morning of this day . also , though the party be none of he give , have much heavy work on he hand . but perhaps the most overtasked , the most anxious and the most effective of all the household be Plomacy the steward . this last personage have , in the time of 's father , when the Directory hold dominion in , go over to with letter in he boot heel for some of the party ; and such have be he good luck that he have return safe . he have then be very young and be now very old , but the exploit give he a character for political enterprise and secret discretion which still avail he as thoroughly as it have do in its freshest gloss . have be steward of for more than fifty year , and a very easy life he have have of it . who could require much absolute work from a man who have carry safely at he heel that which if discover would have cost he he head ? consequently have never work hard , and of latter year have never work at all . he have a taste for timber , and therefore he mark the tree that be to be cut down ; he have a taste for gardening , and would therefore allow no shrub to be plan or be to be make without he express sanction . in these matter he be sometimes drive to run counter to he mistress , but he rarely allow he mistress to carry the point against he . but on occasion such as the present , come out strong . he have the honour of the family at heart ; he thoroughly appreciate the duty of hospitality ; and therefore , when gala doings be go on , always take the management into he own hand and reign supreme over master and mistress . to give he due , old as he be , he thoroughly understand such work as he have in hand , and do it well . the order of the day be to be as follow . the quality , as the upper class in rural districts be designate by the lower with so much true discrimination , be to eat a breakfast , and the non-quality be to eat a dinner . two
two marquee have be erect for these two banquet , that for the quality on the esoteric or garden side of a certain deep ha - ha ; and that for the non-quality on the exoteric or paddock side of the same . both be of huge dimension ; that on the outer side , one may say , on a egregious scale ; but declare that neither would be sufficient . to remedy this , a auxiliary banquet be prepare in the dining - room , and a subsidiary board be to be spread sub dio for the accommodation of the lower class of yokel on the property . no one who have not have a hand in the preparation of such a affair can understand the manifold difficulty which Thorne encounter in she project . have she not be make throughout of the very finest whalebone , rivet with the best steel , she must have sunk under they . have not feel how much be justly expect from a man who at one time carry the destiny of in he boot , he would have give way ; and he mistress , so desert , must have perish among she pole and canvass . in the first place there be a dreadful line to be draw . who be to dispose themselves within the ha - ha , and who without ? to this the unthinking will give a off - hand answer , as they will to every ponderous question . oh , the bishop and such like within the ha - ha ; and and such without . true , my unthinking friend ; but who shall define these such - likes ? it be in such definition that the whole difficulty of society consist . to seat the bishop on a arm chair on the lawn and place at the end of a long table in the paddock be easy enough ; but where will you put , whose husband , though a tenant on the estate , hunt in a red coat , whose daughter go to a fashionable seminary in , who call she fram house , and who have a pianoforte in she drawing - room ? the , as they call themselves , will not sit contente among the bumpkin . will not squeeze she fine clothes on a bench and talk familiarly about cream and duckling to good . and yet be not fit companion and never have be the associate of the and the Grantly . and if be admit within the sanctum of fashionable life , if she be allow with she three daughter to leap the ha - ha , why not the wife and daughter of other family also ? be at present well contente with the paddock , but she might cease to be so if she see on the lawn . and thus poor Thorne have a hard time of it . and how be she to divide the guest between the marquee and the parlour ? she have a countess come , and and a Honourable , and a whole bevy of ladies , , &c ; she have a leash of baronet with they baroness ; and , as we all know , a bishop . if she put they on the lawn , no one would go into the parlour ; if she put they into the parlour , no one would go into the tent . she think of keep the old people in the house , and leave the lawn to the lover . she might as well have seat herself at once in a hornet 's nest . know better than this . ' bless you soul , ma 'am , ' say he , ' there will not be no old lady ; not one , barr yourself and old . ' personally Thorne accept this distinction in she favour as a compliment to she good sense ; but nevertheless she have no desire to be close on the come occasion with . she give up all idea of any arbitrary division of she guest , and determine if possible to put the bishop on the lawn and the countess in the house , to sprinkle the baronet , and thus divide the attraction . what to do with the even Mr Plomacy could not decide . they must take they chance . they have be specially tell in the invitation that all the tenant have be invite ; and they might probably have the good sense to stay away if they object to mix with the rest of the tenantry . then declare he apprehension that the and Honourable Georges would come in a sort of amphibious costume , half morning half evening , satin neckhandkerchief , frock coat , primrise glove , and polish boot ; and that be so dress , they would decline ride at the quintain , or take part in any of the athletic game which Thorne have prepare with so much care . if the and do not ride at the quintain , Thorne might be sure that nobody else would . ' but , ' say she in dolorous voice , all but overcome by she care ; ' it be specially signify that there be to be sport . ' ' and so there will be , of course , ' say . ' they will all be sport with the young lady in the laurel walk . they be the sport they care most about now - a - day . if you get 's the young man at the quintain , you will have all the young woman in the pout . ' ' can not they look on , as they great grandmother do before they ? ' say . ' it seem to I that the lady be not contente with look now -a
-a - day . whatever the man do they will do . if you will have side saddle on the nag , and let they go at the quintain too , it will answer capital , no doubt . ' Thorne make no reply . she feel that she have no good ground on which to defend she sex of the present generation , from the sarcasm of . she have once declare , in one of she warmer moment , ' that now - a - day the gentleman be all woman , and the lady all man . ' she could not alter the debase character of the age . but such be the case , why should she take on herself to cater for the amusement of people of such degraded taste ? this question she ask herself more than once , and she could only answer herself with a sigh . there be she own brother Wilfr , on whose shoulders rest the all the ancient honour of ; it be very doubtful whether even he would consent to ' go at the quintain ' , as not injudiciously express it . and now the morning arrive . the household be early on the move . Cook be cook in the kitchen long before daylight , and man be drag out table and hammer red baize on to bench at the earliest dawn . with what dread eagerness do Thorne look out at the weather as soon as the part veil of night permit she to look at all ! in this respect at any rate there be nothing to grieve she . the glass have be rise for the last three day , and the morning break with that dull chill steady grey haze which in autumn generally presage a clear and dry day . by seven she be dress and down . Thorne know nothing of the modern luxury of deshabille . she would as soon have think of appear before she brother without she stocking as without she stay ; and 's stay be no trifle . and yet there be nothing for she to do when down . she fidget out to the lawn , and then back into the kitchen . she put on she high - heel clog , and fidget out into the paddock . then she go into the small home park where the quintain be erect . the pole and cross -bar and the swivel , and the target and the bag of flou be all complete . she get up on a carpenter 's bench and touch the target with she hand ; it go round with beautiful ease ; the swivel have be oil to perfection . she almost wish to take old Plomacy at he word , to go on a side saddle , and have a tilt at it herself . what must a young man be , think she , who could prefer maunder among the tree with a wishy - washy school girl to such fun as this ? ' well , ' say she aloud to herself , ' one man can take a horse to water , but a thousand can not make he drink . there it be . if they have not the spirit to enjoy it , the fault sha not be mine ;' and so she return the house . at a little after eight she brother come down , and they have a sort of scrap breakfast in he study . the tea be make without the customary urn , and they dispense with the usual roll and toast . egg be also missing , for every egg in the parish have be whip into custard , bake into pie , or boil into lobster salad . the allowances of fresh butter be short , and Thorne be oblige to eat the leg of a fowl without have it devill in the manner he love . 'I have be look at the quintain , , ' say she , ' and it appear to be quite right . ' 'Oh , -- ah ; yes ;' say he . ' it seem to be so yesterday when I see it . ' Thorne be begin to be rather bore by he sister 's love of sport , and have especially no affection for this quintain post . 'I wish you would just try it after breakfast , ' say she . ' you could have the saddle put on , and the pole be there all handy . you can take the flour bag off , you know , if you think will not be quick enough , ' add , see that she brother 's countenance be not indicative of complete accordance with she little proposition . now be a valuable old hunter , excellently suite to 's usual requirement , steady indeed at he fence , but extremely sure , very good in deep ground , and safe on the roads . but he have never yet be ride at a quintain , and Thorne be not inclin to put he to the trial , either with or without the bag of flour . he hum and haw , and finally declare that he be afraid wwould shy . ' then try the cob , ' say the indefatigable . 'he be in physic , ' say . ' there be the colt , ' say he sister ; 'I know he be in the stable , because I see exercise he just now . ' 'my dear , he be so wild that it be as much as I can do to manage he at all . he would destroy himself and I too , if I attempt to ride he at such a rattletrap as that . ' a rattletrap ! the quintain that she have put up with so much
much anxious care ; the game that she have prepare for the amusement of the stalwart yeoman of the country ; the sport that have be honoure by the affection of so many of they ancestor ! it cut she to the heart to hear it so denominate by she own brother . there be but the two of they leave together in the world ; and it have ever be one of the rule by which Thorne have regulate she conduct through life , to say nothing that could provoke she brother . she have often have to suffer from he indifference to time - honoure british custom ; but she have always suffer in silence . it be part of she creed that the head of the family should never be upbraided in he own house ; and Thorne have live up to she creed . now , however , she be greatly try . the colour mount to she ancient cheek , and the fire blaze in she still bright eye ; but yet she say nothing . she resolve that at any rate , to he nothing more should be say about the quintain that day . she sip she tea in silent sorrow , and think with painful regret of the glorious day when she great ancestor Ealfry have successfully hold against a invader . there be no such spirit now leave in she family except that small useless spark which burnt in she own bosom . and she herself , be not she at this moment intend on entertaine a descendant of those very Normand , a vain proud countess with a frenchified name , who would only think that she grac too highly by enter it be portal ? be it likely that a honourable , the son of the , should ride at a quintain in company with a yeoman ? and why should she expect she brother to do that which she brother 's guest would decline to do ? some dim faint idea of the impracticability of she own views flit across she brain . perhaps it be necessary that races doom to live on the same soil should give way to each other , and adopt each other 's pursuit . perhaps it be impossible that after more than five century of close intercourse , should remain , and , . perhaps after all she neighbour be wiser than herself , such idea do occasionally present themselves to 's mind , and make she sad enough . but it never occur to she that she favourite quintain be but a modern copy of a knight 's amusement , a adaptation of the noble tourney to the taste and habits of the . of this she be ignorant , and it would have be cruelty to instruct she . when Thorne see the tear in she eye , he repent himself of he contemptuous expression . by he also it be recognise as a bind law that every whim of he sister be to be respect . he be not perhaps so firm in he observance to she , as she be in hers to he . but he intentions be equally good , and whenever he find that he have forget they , it be a matter of grief to he . ' my dear , ' say he , 'I beg you pardon ; I do not in the least mean to speak ill of the game . when I call it a rattletrap , I merely mean that it be so for a man of my age . you know you always forget that I can not a young man . ' 'I be quite sure you be not a old man , , ' say she , accept the apology in she heart , and smile at he with the tear still on she cheek . ' if I be five - and - twenty , or thirty , ' continue he , 'I should like nothing better than ride at the quintain all day . ' ' but you be not too old to hunt or to shoot , ' say she . ' if you can jump over a ditch and hedge , I be sure you could turn the quintain round . ' ' but when I ride over the hedge , my dear -- and it be not very often I do that -- but when I do ride over the hedge there be not any bag of flou come after I . think how I would look take the countess out to breakfast with the back of my head all cover with meal . ' Thorne say nothing further . she do not like the allusion to the countess . she could not be satisfied with the reflection that the sport of should be interfere with by the personal attention necessary for a . but she see that it be useless for she to push the matter further . it be conced that be to spare the quintain ; and Thorne determine to trust wholly to a youthful knight of hers , a immense favourite , who , as she often declare , be a pattern to the young man of the age , and a excellent example of a english yeoman . this be 's eldest son ; who , to tell the truth , have from he earliest year take the exact measure of 's foot . in he boyhood he have never fail to obtain from she , apple , pocket money , and forgiveness for he numerous trespass ; and now in he early manhood he get privileges and immunitie which be equally valuable . he be allow a day or two 's shoot in ; he school the squire 's horse ; get slips of tree out of the orchard , and root of flower out of
of the garden ; and have the fishing of the little river altogether in he own hand . he have undertake to come mount on a nag of he father 's , and show the way at the quintain post . whatever young do the other would do after he . the juvenile Lookaloft might stand sure to venture if show the way . and so Thorne make up she mind to dispense with the noble Johns and Georges , and trust , as she ancestor have do before she , to the thew and sinews of native growth . at about nine the lower order begin to congregate in the paddock and park , under the surveillance of and the head gardener and head groom , who be swear in as he deputy , and be to assist he in keep the peace and promote the sport . many of the younger inhabitant of the neighbourhood , think that they could not have too much of a good thing , have come at a very early hour , and the road between the house and the church have be thronge for some time before the gate be thrown open . and then another difficulty of huge dimension arise , a difficulty which Plomacy have indeed foreseen , and for which he be in some sort provide . some of those who wish to share 's hospitality be not so particular that they should have be as to the preliminary ceremony of a invitation . they doubtless conceive that they have be overlook by accident ; and instead of take this in dudgeon , as they better would have do , they good - naturedly put up with the slight , and show that they do so by present themselves at the gate in they best . Plomacy , however , well know who be welcome and who be not . to some , even though uninvited , he allow ingress . ' do not be too particular , Plomacy , ' he mistress have say ; ' especially with the child . if they live anywhere near , let they in . ' act on this hint , do let in many a eager urching , and a few tidily dress girl with they swain , who in no way belong to the property . but to the denizen of the city he be inexorable . many a apprentice make he appearance there that day , and urge with piteous supplication that he have be work all the week in make saddle and boot for the use of , in compounding dos for the horse , or cut up carcass for the kitchen . no such claim be allow . know nothing about the city apprentice ; he be to admit the tenant and labourer on the estate ; Thorne be not go to take in the whole city of ; and so on . nevertheless , before the day be half over , all this be find to be useless . almost anybody who choose to come make he way into the park , and the care of the guardian be transfer to the table on which the banquet be spread . even here there be many a unauthorized claimant for a plate , of whom it be impossible to get quit without some commotion than the place and food be worth . -- I the trouble in civilised life of entertaining company , as it be call too generally without much regard to strict veracity , be so great that it can not but be matter of wonder that people be so fond of attempt it . it be difficult to ascertain what be the quid pro quo . if they who give such laborious party , and who endure such toil and turmoil in the vain hope of give they successfully , really enjoy the party give by other , the matter would be understood . a sense of justice would induce man and woman to undergo , in behalf of other , those misery which other have undergone on they behalf . but they all profess that go out be as great a bore as receive ; and to look at they when they be out , one can not but believe they . ! who shall have sufficient self - assurance , who shall feel sufficient confidence in he own power to dare to boast that he can entertain he company ? a clown can sometimes do so , and sometimes a dancer in short petticoat and stuff pink leg ; occasionally , perhaps , a singer . but beyond these , success in this art of entertaining be not often achieve . young man and girl link themselves kind with kind , pair like bird in spring , because nature will it , they , after a simple fashion , do entertain each other . few other even try . lady , when they open they house , modestly confess , it may be presume , they own incapacity , mainly trust to wax candle and upholstery . gentleman seem to rely on they white waistcoat . to these be add , for the delight of the more sensual , champagne and such good thing of the table as fashion allow to be still consider as comestible . even in this respect the world be deteriorate . all the good soup be now taboo ; and at the house of one 's accustom friend , small barrister , doctor , government clerk , and such like , ( for we can not all of we always live as grandee , surround by a of livery servants ) , one get 's a cold potato hand to one as a sort of finale to one 's slice of mutton . ! for those happy day when one could say to one 's neighbourhood , '
' , shall I give you some mash turnip --may I trouble you for a little cabbage ? ' and then the pleasure of drink wine with and ; with all the and all the Smith ! these latter - day habit be certainly more economical . , however , boldly attempt to leave the modern beaten track , and make a positive effort to entertain she guest . ! she do so with but moderate success . they have all they own way of go , and would not go she way . she pipe to they , but they would not dance . she offer to they good honest household cake , make of currant and flour and egg and sweetmeat ; but they would feed themselves on trashy wafer from the shop of the pastry - cook , on chalk and gum and adulterate sugar . poor ! yours be not the first honest soul that have vainly strive to recall the glory of happy day go by ! if fashion suggest to a Courcy that when invite to a dejeuner at twelve o'clock she ought to come at three , no eloquence of thine will teach she the advantage of a nearer approach to punctuality . she have fondly thought that when she call on she friend to come at twelve , and especially beg they to believe that she mean it , she would be able to see they comfortably seate in they tent at two . vain woman -- or rather ignorant woman -- ignorant of the advances of that civilization which the world have witness while she be grow old . at twelve she find herself alone , dress in all the glory of the newest of she many suits of raiment ; with strong shoe however , and a serviceable bonnet on she head , and a warm rich shawl on she shoulders . thus clad she peer out into the tent , go to the ha - ha , and satisfy herself that at any rate the youngster be amuse themselves , speak a word to over the ditch , and take one look at the quintain . three or four young farmer be turn the machine round and round , and pok at the bag of flour in a manner not at all intend by the inventor of the game ; but no mount sportsman were there . look at she watch . it be only fifteen minute past twelve , and it be understand that be not to begin till the half hour . Thorne return to she drawing - room rather quicker than she wont , fear that the countess might come and find none to welcome she . she need not have hurrie , for no one be there . at half - past twelve she pee into the kitchen ; at a quarter to one she be join by she brother ; and just then the first fashionable arrival take place . be announce . no announcement be necessary , indeed ; for the good lady 's voice be hear as she walk across the court - yard to the house scold the unfortunate postilion who have drive she from . at the moment miss Thorne could not but be thankful that the other guest be more fashionable , and be thus spare the fury of 's indignation . 'Oh , , look here ! ' say she , as soon as she find herself in the drawing - room ; 'do look at my roquelaure ! it be clean spoilt , and for ever . I would not but wear it because I know you wish we all to be grand to - day ; and yet I have my misgiving . oh dear , oh dear ! it be five - and - twenty shilling a yard . ' the post horse have misbehave in some unfortunate manner just as be get out of the chaise and have nearly throw she under the wheel . belong to other day , and therefore , though she have but little else to recommend she , Thorne be to a certain extent fond of she . she send the roquelaure away to be clean , and lent she one of she best shawl out of she own wardrobe . the next comer be , who be immediately inform of 's misfortune , and of she determination to pay neither master nor post -boy ; although , as she remark , she intend to get she lift home before she make know she mind upon that matter . then a good deal of rustling be hear in the sort of lobby that be use for the ladie ' outside cloak ; and the door have be throw wide open , the servant announce , not in the most confident of voice , , and the , and . poor man !-- we mean the footman . he know , none better , that have no business there , that she be not want there , and would not be welcome . but he have not the courage to tell a stout lady with a low dress , short sleeve , and satin at eight shilling a yard , that she have come to the wrong tent ; he have not da to hint to young lady with white dancing shoe and long glove , that there be a place ready for they in the paddock . and thus carry she point , break through the guard , and make she way into the citadel . that she would have to pass a uncomfortable time there , she have surmise before . but nothing now could rob she of the power of boast that she have consort on the lawn with the squire and , with a countess , a bishop , and the country grandee , while and such
such like be walk about with the ploughboy in the park . it be a great point gain by , and it might be fairly expect that from this time forward the tradesman of would , with undoubting pens , address she husband and , . 's pluck carry she through everything , and she walk triumphant into the draw - room ; but she child do feel a little abashed at the sort of reception they meet with . it be not in 's heart to insult she own guest ; but neither be it in she disposition to overlook such effrontery . 'Oh , , be this you , ' say she ; ' and you daughter and son ? well , we be very glad to see you ; but I be sorry you have come in such low dress , as we be all go out of door . could we lend you anything ? ' ' oh dear no ! thank ye , , ' say the mother ; ' the girl and myself be quite use to low dress , when we be out . ' ' be you , indeed ? ' say Thorne shudder ; but the shudder be not lose on . ' and where 's Lookaloft , ' say the master of the house , come up to welcome he tenant 's wife . let the fault of the family be what they would , he could not but remember that they rent be well pay ; he be therefore not willing to give they a cold shoulder . ' such a headache , ! ' say . 'In fact he could not stir , or you may be certain on such a day he would not have absent himself . ' ' dear I , ' say . ' if he be so ill , I sure you would wish to be with he . ' ' not at all ! ' say . ' not at all , . it be only bilious you know , and when he be that way he can bear nobody nigh he . ' the fact however be that Lookaloft , have either more sense or less courage than he wife , have not choose to intrude on 's drawing - room ; and as he could not very well have go among the plebeian while he wife be with the patrician , he think it most expedient to remain at . soon find herself on a sofa , and the on two chair , while stand near the door ; and here they remain till in due time they be seat all four together at the bottom of the dining - room table . then the come ; the archdeacon and and the two girl , and and ; and as ill luck would have it , they be closely follow by 's carriage . as look out of the carriage window , she see she brother - in - law help the lady out , and throw herself back into she seat , dread to be discover . she have have a odious journey . 's civility have be more than ordinarily greasy ; and now , though he have not in fact say anything which she could notice , she have for the first time entertaine a suspicion that he be intend to make love to she . be it after all true that she have be conduct herself in a way that justify the world in think that she like the man ? after all , could it be possible that the archdeacon and be right , and that she be wrong ? have also be watch , and have come to the conclusion that it behove she brother to lose no further time , if he mean to gain the widow . she almost regrett that it have not be contrive that should be at before they . do not see he sister - in - law in company with , but do . come out with Thorne to the front door to welcome , and he remain in the courtyard till all they party have pass on . hing back in the carriage as long as she well could , but she be nearest to the door , and when , have alight , offer she he hand , she have no alternative but to take it . stand at the open door , while be shak hand with someone within , see a clergyman alight from the carriage whom he at once know to be , and then she see this clergyman hand out . have see so much , , rather sick at heart , follow Grantly into the house . be , however , spare any further immediate degradation , for give she he arm across the courtyard , and be fain to throw away he attention upon . they have hardly pass into the house , and from the house to the lawn , when , with a loud rattle and such noise as great man and great woman be entitled to make in they passage through the world , the Proudy drive up . it be soon apparent that no every day comer be at the door . one servant whisper to another that it be the bishop , and the word soon run through all the hanger - on and strange grooms and coachman about the place . there be quite a little cortege to see the bishop and he ' lady ' walk across the courtyard , and the good man be pleased to see that the church be hold in such respect in the parish of 's . and now the guest come fast and thick , and the lawn begin to be crowded , and the room to be full . voice buzze , silk rust against silk
silk , and muslin crumple against muslin . Thorne become more happy than she have be , and again bethotch she of she sport . there be target and bow and arrow prepare at the further end of the lawn . here the garden of the place encroach with a somewhat wide sweep upon the paddock , and give ample room for the doings of the toxophilite . Thorne get together such daughter of as could bend a bow , and marshall they to the target . there be the Grantly girl and the Proudie girl and the Chadwick girl , and the two daughter of the burly chancellor , and ; and with they go and , and young of , and of the , and Deed the dashing attorney of the , and the , and the , and the , all of whom as in duty bound , attend the step of the three . ' do you ever ride at the quintain , ? ' say , as she walk with she party , across the lawn . ' the quintain ? ' say young , who consider himself a dab at horsemanship . ' be it a sort of gate , ? ' Thorne have to explain the noble game she speak of , and have to own that he never have ridden at the quintain . ' would you like to come and see ? ' say . ' there will be plenty here without you , if you like it . ' ' well , I do not mind , ' say ; 'I suppose the lady can come too . ' 'Oh , yes , ' say ; ' those who like it ; I have no doubt they will go to see you prowess , if you will ride , . ' look down at a most unexceptionable pair of pantaloon , which have arrive from only the day before . they be the very thing , at least he think so , for a picnic of fete champetre ; but he be not prepare to ride in they . be he more encouraged than have be , by the idea of be attack from behind by the bag of flour which Thorne have graphically describe to he . ' well , I do not know about riding , , ' say he ; 'I fear I be not quite prepare . ' Thorne sigh , but say nothing further . she leave the toxophilite to they bow and arrow , and return towards the house . but as she pass by the entrance to the small park , she think that she might at any rate encourage the yeoman by she presence , as she could not induce she more fashionable guest to mix with they in they many amusement . accordingly she once more betake herself to the quintain post . here to she great delight she find ready mount , with he pole in he hand , and a lot of comrade stand round he , encourage he to the assault . she stand at a little distance and nod to he in token of she good pleasure . ' shall I begin , ma'am ? ' say finger he long staff in a rather awkward way , while he horse move uneasily beneath he , not accustom to a rider arm with such a weapon . ' yes , yes , ' say , stand triumphant as the queen of beauty , on a invert tub which some chance have bring hither from the farm - yard . ' here go then , ' say as he wheel he horse round to get the necessary momentum of a sharp gallop . the quintain post stand right before he , and the square board at which he be to tild be fairly in the way . if he hit that duly in the middle , and maintain he pace as he do so , it be calculate that he would be carry out of reach of the flour bag , which , suspend at the other end of the cross -bar on the post , would swe round when the board be struck . it be also calculate that if the rider do not maintain he pace , he would get a blow from the flour bag just at the back of he head , and bear about he the sign of he awkwardness to the great amusement of the looker - on . do not object to be powder with flour in the service of he mistress , and therefore gallantly touch he steed with he spur , have lay he lance in rest to the best of he ability . but he ability in this respect be not great , and he appurtenance probably not very good ; consequently , he strike he horse with he pole unintentionally on the side of the head as he start . the animal swerve and shy , and gallop off wide of the quintain . well accustom to manage a horse , but not to do so with a twelve - foot rod on he arm , lower he right hand to the bridle and thus the end of the lance come to the ground , and get between the leg of the steed . down come the rider and steed and staff . yong be throw some six foot over the horse 's head , and poor almost fell of she tub in a swoon . ' oh gracious , he be kill , ' shriek a woman , who be near he when he fall . ' the be good to he ! he poor mother , he poor mother ! ' say another . ' well , drat they dangerous play all the world over , ' say a old crone . ' he have break he
he neck sure enough , if ever man do , ' say a fourth . poor . she hear all this and yet do not quite swoon . she make she way through the crowd as best she could , sick herself almost to death . oh , he mother -- he poor mother ! how could she ever forgive herself . the agony of that moment be terrific . she could hardly get to the place where the poor lad be lie , as three or four man in front be about the horse which have risen with some difficulty ; but at last she find herself close to the young farmer . ' have he mark himself ? for heaven 's sake tell I that ; have he mark he knee ? ' say , slowly rise and rub he left shoulder with he right hand , and think only of he horse 's leg . soon find that he have not break he neck , nor any of he bone , nor be injured in any essential way . but from that time forth she never instigate any one to ride at the quintain . leave as soon as she could do so civilly , and go in quest of she father whom she find on the lawn in company with . she be not sorry to find they together . she be anxious to disabuse at any rate she father 's mind as to this report which have get abroad respecte she , and would have be well please to have be able to do the same with regard to . she put she own through she father 's arm , come up behind he back , and then tender she hand also to the vicar of 's . ' and how do you come ? ' say , when the first greeting be over . ' the bring I , ' say she ; ' they carriage be oblige to come twice , and have now go back for the signora . ' as she speak she catch 's eye , and see that he be look pointedly at she with a severe expression . she understand at once the accusation contain in he glance . it say as plainly as a eye could speak , ' yes , you come with the , but you do so in order that you might be in company with . ' ' we party , ' say she , still address she father , ' consiste of the and , myself , and . ' as she mention the last name she feel she father 's arm quiver slightly beneath she touch . at the same moment turn away from they , and join he hand behind he back stroll slowly away by one of the path . ' , ' say she , ' it be impossible to help come in the same carriage with ; it be quite impossible . I have promise to come with they before I dreamt of he come , and afterwards I could not get out of it without explain and give rise to talk . you be not at home , you know , I could not possibly help it . ' she say all this so quickly that by the time she apology be speak she be quite out of breath . 'I do not know why you should have wish to help it , my dear , ' say she father . ' yes , papa , you do ; you must know , you do know all the thing they say at . I be sure you do . you know all the archdeacon say . how unjust he be , and too . he be a horrid man , a horrid , odious man , but --' ' who be a odious man , my dear ? ? ' ' no ; but . you know i mean . he be the most odious man I ever meet in my life , and it be most unfortunate my have to come here in the same carriage with he . but how could I help it ? ' a great weight begin to move itself off 's mind . so , after all , the archdeacon with all he wisdom , and Grantly with all her tact , and with all he talent be in the wrong . he own child , he , the daughter of whom he be so proud be not to become the wife of . he have be about to give he sanction to the marriage , so certified have he be of this fact ; and now he learn that this impute lover of 's be at any rage as much dislike by she as by any one of the family . , however , be by no means sufficientely a man of the world to conceal the blunder he have make . he could not pretend that he have entertain no suspicion ; he could not make believe that he have never join the archdeacon in he surmise . he be greatly surprised , and gratify beyond measure , and he could not help show that such be the case . ' my darling girl , ' say he , 'I be so delighted , so overjoyed . my own child ; you have take such a weight off my mind . ' ' but surely , papa , you do not think -- ' 'I do not know what to think , my dear . the archdeacon tell I that -' ' the archdeacon ! ' say , she face light up with passion . 'A man like the archdeacon might , one would think , be better employ than in traduce he sister - in - law , and create bitterness between a father and he daughter .
. ' ' he do not mean to that , . ' ' what do he mean then ? why do he interfere with I , and fill you mind with such falsehood ? ' ' never mind it now , my child ; never mind it now . we shall all know you better now . ' 'Oh , papa , that you should have think it ! that you should have suspect I ! ' 'I do not know what you mean by suspicion , . there would be nothing disgraceful , you know ; nothing wrong in such a marriage . nothing that could have justifi my interfering as you father . ' and would have proceed in he own defence to make out that after all be a very good sort of man , and a very fitting second husband for a young widow , have he not be interrupt by 's greater energy . ' it would be disgraceful , ' say she ; ' it would be wrong ; it would be abominable . could I do such a horrid thing , I should expect no one to speak to I . ugh --' and she shudder as she think of the matrimonial torch which she friend have be so ready to light on she behalf . I do not wonder at ; I do not wonder at ; but , oh , papa , I do wonder at you . how could you , how could you believe it ? ' poor Eleanor , as she think of she father 's defalcation , could resist she tear no longer , and be force to cover she face with she handkerchief . the place be not very opportune for she grief . they be walk through the shrubbery , and there be many people near they . poor stammer out he excuse as best he could , and with a effort control she tear , and return she handkerchief to she pocket . she do not find it difficult to forgive she father , nor could she altogether refuse to join he in the return gaiety of spirit to which she present avowal give rise . it be such a load off he heart to think that he should not be call on to welcome as he son - in - law ; it be such a relief to he to find that he daughter 's feeling and he own be now , as they ever have been , in unison . he have be so unhappy for the last six week about this wretched ! he be so indifferent as to the loss of the hospital , so thankful for the recovery of he daughter , that , strong as be the ground for 's anger , she could not find it in she heart to be long angry with he . ' dear papa ,' she say , hang closely to he arm , ' never suspect I again : promise I that you never will . whatever I do , you may be sure I shall tell you first ; you may be sure I shall consult you . ' and do promise , and own he sin , and promise again . and so , while he promise amendment and she utter forgiveness , they return together to the drawing - room window . and what have mean when she declare that whatever she do , she would tell she father first ? what be she think of do ? so end the first act of the melodrama which be call on to perform this day at . the , the , and at and now there be new arrival . just as reach the drawing - room the signora be be wheel into it . she have be bring out of the carriage into the dining - room and there place on a sofa , and be now in the act of enter the other room , by the joint aid of she brother and sister , , and two servants in livery . she be all in she glory , and look so pathetically happy , so full of affliction and , be so beautiful , so pitiable , and so charme , that it be almost impossible not to be glad she be there . Thorne be unaffectedly glad to welcome she . in fact , the signora be a sort of lion ; and though there be no drop of the blood in 's vein , she nevertheless do like to see attractive people at she house . the signora be attractive , and on she first settlement in the dining - room she have whisper two or three soft feminine word into Thorne be ear , which , at the moment , have quite touch that lady 's heart . 'Oh , ; where be ? ' she say , as soon as she attendant have place she in she position just before one of the window , from whence she could see all that be go on upon the lawn ; ' how be I to thank you for permit a creature like I to be here ? but if you know the pleasure you give I , I be sure you would excuse the trouble I bring with I . ' and as she speak she squeeze the spinster 's little hand between she own . ' we be delighted to see you here , ' say ; ' you give we no trouble at all , and we think it a great favour confer by you to come and see we ; do not we , ? ' 'a very great favour indeed , ' say , with a gallant bow , but of somewhat less cordial welcome than that conced by he sister . Thorne have learn perhaps more of the antecedent
antecedent of he guest than he sister have do , and not as yet undergo the power of the signora 's charms . but while the mother of the last of the be thus in he full splendour , with crowd of people gaze at she and the elite of the company stand round she couch , she glory be pal by the arrival of the . Thorne have now be wait three hour for the countess , and could not therefore but show very evident gratification when the arrival at last took place . she and she brother of course go off to welcome the title grandee , and with they , alas , go many of the signora 's admirer . 'Oh , , ' say the countess , while the act of be disro of she fur cloak , and re-ro in she gauze shawl , ' what dreadful roads you have ; perfectly frightful . ' it happen that Thorne be way - warden for the district , and not like the attack , begin to excuse he roads . ' oh yes , indeed they be , ' say the countess , not mind he in the least , ' perfectly dreadful ; be they not , ? why , dear , we leave just at eleven ; it be only just past eleven , be it not , ? and --' ' just past one , I think you mean , ' say the , turn from the group and eyee the signora through he glass . the signora give he back he own , as the saying be , and more with it ; so that the young nobleman be force to avert he glance , and drop he glass . 'I say , , ' whisper he , ' who the deuce be that on the sofa ? ' 's daughter , ' whisper back . ' she call herself . ' ' Whew - ew - ew ! ' whistle the . ' the devil she be ! I have hear no end of story about that filly . you must positively introduce I , Thorne ; you positively must . ' who be respectability itself , do not quite like have a guest about whom the have hear no end of story ; but he could not help himself . he merely resolve that before he go to be he would let he sister know somewhat of the history of the lady she be so willing to welcome . the innocence of , at she time of life , be perfectly charme ; but even innocence may be dangerous . ' may say what he like , ' continue the countess , urge she excuse on ; 'I be sure we be past the castle gate before twelve , be not we , ? ' ' upon my word , I do not know , ' say the , ' for I be half asleep . but I do know that I be call sometime in the middle of the night , and be dress myself before daylight . ' wise people , when they be in the wrong , always put themselves right by find fault with the people against whom they have sinn . be a wise woman ; and therefore , have treat Thorne very badly by stay away till three o'clock , she assume the offensive and attack 's roads . she daughter , not less wise , attack 's early hour . the art of do this be among the most precious of those usually cultivate by person who know how to live . there be no withstand it . who can go systematically to work , and have do battle with the primary accusation and settle that , then bring forward a counter - charge and support that also ? life be not long enough for such labour . a man in the right rely easily on he rectitude , and therefore go about unarmed . he very strength be he weakness ; he very weakness be he strength . the one be never prepar for combat , the other be always ready . therefore it be that in this world the man that be in the wrong almost invariably conquer the man that be in the right , and invariably despise he . a man must be a idiot or else a angel , who , after the age of forty shall attempt to be just to he neighbour . many like the have lear not they lesson at a much earlier age . but this of course depend on the school in which they have be teach . poor miss Thorne be altogether overcome . she know very well that she have be ill - treat , and yet she find herself make apology to . to do she ladyship justice , she receive they very graciously , and allow herself with she train of daughter to be lead towards the lawn . there be two window in the draw - room wide open for the countess to pass through ; but she see that there be a woman on the sofa , at the third window , and that that woman have , as it be , a follow attach to she . she ladyship therefore determined to investigate the woman . the be hereditarily short sigh , and have be so for thirty centurie at least . so , who , when she enter the family have adopt the family habit , do as she son have do before she , and take she glass to investigate the , press in among the gentleman who surround the couch , and bow slightly to those whom she choose to honour by she acquaintance . in order to get to the window she have to pass close to the front of the couch
couch , and as she do so she stare hard at the occupant . the occupant in return star hard at the countess . the countess who since she countess - ship commence have be accustom to see all eye , not royal , ducal , or marquesal , fall down before she own , pause as she go on , raise she eyebrow , and star even harder than before . but she have now to do with one who care little for countess . it be , one may say , impossible for mortal man or woman to abash . she open she large bright lustrous eye wider and wider , till she seem to be all eye . she gaze up into the lady 's face , not as though she do it with a effort , but as if she delight in do it . she use no glass to assist she effrontery , and need none . the faintest possible smile of derision play round she mouth , and she nostril be slightly dilate , as if in sure anticipation of she triumph . and it be sure . the , in spite of she thirty century and castle , and the fact that be grand master of the poney to the of , have not a chance with she . at first the little circlet of gold waver in the countess 's hand , then the hand shook , then the circlet fall , the countess 's head toss itself into the air , and the countess 's foot shamble out to the lawn . she do not however go so fast but what she hear the signora 's voice , ask -- ' who on earth be that woman , ? ' ' that be . ' 'Oh , ah . I might have suppose so . , ha , ha . well , that be as good as a play . ' it be as good as a play to any there who have eye to observe it , and wit to comment on what they observe . but the soon find a congenial spirit on the lawn . there she encounter , and as be not only the wife of a bishop , but be also the cousin of a earl , consider she to be the fittest companion she be likely to meet in that assemblage . they be accordingly delighted to see each other . by no means despise a countess , and as this countess live in the county and within a sort of extensive visit distance of , she be glad to have this opportunity of ingratiat herself . ' my dear , I be so delighted , ' say she , look as little grim as it be in she nature to do so . 'I hardly expect to see you here . it be such a distance , and then you know , such a crowd . ' ' and such roads , ! I really wonder how the people ever get about . but I do not suppose they ever do . ' ' well , I really do not know ; but I suppose not . the Thorne do not , I know , ' say . ' very nice person , , be not she ? ' 'Oh , delightful and so queer ; I have know she these twenty year . a great pet of mine be dear . she be so very strange , you know . she always make I think of the and the . be not she dress quite delightful ? ' ' , ' say ; 'I wonder now whether she paint . do you ever see such colour ? ' 'Oh , of course , ' say ; ' that be , I have no doubt she do . but , , who be that woman on the sofa by the window ? just step this way and you will see she , there - - ' and the countess lead she to a spot where she could plainly see the signora 's well -remember face and figure . she do not however do so without be equally well see by the signora . ' look , look , ' say that lady to , who be still stand near to she ; ' see the high spirituality and temporality of the land in together , and all against poor I . I will wager my bracelet , against you next sermon , that they have take up they position there on purpose to pull I to piece . well , I can not rush to the combat , but I know how to protect myself if the enemy come near I . ' but the enemy know better . they could gain nothing be contact with the signora , and they could abuse she as they pleas at a distance from she on the lawn . ' she be that horrid italian woman , ; you must have heard of she . ' ' what italian woman ? ' say she ladyship , quite alive to the come story ; 'I do not think I have hear of any italian woman come into the country . she do not look italian either . ' 'Oh , you must have heard of she , ' say . ' no , she be not absolutely Italian . she be 's daughter -- the prebendary ; and she call herself the . ' 'Oh -- h --h --h! ' exclaim the countess . 'I be sure you have hear of she , ' continue . 'I do not know anything about she husband . they do say that some man name be still alive . I believe she do marry such a man abroad , but I do not at all know who or what he be .
. ' 'Ah -- h --h --h ! ' say the countess , shak she head with much intelligence , as every additional 'h ' fell from she lip . 'I know all about it now . I have hear mention she . know all about she . hear about she in . ' ' she be a abominable woman at any rate , ' say . ' Insufferable , ' say the countess . ' she make she way into the palace once , before I know anything about she ; and I can not tell you how dreadfully indecent she conduct be . ' ' be it ? ' say the delighted countess . ' Insufferable , ' say the prelatess . ' but why do she lie on a sofa ? ' ask the . ' she have only one leg , ' say . ' only one leg ! ' say the , who feel to a certain degree dissatisfie that the signora be thus incapacitate . ' be she bear so ? ' 'Oh , no , ' say , -- and she ladyship feel somewhat recomfort by the assurance , --' she have two . but that beat she , I believe , till she be oblige to have one amputate . at any rate she entirely lose the use of it . ' ' unfortunate creature ! ' say the countess , who herself know something of matrimonial trial . ' yes , ' say ; 'one would pity she , in spite of she past bad conduct , if she know how to behave herself . but she do not . she be the most insolent creature I have ever put my eye on . ' ' indeed she be , ' say . ' and she conduct with man be abominable , that she be not fit to be admit into any lady 's drawing - room . ' ' dear I ! ' say the countess , become again excited , happy , and merciless . ' you see that man stand near she , -- the clergyman with the red hair ? ' ' yes , yes . ' ' she have absolutely ruin that man . the bishop , or I should rather take the blame on myself , for it be I ,-- I bring he down from to . he be a tolerable preacher , a active young man , and I therefore introduce he to the bishop . that woman , , have get hold of he , and have so disgrace he , that I be force to require that he shall leave the palace ; and I doubt very much whether he will not lose he gown . ' ' why what a idiot the man must be ! ' say the countess . ' you do not know the intrigue villainy of that woman , ' say , remember she own torn flounce . ' but you say she have only get one leg ! ' ' she be as full of mischief as tho ' she have ten . look at she eye , . do you ever see such eye in a decent woman 's head ? ' 'Indeed I never do , . ' ' and she effrontery , and she voice ; I quite pity she poor father , who be really a good sort of man . ' , be not he ? ' ' yes , . he be one of we prebendary , -- a good quiet sort of man himself . but I be surprise that he should let he daughter conduct herself as he do . ' 'I suppose he can not help it , ' say the countess . ' but a clergyman , you know , ! he should at any rate prevent she from exhibiting in public , if he can not induce she to behave at home . but he be to be pitie . I believe he have a desperate life of it with the lot of they . that apish - look man there , with the long beard and the loose trousers , -- he be the woman 's brother . he be nearly as bad as she be . they be both of they infidel . ' ' infidel ! ' say , ' and they father a prebendary ! ' ' yes , and likely to be the new dean too , ' say . 'Oh , yes , poor dear ! ' say the countess , who have once in she life speak to that gentleman ; be so distressed to hear it , . and so be to be the new dean ! he come of a excellent family , and I wish he success in spite of he daughter . perhaps , , when he be dean , they will be better able to see the error of they way . ' to this say nothing . she dislike of the be too deep to admit of she even hope that that lady should see the error of she way . look on the signora as one of the lost , -- one of those beyond the reach of charity , and be therefore able to enjoy the luxury of hate she , without the drawback of wish she eventually well out of she sins . any further conversation between these congenial soul be prevent by the advent of , who come to lead the countess to the tent . indeed , he have be desire to do so some ten minute since ; but he have be delay in the drawing - room by the signora . she have contrive to detain he , to bet he near to she sofa , and at last to make he seat himself on a chair close to she beautiful arm . the fish
fish take the bait , be hook , and catch , and lande . within that ten minute he have hear the whole of signora 's history in such strain as she choose to use in tell it . he lear not from the lady 's own lip the whole of that mysterious tale to which the have merly allude . he discover that the beautiful creature lie before he have be more sinn against than sinning . she have own to he that she have be weak , confid and indifferent to the world 's opinion , and that she have therefore be ill - use , deceive and evil speak of . she have speak to he of she mutilate limb , she youth destroy in the fullest bloom , she beauty rob of its every charm , she life blight , she hope wither ; and as she do so , a tear drop from she eye to she cheek . she have tell he of these thing , and ask for he sympathy . what could a good - natured genial - do but promise to sympathise with she ? Thorne do promise to sympathise ; promise also to come and see the last of the , to hear more of those fearful Roman day , of those light and innocent but dangerous hour which flit by so fast on the shore of , and to make himself the confident of the signora 's sorrow . we need hardly say that he drop all idea of warn he sister against the dangerous lady . he have be mistaken ; never so much mistaken in he life . he have always regard that as a coarse brutal - minded young man ; now he be more convinced than ever that he be so . it be by such man as the that the reputation of such woman as be imperil and damage . he would go and see the lady in she own house ; he be fully sure in he own mind of the soundness of he own judgment ; if he find she , as he believe he should do , a injured well - disposed , warm - hearted woman , he would get he sister to invite she out to . ' no , ' say she , as at she instance he get up to leave she , and declare that he himself would attend upon she want ; 'no , no , my friend ; I positively put a veto upon you do so . what , in you own house , with a assemblage round you such as there be here ! do you wish to make every woman hate I and every man stare at I ? I lay a positive order on you not to come near I again to - day . come and see I at home . it be only at home that I can talk ; it be only at home that I really can live and enjoy myself . my day of go out , day such as these , be rare indeed . come and see I at home , , and then I will not bid you to leave I . ' it be , we believe , common with young man of five and twenty to look on they senior -- on man of , say , double they own age -- as so many stock and stone -- stock and stone , that be , in regard to feminine beauty . there never be a greater mistake . women , indeed , generally know better ; but on this subject man of one age be thoroughly ignorant of what be the very nature of mankind of other age . no experience of what go on in the world , no reading of history , no observation of life , have any effect in teach the truth . of fifty do not dance mazurka , be generally too fat and wheezy ; nor do they sit for the hour together on river bank at they mistress 's foot , be somewhat afraid of rheumatism . but for real true love , live at first sight , love to devotion , love that rob a man of he sleep , love that ' will gaze a eagle blind , ' love that ' will hear the lowest sound when the suspicious tread of theft be stop , ' love that be ' like a still climb tree in the , ' -- we believe this best age be from forty - five to seventy ; up to that , man be generally give to mere flirting . at the present moment , aetat . fifty , be over head and ears in love at first sight with the , . nevertheless he be sufficientely master of himself to offer he arm with all propriety to , and the countess graciously permit herself to be lead to the tent . such have be be order , as she have succeed in induce the bishop to lead old to the top of the dining - room . one of the baronet be send off in quest of , and find that lady on the lawn not in the best of humours . and the countess have leave she too abruptly ; she have in vain look about for a attendant chaplain , or even a stray curate ; they be all draw long bow with the young lady at the bottom of the lawn , or find place for they graceful co-toxophilite in some snug corner of the tent . in such position have be will not in earlier day to fall back upon ; but now she could never fall back upon he again . she give she head one shake as she think of she lone position , and that shake be
be as good as a week deduct from 's longer sojourn in . , however , relieve she present misery , though he do so by no means mitigate the sinning chaplain 's doom . and now the eat and drink begin in earnest . , to he great horror , find himself leagu to . have a great regard for the archdeacon , which be not cordially return ; and when she , come up to he , whisper in he ear , ' come , archdeacon , I be sure you will not begrudge a old friend the favour of you arm , ' and then proceed to tell he the whole history of she roquelaure , he resolve that he would shake she off before he be fifteen minute older . but latterly the archdeacon have not be successful in he resolution ; and on the present occasion stuck to he till the banquet be over . get a baronet 's wife , and fell to the lot of a baronet . attach herself to Harding in order to make room for , who succeed in sit down in the dining - room next to . to speak sooth , now that he have love in earnest to make , he heart almost fail he . have be right glad to avail herself of he arm , see that be hover nigh she . in striving to avoid that terrible Charybdis of a Slope she be in great danger of fall into a unseen Scylla on the other hand , that be . nothing could be more gracious than she be to . she almost jump at he proffered arm . perceive this from a distance , and triumph in she heart ; feel it , and be encourage ; see it , and glower with jealousy . and sit down to table in the dining - room ; and as she take she seat at he right hand , she find that be already in possession of the chair at she own . as these thing be go on in the dining - room , be hang enraptured and alone over the signora 's sofa ; and from she seat could look through the open door and see that he be do so . the to , and the Dean die the bishop of say over the well - spread board in the dining - room ; and while he do so the last breath be fly from the dean of Barchester as he lay in he sick - room in the deanery . when the bishop of raise he first glass of champagne to he lip , the deanship of be a good thing in the gift of the prime minister . before the bishop of have leave the table , the minister of the day be make aware of the fact at he country seat in , and have already turn over in he mind the name of five very respectable aspirant for the preferment . it be at present only necessary to say that 's name be not among the five . ''Tbe merry in the hall when the beard wag all ; ' and the clerical beard wag merrily in the hall of that day . it be not till after the last cork have be draw , the last speech make , the last nut crack , that tiding reach and be whispered about that the poor dean be no more . it be well for the happiness of the clerical beard that this little delay take place , as otherwise decency would have forbide they to wag at all . but there be one sad man among they that day . 's beard do not wag as it should have do . he have come there hope the best , strive to think the best about ; turn over in he mind all the word he remember to have fall from she about , and try to gather from they a conviction unfavourable to he rival . he have not exactly resolve to come that day to some decisive proof as to the widow 's intention ; but he have mean , if possible , to re-cultivate he friendship with ; and in he present frame of mind any such re-cultivation must have end in a declaration of love . he have pass the previous night alone at he new parsonage , and it be the first night that he have so pass . it have be dull and sombre enough . have be right in say that a priestess would be want at 's . he have sit there alone with he glass before he , and then with he teapot , think about . as be usual in such meditation , he do little but blame she ; blame she for like , and blame she for not like he ; blame she for she cordiality to himself , and blame she for she want of cordiality ; blame she for be stubborn , headstrong , and passionate ; and yet the more he think of she the higher she rise in he affection . if only it should turn out , if only it could be make to turn out , that she have defend , not from love , but on principle , all would be right . such principle in itself would be admirable , loveable , womanly ; he feel that he could be pleased to allow just so much favour as that . but if -- and then pok he fire most unnecessarily , speak crossly to he new parlour-maid who come in for the tea - thing , and throw himself back in he chair determined to go to sleep . why have she be so stiff - necke when ask a plain question ? she could not but have know in what
what light he regard she . why have she not answer a plain question , and so put a end to he misery ? then , instead of go to sleep in he arm -chair , walk about the room as though he have be possess . on the follow morning , when he attend 's behest , he be still in a somewhat confused state . he first duty have be to converse with , and that lady have find it impossible to elicit the slightest sympathy from he on the subject of hr roquelaure . Thorne have ask he whether be come with the ; and the two name of and Grantly together have nearly make he jump from he seat . he be in this state of confused uncertainty , hope , and doubt , when he see , with he most polished smile , hand out of she carriage . he think of nothing more . he never consider whether the carriage belong to she or to , or to any one else to whom they might both be mutually oblige without any concert between themselves . the sight in he present state of mind be quite enough to upset he and he resolve . it be clear as noonday . have he see she hand into a carriage by at a church door with a white veil over she head , the truth could not be more manifest . he go into the house , and , as we have see , soon find himself walk with . shortly afterwards come up ; and then he have to leave he companion , and either go about alone or find another . while in this state he be encounter by the archdeacon . 'I wonder , ' say , ' if it be true that and come here together . say she be almost sure she see they face in the same carriage as she get out of she own . ' have nothing for it but to bear he testimony to the correctness of 's eyesight . ' it be perfectly shameful , ' say the archdeacon ; 'or I should rather say , shameless . she be ask she as my guest ; and if she be determined to disgrase herself , she should have feel enough not to do so before my immediate friend . I wonder how that man get himself invite . I wonder whether she have the face to bring he . ' to this could answer nothing , nor do he wish to answer anything . though he abuse to himself , he do not choose to abuse to any one else , nor be he well pleas to hear any one else speak ill of she . , however , be very angry , and do not spare he sister - in - law . therefore leave he as soon as he could , and wander back into the house . it be impossible to say how the knowledge have be acquire , but the signora have a sort of instinctive knowledge that be a admirer of . man hunt fox by the aid of dog , and be aware that they do so by the strong organ of smell with which the dog be endow . they do not , however , in the least comprehend how such a sense can work with such acuteness . the organ by which woman instinctively , as it be , know and feel how other woman be regard by man , and how also man be regard by other woman , be equally strong , and equally incomprehensible . a glance , a word , a motion , suffice : by some such acute exercise of she feminine sense the signora be aware that love ; and therefore , by a further exercise of she peculiar feminine propensity , it be quite natural for she to entrap into she net . the work be half do before she come to , and when could she have a better opportunity of complete it ? she have have almost enough of , though she could not quite resist the fun of drive a very sanctimonious clergyman to madness by a desperate and ruinous passion . Thorne have fall too easily to give much pleasure in the chase . he position as a man of wealth might make he alliance of value , but as a lover he be very second - rate . we may say that she regard he somewhat as a sportsman do a pheasant . the bird be so easily shot , that he would not be worth the shooting be it not for the very respectable appearance that he make in a larder . the signora would not waste much time in shoot , but still he be worth bagging for family use . but be game of another sort . the signora be herself possess of quite sufficient intelligence to know that be a man more than usually intellectual . she know also , that as a clergyman he be of a much higher stamp than , and that as gentleman he be better educated than . she would never have attempt to drive into ridiculous misery as she do , nor would she think it possible to dispose of he in ten minute as she have do with . such be she reflection about . as to , it can not be say that he reflect at all about the signora . he know that she be beautiful , and he feel that she be able to charm he . he require charm in he present misery , and therefore he go and stand at the head of she couch . she know all about it . such be she peculiar gift . it be she nature to see that he require charming , and it be
be she province to charm he . as the idler swallow he dose of opium , as the reprobate swallow he dose of gin , so with similar desire and for similar reason do prepare to swallow the charms of the . ' why be not you shoot with bow and arrow , ? ' say she , when they be nearly alone together in the sitting - room ; 'or talk with young lady in shady bower , or turn you talents to account in some way ? what be a bachelor like you ask here for ? do not you mean to earn you cold chicken and champagne ? be I you , I should be asham to be so idle . ' murmure some sort of answer . though he wish to be charme , he as hardly yet in a mood to be playful in return . ' why , what ail you , ? ' say she , ' here you be in you own parish ; Thorne tell I that she party be give expressly in you honour ; and yet you be the only dull man in it . you friend be with I a few minute since , full of life and spirit ' why do not you rival he ? ' it be not difficult for so acute a observer as to see that she have hit the nail on the head and drive the bolt home . wince visibly before she attack , and she know at once that he be jealous of . ' but I look on you and as the very antipode of man , ' say she . ' there be nothing in which you be not each the reverse of the other , except in belong to the same profession ; and even in that you be so unlike as perfectly to maintain the rule . he be gregarious , you be give to solitude . he be active , you be passive . he work , you think . he like woman , you despise they . he be fond of position and power , and so be you , but for directly different reason . he love to be praise , you very foolishly abhor it . he will gain he reward , which will be a insipid useful wife , a comfortable income , and a reputation for sanctimony . you will also gain yours . ' ' well , and what will they be ? ' say , who know that he be be flatter , and yet suffer himself to put up with it . ' what will be my rewards ? ' ' the heart of some woman whom you will be too austere to own that you love , and the respect of some few friend which you will be too proud to own that you value . ' ' Rich reward , ' say he ; ' but of little worth if they be to be so treat . ' 'Oh , you be not to look for such success as await . he be bear to be a successful man . he suggest to himself a object , and then start for it with eager intention . nothing will deter he from he pursuit . he will have no scruple , no fear , no hesitation . he desire be to be a bishop with a rise family , the wife will come first , and in due time the apron . you will see all this , and then -- ' ' well , and what then ? ' ' then you will begin to wish that you have do the same . ' look placidly out at the lawn , and rest he shoulder on the head of the sofa , rub he ching with he hand . it be a trick he have when he be think deeply ; and what the signora say make he think . be it not all true ? would he not hereafter look back , if not at , at some other , people not equally gif with himself , who have risen in the world while he have lag behind , and then wish that he have do the same ? 'Is not such the doom of all speculative man of talent ? ' say she . ' do they not all sit rapt as you now be , cut imaginary silken cord with they fine edge , while those not so highly tempere sever the every - day Gordian knot of the world 's struggle , and win wealth and reny ? steel too highly polished , edge too sharp , do not do for this world 's work , . ' who be this woman that thus read the secret of he heart , and re-utter to he the unwelcome boding of he own soul ? he look full into she face when she have do speak , and say , ' be I one of those foolish blades , too sharp and too fine to do a useful day 's work ? ' ' why do you let the Slopes of the world out - distance you ? ' say she . ' it not the blood in you vein as warm as he ? do not you pulse beat as fast ? have not make you a man , and intend you to do a man 's work here , ay , and to take a man 's wage also ? ' sit ruminat and rub he face , and wonder why these thing be say to he ; but he reply nothing . the signora go on -- ' the greatest mistake any man ever make be to suppose that the good thing of the world be not worth the winning . and it be a mistake so oppose to the religion
religion which you preach ! why do permit he bishop one after the other to have they five thousand and ten thousand a year if such wealth be bad and not worth having ? why be beautiful thing give to we , and luxuries and pleasant enjoyment , if they be not intend to be use ? they must be mean for some one , and what be good for a layman can not surely be bad for a clerk . you try to despise these good thing , but you only try ; you do not succeed . ' ' do not I , ' say , still muse , and not know what he say . 'I ask you the question : do you succeed ? ' look at she piteously . it seem to he as though he be be interrogate by some inner spirit of he own , to whom he could not refuse a answer , and to whom he do not dare to give a false reply . ' come , , confess ; do you succeed ? be money so contemptible ? be worldly power so worthless ? be feminine beauty a trifle to be so slightly regard by a wise man ? ' ' Feminine beauty ! ' say he , gaze into she face , as though all the feminine beauty in the world be concentrate there . ' why do you say I do not regard it ? ' ' if you look at I like that , , I shall alter my opinion -- or should do so , be I not of course aware that I have no beauty of my own worth regarding . ' the gentleman blush crimson , but the lady do not blush at all . a slightly increase colour animate she face , just so much so as to give she a air of special interest . she expect a compliment from she admirer , but she be rather grateful than otherwise by find that he do not pay it to she . and , , and , they all pay she compliment . she be rather in hope that she would ultimately succeed in induce to abuse she . ' but you gaze , ' say she , ' be one of , and not of admiration . you wonder at my audacity in ask you such question about yourself . ' ' well , I do rather , ' say he . ' nevertheless I expect a answer , . why be woman make beautiful if man be not to regard they ? ' ' but man do regard they , ' he reply . ' and why not you ? ' ' you be begge the question , . ' 'I be sure that I shall beg nothing , , which you will not grant , and I do beg for a answer . do you not as a rule think woman below you notice as companion ? let we see . there be the widow bold look round at you from she chair this minute . what would you say to she as a companion for life ? ' , rise from he position , lean over the sofa and look through the drawing - room door to the place where be seat between and . she at once catch he glance , and avert she own . she be not pleasantly place in she present position . be do he best to attract she attention ; and she be strive to prevent he do so by talk to , while she mind be intently fix on and . endeavoure to take advantage of she favour , but he be think more of the manner in which he would by - and - by throw himself at she foot , than of amusing she at the present moment . ' there , ' say the signora . ' she be stretch she beautiful neck to look at you , and now you have disturb she . well I declare , I believe I be wrong about you ; I believe that you do think a charming woman . you look seem to say so ; and by she look I should say that she be jealous of I . come , , confide in I , and if it be so , I will do all in my power to make up the match . ' it be needless to say that the signora be not very sincere in she offer . she be never sincere on such subject . she never expect other to be so , nor do she expect other to think she so . such matter be she plaything , she billiard table , she hound and hunter , she waltze and polka , she picnic and summer - day excursion . she have little else to amuse she , and therefore play at love - make in all its form . she be now play at it with , and do not at all expect the earnestness and truth of he answer . ' all in you power would be nothing , ' say he ; ' for be , I imagine , already engage to another . ' ' then you own the impeachment yourself . ' ' you cross-question I rather unfairly , ' he reply , ' and I do not know why I answer you at all . be a very beautiful woman , and as intelligent as beautiful . it be impossible to know she without admir she . ' ' so you think the widow a very beautiful woman ? ' ' indeed I do . ' ' and one that would grase the parsonage at 's . ' ' one that would grase any man 's house . ' ' and you really have the effrontery to tell
tell I this , ' say she ; 'too tell I , who , as you very well know , set up to be a beauty myself , and who be at this very moment take such a interest in you affair , you really have the effrontery to tell I that be the most beautiful woman you know . ' 'I do not say so , ' say ; ' you be more beautiful -- ' 'Ah , come now , that be something like . I think you would not be so unfeeling . ' ' you be more beautiful , perhaps more clever . ' ' thank you , thank you , . I know that you and I should be friend . ' ' but --' ' not a word further . I will not hear a word further . if you talk till midnight , you can not improve what you have say . ' ' but , --' 'I will not hear a word about . Dread thought of strychnine do pass across my brain , but she be welcome to the second place . ' 'her place --' 'I will not hear anything about she or she place . I be satisfied and that be enough . but , , I be die with hunger ; beautiful and clever as I be , you know I can not go to my food , and yet you do not bring it to I . ' this at any rate be so true as to make it unnecessary that should not act upon it , and he accordingly go into the dining - room and supply the signora 's want . ' and yourself , ' say she . ' oh , ' say he , 'I be not hungry ; I never eat at this hour . ' ' come , come , , do not let love interfere with you appetite . it never do with mine . give I half a glass more champagne , and then go to the table . will do I a injury if you stay talk to I any longer . ' do as he be bid . he take she plate and glass from she , and go into the dining - room , help himself to a sandwich from the crowded table and begin munch it in a corner . as he be do so , , who have hardly sit down for a moment , come into the room , and see he stand , be greatly distress . ' oh , my dear , ' say she , ' have you never sit down yet ? I be so distressed . you of all man too . ' assure she that he have only just come into the room . ' that be the very reason why you should lose no more time . come I will make room for you . thank 'ee my dear , ' she say , see that be make a attempt to move from she chair , ' but I would not for the world see you stir , for all the lady would think it necessary to follow . but , perhaps , if have do -- just for a minute , -- till I can get another chair . ' and so have to rise to make way for he rival . this he do , as he do everything , with a air of good - humoured pleasantry , which make it impossible for to refuse the proffered seat . ' he bishopric let another take , ' say ; the quotation be certainly not very appropriate , either for the occasion , or the person speak to . 'I have eat and be satisfied ; , pray take my chair . I wish for you sake , it really be a bishop 's seat . ' do sit down , and as he do so , get up as though to follow she neighbour . ' pray , pray do not move , ' say , almost force back into she chair . be not go to leave we . he will stand behind you like a true knight as he be . and now I think of it , , let I introduce you to . , . ' and the two gentleman bow stifinitely to each other across the lady they both intend to marry , while the other gentleman who also intend to marry she stand behind , watch they . the two have never meet each other before , and the present be certainly not a good opportunity for much cordial conversation , even if cordial conversation between they have be possible . as it be , the whole four who form the party seem as though they tongue be tie . , who be wide awake to what he hope be he come opportunity , be not much concerned in the interest of the moment . he wish be to see move , that he might pursue she . be not exactly in the same frame of mind ; the evil of the day be near enough ; there be no reason why he should precipitate it . he have make up he mind to marry if he could , and be resolve to - day to take the first preliminary step towards do so . but there be time enough before he . he be not go to make a offer of marriage over the table - cloth . have thus good - naturedly make way for , he be willing also to let he talk to the future as long as they remain in they present position . bow to , begin eat he food , without say a word further . he be full of thought , and though he eat he do so unconsciously .
. but poor be the most to be pitie . the only friend on whom she think she could rely , be , and he , it seem , be determined to desert she . do not attempt to address she . she say a few word in reply to some remark from , and then feel the situation too much for she , start from she chair in spite of , and hurrie from the room . follow she , and young lose the occasion . , when she be leave alone , could not help ponder much on the singular interview she have have with this singular man . not a word that she have speak to he have be intend by she to be receive as true , and yet he have answer she in the very spirit of truth . he have do so , and she have be aware that he have do so . she have worm from he he secret ; and he , debar as it would seem from man 's usual privilege of lie , have innocently laid bare he whole soul to she . he love , but be not in he eye so beautiful as herself . he would afain have for he wife , but yet he have acknowledge that she be the less gif of the two . the man have literally be unable to falsify he thought when question , and have be compelle to be true malgre lui , even when truth must have be disagreeable to he . this teacher of man , this pundit , this double - distilled quintessence of university perfection , this writer of religious treatise , this speaker of ecclesiastical speech , have be like a little child in she hand ; she have turn he inside out , and read he very heart as she might have do that of a young girl . she could not but despise he for he facile openness , and yet she like he too . it be a novelty to she , a new trait in a man 's character . she feel also that she could never so completely make a fool of he as she do of the and the Thorne . she feel that she could never induce to make protestation to she that be not true , or to listen to nonsense that be mere nonsense . it be quite clear that be heartily in love with , and the signora , with very unwonted good nature , begin to turn it over in she mind whether she could not do he a good turn . of course be to have the first chance . it be a understood family arrangement that she brother be , if possible , to marry the widow bold . know too well the necessity and what be due to she sister to interfere with so excellent a plan , as long as it might be feasible . but she have strong suspicion that it be not feasible . she do not think it likely that would accept a man in she brother 's position , and she have frequently say so to . she be inclin to believe that have more chance of success ; and with she it would be a labour of love to rob of he wife . and so the signora resolve , should fail , to do a good - natured act for once in she life , and give up to the woman whom he love . chapter XXXIX the Lookaloft and the Greenacre on the whole , 's provision for the amusement and feeding of the outer class in the exoteric paddock be not unsuccessful . two little drawback to the general happiness do take place , but they be of a temporary nature , and apparent rather than real . the first be the downfall of young , and the other be the uprise of and she family . as to the quintain , it become more popular among the boy on foot , than it would ever have be among the man on horseback , even have young Greenacre be more successful . it be twirl round and round till it be nearly twist out of the ground ; and the bag of flou be use with great gusto in powder the back and head of all who could be coax within the vicinity . of course it be report all throughout the assemblage that be dead , and there be a pathetic scene between he and he mother when it be find that he have escape scatheless from the fall . a good deal of beer be drink on the occasion , and the quintain be ' drat ' and ' bother ' , and very generally anathematise by all the mother who have young son likely to be place in similar jeopardy . but the affair of be of a more serious nature . 'I do tell 'ee plainly , -- face to face -- she be there in madam 's drawing - room ; herself and , and they two walloping gal , dress up to they very eyeses . ' this be say by a very positive , very indignant , and very fat farmer 's wife , who be sit on the end of a bench lean on the handle of a huge cotton umbrella . ' but you do not zee she , ? ' say , whom this information , join to the recent peril undergone by she son , almost overpowered . Greenacres hold just as much land as , pay he rent quite as punctually , and he opinion in the vestry - room be reckon to be every whit as good . 's rise in the world have be wormwood to . she have not taste herself for the sort of finery which
which convert farm into , and which have occasionally grac 's letter with the dignity of esquirehood . she have no wish to convert she own homeland into , or to see she goodman go about with a new - fangled handle to he name . but it be a mortal injury to she that should be successful in she hunt after such honour . she have abuse and ridicule to the extent of she little power . she have push against she go out of church , and have excuse herself with all the easiness of equality . 'Ah , dame , I ax pardon ; but you be grow so mortal stout these time . ' she have inquire with apparent cordiality of after ' the woman that own he , ' and have , as she think , be on the whole able to hold she own pretty well against she aspiring neighbour . now , however , she find herself distinctly put into a separate and inferior class . be ask into the draw - room , merely because she call she house , and have talk over she husband into buy piano and silk dress instead of put he money by to stock farm for he son . , much as she reverence , and highly as she respecte she husband 's landlord , could not but look on this as a act of injustice do to she and hers . Hitherto the have never be recognise as be of a different class from the Greenacres . they pretension be all self - pretension , they finery be all pay for by themselves and not grant to they by other . the local sovereign of the vicinity , the district fountain of honour , have hitherto confer on they the stamp of no rank . Hitherto they crinoline petticoat , late hour , and mincing gait have be a fair subject of 's raillery , and this raillery have be a safety valve for she envy . now , however , and from henceforward , the case would be very different . now the Lookaloft would boast that they aspiration have be sanction by the gentry of the country ; now they would declare with some show of truth that they claim to peculiar consideration have be recognise . they have sit as equal guest in the presence of bishop and baronet ; they have be curtsey to by Thorne on she own drawing - room carpet ; they be about to sit down to table in company with a live countess ! , as she have always be call by the young Greenacre in the day of they juvenile equality , might possibly sit next to the , and that wretch might be permit to hand a custard to the . the fruition of these honour , or such of they have fall to the lot of the envied family , be not such as should have cause much envy . the attention pay to the by the be very limited , and the amount of society be hardly in itself a recompense for the dull monotony of they day . but of what they endure take no account ; she think only of what she consider they must enjoy , and of the dreadfully exalt tone of living which would be manifest by the family , as the consequence of they present distinction . ' but do 'ee zee them there , dame , do 'ee zee th'ey then with you own eye ? ' ask poor , still hope that there might be some ground for doubt . ' and how could I do that , unless so be I be there myself ? ' ask . 'I do not set eye on none of they this bless morning , but I zee would they as do . you know we ; well , he will be for keeping company with , 's own maid , you know . and be not one of you common kitchen wench . so , she come out to we , you know , and she be always vastly polite to I , be , I must say . so before she take so much as one turn with , she tell I every hag porth that be go on up in the house . ' ' do she now ? ' say . ' indeed she do , ' say . ' and she tell you they people be up there in the drawing - room ? ' ' she tell I she zee would they come in -- that they be dress finer by half nor any of the family , with all they neckse and buzom stark nake as a bear babby . ' ' the minx ! ' exclaim , who feel herself more put about by this than any other mark of aristocratic distinction which she enemy have assume . ' yes , indeed , ' continue , 'as naked as you please , while all the quality be dress just as you and I be , . ' ' Drat they impudence ' say , from whose well - cover bosom all milk of human kindness be reced , as far as the family of the Lookaloft be concerned . say I , ' say ; ' and so say my good - man , when he hear would it . " , " say he to I , " if ever you take to go about of ' morning with yourself all naked in they way , I beg you will not come back no more to the old house . " so say I , " , no more I wull . " " but , " say he , " drat it , how the deuce do she manage with she rheumatiz , and she not a rag
rag on she : " ' say , laugh loudly as she though of 's probable suffering from rheumatic attack . ' but to like herself that way to folk that ha 's blood in they vein , ' say . ' well , but that war not all neither that tell . there they all swell into 's drawing - room , like so many turkey cock , as much to say , " and who dare say no to we ? " and be think of tell they to come down here , only he heart fail he ' cause of the grand way they be dress . so in they go ; but look at they as glum as death . ' ' well now , ' say , greatly relieve , 'so they be not ax different from we all then ? ' ' Betsey say that say that madam be not a bit too well pleased to see they where they be and that , to he believe , they be expect to come here just like the rest of we . ' there be great consolation in this . not that be altogether satisfied . she feel that justice to herself demand that should not only not be encourage , but that she should also be absolutely punish . what have be do at that scriptural banquet , of which so often read the account to she family ? why have not Thorne boldly go to the intruder and say : ' friend , thou hast come up hither to high place not fitte for thee . go down lower , and thou will find thy mate . ' let the Lookalofts be treat at the present moment with ever so cold a shoulder , they would still be enable to boast hereafter of they position , they aspiration , and they honour . ' well , with all her grandeur , I do wonder that she be so mean , continue , unable to dismiss the subject . ' do you hear , goodman ? ' she go on , about to repeat the whole story to she husband who then come up . ' there be dame and and and the lot of th'ey all sit as grand as fivepence in 's drawing - room , and they not ax no more nor you nor I . do you ever hear tell the like of ' that ? ' ' well , and what for should not they ? ' say . ' Liken theyselves to the quality , as though they be estate folk , or the like of ' that ! ' say . ' well , if they like it and madam like it , they be welcome for I , ' say the farmer . ' now I like the place better , cause I be more at home like , and do not have to pay for they fine clothes for the missus . every one to he taste , , and if neighbou think that he have the best of it , he be welcome . ' sit down by she husband 's side to begin the heavy work of the banquet , and she do so in some measure of restore tranquillity , but nevertheless she shook she head at she gossip to show that in this instance she do not quite approve of she husband 's doctrine . ' and I will tell 'ee what , dame , ' continue he ; ' if so be that we can not enjoy the dinner that madam give we because be sit up there on a grand sofa , I think we ought all to go home . if we greet at that , what will we do when true sorrow come across we ? how would you be now , dame , if the boy there have break he neck when he get the tumble ? ' be humble , and say nothing further on the matter . but let prudent man , such as , preach as they will , the family of the certainly do occasion a good deal of heart - burn in the world at large . it be pleasant to see Plomacy , as lean on he stout stick he go about among the rural guest , act as a sort of head constable as well as master of the revel . ' now , young 'un , if you can not manage to get along without that screeching , you would better go to the other side of the twelve - acre field , and take you dinner with you . come , girl , what do you stand there for , twirling of you thumb ? come out , and let the lad see you ; you have no need to be so asham of you face . hello ! there , who be you ? how do you make you way in here ? ' this last disagreeable question be put to a young man of about twenty - four , who do not , in 's eye , bear sufficient vestige of a rural education and residence . ' if you please , you worship , master the coachman let I in at the church wicket , ' cause I do be work mostly al'ays for the family . ' ' then master the coachman may let you out again , ' say , not even conciliate by the magisterial dignity which have be conced to he . ' what be you name ? and what trade be you , and who do you work for ? ' 'I be , you worship , ; and -- and -- and -- ' ' and what be you trade , ? ' ' Plaisterer , please you worship . ' 'I will plaister you and too ; you
you will just walk out of this ' ere field as quick as you walk in . we do not want no plaisterer ; when we do , we will send for th'ey . come , my buck , walk . ' Stubb the plasterer be much downcast at the dreadful edict . he be a sprightly fellow , and have contrive since he egress into the elysium to attract to himself a forest nymph , to whom he be whisper a plasterer 's usual soft nothing , when he be encounter by the great Mr Plomacy . it be dreadful to be thus dissever from the dryad , and send how back to a pandemonium just as the nectar and ambrosia be about to descmend on the field of asphodel . he begin to try what prayer would do , but city prayer be avain against the great rural potentate . not only do order he exit , but raise he stick to show the way which lead to the gate that have be leave in the custody of that false , proceed himself to see the edict of banishment carry out . the goddess mercy , however , the sweetest goddess that ever sit upon a cloud , and the dearest to poor frail erring man appear on the field in the person of . never be interced goddess more welcome . ' come , man , ' say , ' never stick at trifle such a day as this . I know the lad well . let he bide at my axing . Madam will not miss what he can eat and drink , I know . ' now and be swear friend . have at he own disposal as comfortable a room as there be in ; but he be a bachelor , and alone there ; and , moreover , smoke in the house be not allow even to . he moments of truest happiness be spend in a huge arm -chair in the warmest corner of 's beautifully clean front kitchen . ' Tbe there that the inner man dissolve itself , and pour itself out in stream of pleasant chat ; ' twas there , and perhaps there only , that he could unbure himself from the ceremony of life without offend the dignity of those above he , or incurr the familiarity of those below . ' Tbe there that he long pipe be always to be find on the accustom chimney board , not only permit but encourage . such be the state of the case , it be not to be suppose that could refuse such a favour to ; but nevertheless he not grant it without some further show of austere authority . ' eat and drink , ! no . it be not what he eat and drink ; but the example such a chap show , come in where he be not invite -- a chap of he age too . he too that never do a day 's work about since he be bear . Plaisterer ! I will plaister he ! ' ' he work long enough for I , then . and a good hand he be at setting tiles as any in , ' say the other , not stick quite to veracity , as indeed mercy never should . ' come , come , let he alone to - day , and quarrel with he to - morrow . you would not shame he before he lass there ? ' ' it go against the grain with I , then , ' say . ' and take care , you Stubbs , and behave yourself . if I hear a row , I shall know where it come from . I be up to you journeyman ; I know what stuff you be make of . ' and so go off happy , pull at the forelock of he shock head of hair in honour of the steward 's clemency , and give another double pull at it in honour of the farmer 's kindness . and as he go he swore within he grateful heart , that if ever want a day 's work do for nothing , he be the lad to do it for he . which promise it be not probable that he would ever be call upon to perform . but be not quite happy in he mind for he think of the unjust steward , and begin to reflect whether he have not make for himself friend at the mammon of unrighteousness . this , however , do not interfere with the manner in which he perform he duty at the bottom of the long board ; nor do perform he the worse at the top on account of the good wish of the plasterer . moreover , the guest do not think it anything amiss when Mr Plomacy , rise to say , pray that would make they all truly thankful for the good thing which in she great liberality have set out before they ! all this time the quality in the tent on the lawn be get on swimmingly ; that be , champagne without restriction can enable quality fold to swim . gorse propose the health of , and like she to a blood race - horse , always in condition , and not to be ti down by any amount of work . Thorne return thanks , say he hope he sister would always be find able to run when call upon , and than give the health and prosperity of the family . he sister be very much honoure by see so many of they at she poor board . they be all aware that important avocation make the absence of the earl necessary . as he duty to he prince have call he from he family hearth he , ,
, could not venture to regret that he do not see he at ; but nevertheless he would venture to say -- and so Thorne become somewhat gravelled as a country gentleman in similar circumstance usually do ; but he ultimately sit down , declare that he have much satisfaction in drinking the noble earl 's health , together with that of the countess , and all the family of castle . and then the return thanks . we will not follow he through the different period of he somewhat irregular eloquence . those immediately in he neighbourhood find it at first rather difficult to get he to he leg , but much greater difficulty be soon experience in induce he to resume he seat . one of two arrangement should certainly be make in these day : either let all speech - make on festive occasion be utterly taboo and make as it be impossible ; or else let those who be to exercise the privilege be first subject to a competing examination before the civil service examine commissioner . as it be now , the Honourable George do but little honour to we exertion in favour of british education . in the dining - room the bishop go through the honour of the day with much more neatness and propriety . he also drank 's health , and do it in a manner become the bench which he adorn . the party there , be perhaps a little more dull , a shade less lively than that in the tent . but what be lose in mirth , be fully make up in decorum . and so the banquet pass off at the various table with great eclat and universal delight . -- ' that which have make they drunk , have make I bold . ' ' Tbe thus that encourage himself , as he leave the dining - room in pursuit of . he have not indeed see in that room any person really intoxicate ; but there have be a good deal of wine drunk , and have not hesitate to take he share , in order to screw himself up to the undertaking which he have in hand . he be not the first man who have think it expedient to call in the assistance of on such a occasion . be out through the window , and on the grass before she perceive that she be follow . just at that moment the guest be nearly all occupy at the table . here and there be to be see a constant couple or two , who prefer they own sweet discourse to the jingle of glass , or the charms of rhetoric which fall from the mouth of the and the bishop of ; but the grounds be as nearly vacant as could wish they to be . see that she be pursue , and as a deer , when escape be no longer possible , will turn to bay and attack the hound , so do she turn upon . ' pray do not let I take you from the room , ' say she , speak with all the stiffness which she know how to use . 'I have come out to look for a friend . I must beg of you , , to go back . ' but would not be thus entreate . he have observ all day that be not cordial to he , and this have to a certain extent oppress he . but he do not deduce from this any assurance that he aspiration be in vain . he see that she be angry with he . might she not be so because he have so long tamper with she feeling , -- might it not arise from he having , as he know to be the case , cause she name to be bruit about in conjunction with he own , without have give she the opportunity of confessing to the world that henceforth they name be to be the one and the same ? poor lady ! he have within he a certain conscience - stricken feeling of remorse on this head . it might be that he have wrong she by he tardiness . he have , however , at the present moment imbibe too much of 's champagne to have any inward misgiving . he be right in repeat the boast of : he be not drink ; but he be bold enough for anything . it be a pity that in such a state he could not have encounter . ' you must permit I to attend you , ' say he ; 'I could not think of allow you to go alone . ' ' indeed you must , , ' say still very stifinitely ; ' for it be my special wish to be alone . ' the time for let the great secret escape he have already come . see that it must be now or never , and he be determine that it should be now . this be not he first attempt at win a fair lady . he have be on he knee , look unutterable thing with he eye , and whisper honeyed word before this . indeed he be somewhat a adept at these thing , and have only to adapt to the perhaps different taste of the well -remember rhapsody which have once so much gratify . ' do not ask I to leave you , , ' say he with a impassioned look , impassion and sanctify as well , with that sort of look which be not uncommon with gentleman of 's school , and which may perhaps be call the tender - pious . ' do not ask I to leave you , till I have speak a few word with which my heart be full ; which I
I have come hither purposely to say . ' see how it be now . she know directly what it be she be about to go through , and very miserable the knowledge make she . of course she could refuse , and there would be a end of that , one might say . but there be not a end of it as far as be concerned . the very fact of 's make a offer to she would be a triumph for the archdeacon , and in a great measure a vindication of 's conduct . the widow could not bring herself to endure with patience the idea that she have be in the wrong . she have defend , she have declare herself quite justifi in admit he among she acquaintance , have ridicule the idea of he consider himself as more than a acquaintance , and have resent the archdeacon 's caution in she behalf : now it be about to be prove to she in a manner sufficiently disagreeable that the archdeacon have be right , and she herself have be entirely wrong . 'I do not know what you can have to say to I , , that you could not have say when we be sit at table just now ;' and she close she lip , and steady she eyeball and look at he in a manner that ought to have freeze he . but gentleman be not easily freeze when they be full of champagne , and it would not at any time have be easy to freeze . ' there be thing , , which a man can not well say before a crowd ; which perhaps he can not well say at any time ; which indeed he may most fervently desire to get spoken , and which he may yet find it almost impossible to utter . it be such thing as these , that I now wish to say to you ;' and then the tender - pious look be repeat , with a little more emphasis even than before . have not find it practicable to stand stock still before the dining - room window , and there receive he offer in full view of 's guest . she have therefore in self - defence walk on , and have gain he object of walking with she . he now offer she he arm . ' thank you , , I be much oblige to you ; but for the very short time that I shall remain with you I shall prefer walk alone . ' ' and must it be so short ? ' say he ; ' must it be --' ' yes , ' say , interrupt he ; 'as short as possible , if you please , sir . ' 'I have hope , -- I have hope -- ' ' hope nothing , , as far as I be concerned ; pray do not ; I do not know , and need not know what hope you mean . we acquaintance be very slight , and will probably remain so . pray , pray , let that be enough ; there be at any rage no necessity for we to quarrel . ' be certainly treat rather cavalierly , and he feel it so . she be reject he before he have offer himself , and inform he at the same time that he be take a great deal too much on himself to be so familiar . she do not even make a attempt > from such a sharp and waspish word as ' no ' to pluck the string . he be still determined to be very tender and very pious , see that in spite of all have say to he , he not yet abandon hope ; but he be inclin to be somewhat angry . the widow be bear herself , as he think , with too high a hand , be speak of herself in much too imperious a tone . she have clearly no idea that a honour be be confer on she . would be tender as long as he could , but he begin to think , if that fail , it would not be amiss if he also mount himself for a while on he high horse . Slope could undoubtedly be very tender , but he could be very savage also , and he know he own ability . ' that be cruel , ' say he , ' and unchristian too . the worst of we be all still bidden to hope . what have I do that you should pass on I so severe a sentence ? ' and then he pause a moment , during which the widow walk steadily on with measured step , say nothing further . ' beautiful woman , ' at last he burst forth , ' beautiful woman , you can not pretend to be ignorant that I adore you . yes , , yes , I love you . I love you with the truest affection which man can bear to woman . next to my hope of heaven be my hope of possesse you . ' ( 's memory here play he false , or he would not have omit the deanery ) ' how sweet to walk to heave with you by my side , with you for my guide , mutual guide . , , , shall we walk that sweet path together ? ' have no intention of ever walk together with on any other path than the special one of 's which they now occupy ; but as she have be unable to prevent the expression of 's wish and aspiration , she resolve to hear he out to the end , before she answer he . ' ah ! ,' he continue , and it seem
seem to be he idea , that as he have once find courage to pronounce she name , he could not utter it often enough . 'Ah ! , will it not be sweet with the 's assistance , to travel hand in hand through this mortal valley which he mercy will make pleasant to we , till hereafter we shall dwell together at the foot of he throne ? ' and then a more tenderly pious glance ever beam from the lover 's eye . 'Ah ! --' ' my name , , be , ' say , who , though determined to hear out the tale of he love , be too much disgust by he blasphemy to be able to bear much more of it . ' Sweetest angel , be not so cold , ' say he , and as he say it the champagne break forth , and he contrive to pass he arm around she waist . he do this with considerable cleverness , for up to this point have contrive with tolerable success to keep she distance from he . they have get into a walk nearly envelope by shrub , and therefore no doubt consider that as they be now alone it be fitting that he should give she some outward demonstration of that affection of which he talk so much . it may perhaps be presume that the same stamp of measure have be find to succeed with . be this as it may , it be not successful with . she spring from he as she would have jump from a adder , but she do not spre far ; not , indeed , beyond arm 's length ; and then , quick as thought , she raise she little hand and deal he a box on the ear with such right good will , that it sound among the tree like a miniature thunder-clap . and now it be to be fear that every well - breed reader of these page will lay down the book with disgust , feel that , after all , the heroine be unworthy of sympathy . she be a hoyden , one will say . at any rate she be not a lady , another will exclaim . I have suspect she all through , a third will declare ; and she have no idea of the dignity of a matron ; or of the peculiar propriety which she position demand . at one moment she be rom with young ; then she be make eye at ; anon she come to fisty - cuff with a third lover ; and all before she be yet a widow of two year ' standing . she can not altogether be defend ; and yet it may be averr that she be not a hoyden , not give to rom , nor prone to box . it be to be wish devoutly that she have not strike in the face . in do so she derogate from she dignity and commit herself . have she be educate in , have she be bring up by any sterner mentor than that fond father , have she liv longer under the rule of a husband , she might , perhaps , have save herself from this great fault . as it be , the provocation be too much for she , the temptation to instant resentment of the insult too strong . she be too keen in the feeling of independence , a feeling dangerous for a young woman , but one in which she position peculiarly tempt she to indulge . and then 's face , tint with a deeper dye than usual by the wine he have drunk , simper and pucker itself with pseudo piety and tender grimace , see specially to call for such punishment . she have , too , a true instinct as to the man ; he be capable of rebuke in this way and in no other . to he the blow from she little hand be as much a insult as a blow from a man would have be to another . it go directly to he pride . he conceive himself lower in he dignity , and personally outrage . he could almost have struck at she again in he rage . even the pain be a great annoyance to he , and the feel that he clerical character have be wholly disregard , sorely vex he . there be such man ; men who can endure no taint on they personal self - respect , even from a woman ; --men whose body be to themselves such sacr temple , that a joke against they be desecration , and a rough touch downright sacrilege . be such a man ; and , therefore , the slap on that face that he get from be , as far as he be concerned , the fittest rebuke which could have be administer to he . but , nevertheless , she should not have raise she hand against the man . lady ' hand so soft , so sweet , so delicious to the touch , so grateful to the eye , so gracious in they gentle doings , be not make to belabour man 's face . the moment the deed be done , feel that she have sinn against all propriety , and would have give little worlds to recall the blow . in she first agony of sorrow she all but beg the man 's pardon . she next impulse , however , and the one which she obey , be to run away . 'I never , never , will speak another word to you , ' she say , gas with emotion and the loss of breath , which she exertion and violent feeling occasion she , and so say she put foot to the
the ground and run quickly back along the path to the house . but how shall I se the divine wrath of , or how invoke the tragic muse to describe the rage which swell the celestial bosom of the bishop 's chaplain ? such a undertake by no means befit the low - heel buskin of modern fiction . the painter put a veil over 's face when call on to depict the father 's grief at the early doom of he devoted daughter . the god , when he resolve to punish the rebellions wind , abstain from mouthing empty threat . the god when he resolve to punish the rebellious wind , abstain from mouthing empty threat . we will not attempt to tell with what mighty surge of the inner heart swore to revenge himself on the woman who have disgrac he , nor will we vainly strive to depict the deep agony of he soul . there he be , however , alone on the garden walk , and we must contrive to bring he out of it . he be not willing to come forth quite at once . he cheek be stinge with the weight of 's finger , and he fancie that every one who look at he would be able to see on he face the trace of what he have endure . he stand awhile , become redder and redder with rage . he stand motionless , undecided , glaring with he eye , think of the pain and penalties of , and meditat how he might best devote he enemy to the infernal gods with all the passion of he accustom eloquence . he longe in he heart to be preach at she . ' Tbe thus that he be ordinarily avenged of sinn mortal man and woman . could he at once have ascend he and fulminate at she such denunciation as he spirit delighte in , he bosom would have be greatly ease . but how preach to 's laurels , or how preach indeed at all in such a vanity fair as this now go on at ? and then he begin to feel a righteous disgust at the wickedness of the doings around he . he have be justly chastise for lending , by he presence , a sanction to such worldly lure . the gaiety of society , the mirth of banquet , the laughter of the young , and the eating and drinking of the elders be , for awhile , without excuse in he sight . what have he now bring down upon himself by sojourn thus in the tent of the heathen ? he have consort with idolater round the altar of ; and therefore a sore punishment have come upon he . he then think of the , and he soul within he be full of sorrow . he have a inkling -- a true inkling -- that he be a wicked sinful man ; but it lead he in no right direction ; he could admit no charity in he heart . he feel debasement come on he , and he long to take it off , to rise up in he stirrup , to mount to high place and great power , that he might get up into a mighty pulpit and preach to the world a loud sermon against . there he stand fix to the gravel for about ten minute . favour he so far that no prying eye come to look upon he in he misery . then a shudder pass over he whole frame ; he collect himself , and slowly wound he way round to the lawn , advanc along the path and not return in the direction which have take . when he reach the tent he find the bishop stand there in conversation with the master of . he lordship have come out to air himself afer the exertion of he speech . ' this be very pleasant -- very pleasant , my lord , be it not ? ' say with he most gracious smile , and point to the tent ; ' very pleasant . it be delightful to see so many person enjoy themselves so thoroughly . ' think he might force the bishop to introduce he to . a very great example have declare and practise the wisdom of be everything to everybody , and be desirous of follow it . he maxe be never to lose a chance . the bishop , however , at the present moment be not very anxious to increase 's circle of acquaintance among he clerical breth . he have he own reason for drop any mark allusion to he domestic chaplain , and he therefore make he shoulder rather cold for the occasion . ' very , very , ' say he without turn round , or even deign to look at . ' and therefore , , I really think that you will find that the hebdomadal board will exercise as wide and as general a authority as at the present moment . I , for one , - - ' , ' say , raise he hat , and resolve not to be outwit by such a insignificant little goose as the bishop of . the master of also raise he hat and bow very politely to . there be not a more courteous gentleman in the queen 's dominion than the master of . 'My lord , ' say , ' pray do I the honour of introduce I to . the opportunity be too much in my favour to be lose . ' the bishop have no help for it . ' my chaplain , , ' say he ; 'my present chaplain , . ' he certainly make the introduction as unsatisfactory to the chaplain as possible , and by the use of the word present
present , seem to indicate that might probably not long enjoy the honour which he now hold . but care nothing for this . he understand the innuendo , and disregard it . it might probably come to pass that he would be in a situation to resign he chaplaincy before the bishop be in a situation to dismiss he from it . what need the future dean of care for the bishop , or for the bishop 's wife ? have not , just as he be enter 's carriage , receive a important note from of the ? have he not that note this moment in he pocket ? so disregarde the bishop , he begin to open out a conversation with the master of . but suddenly and interruption come , not altogether unwelcome to . one of the bishop 's servant come up to he master 's shoulder with a long , grave face , and whisper into the bishop 's ear . ' what be it , ? ' say the bishop . ' the dean , my lord ; he be dead . ' have no further desire to converse with the master of , and be very soon on he road back to . , as we have say , have declare she intention of never hold further communication with , run hurriedly back towards the house . the thought , however , of what she have do grieve she greatly , and she could not abstain from bursting into tear . ' Twas thus she play the second act in that day 's melodrama . to when come to the end of the walk and face the lawn , she begin to bethink herself what she should do . be she to wait there till catch she , or be she to go in among the crowd with tear in she eye and passion in she face ? she might in truth have stand there long enough without any reasonable fear of further immediate persecution from ; but we be all inclin to magnify the bugbear which frighten we . in she present state of dread she do not know of what atrocity he might venture to be guilty . have any one tell she a week ago that he would have put he arm around she waist at the party of 's she would have be utterly incredulous . have she be inform that he would be see on the follow walk down the in a scarlet coat and top - boot , she would not have think such a phenomenon more improbable . but this improbable iniquity he have commit ; and now there be nothing she could not believe of he . in the first place it be quite manifest that he be tipsy ; in the next place , it be to be take as prove that all he religion be sheer hypocrisy ; and finally the man be utterly shameless . she therefore stand watch for the sound of he footfall , not without some fear that he might creep out at she suddenly from among the bushes . as she thus stood , she see at a little distance from she walk quickly across the grass . 's handkerchief be in she hand , and put it to she face so as to conceal she tear , she run across the lawn and join she friend . 'Oh , , ' she say , almost too much out of breath to speak very plainly ; 'I be so glad I have find you . ' ' you have find I ! ' say , laugh , ' that be a good joke . why and I have be look for you everywhere . he swear that you have go off with , and be now on the point of hang himself . ' 'Oh , , do not , ' say . ' why , my child , what on earth be the matter with you ! ' say , perceive that 's hand tremble on she own arm , and find also that she companion be still half chok with tear . ' goodness heaven ! something have distress you . what be it ? what can I do for you ? ' answer she only by a sort of spasmodic gurgle in she throat . she be a good deal upset , as people say , and could not at the moment collect herself . ' come here , this way , ; come this way , and we shall not be see . what have happen to vex you so ? what can I do for you ? can do anything ? ' , no , no , no , no , ' say . ' there be nothing to be do . only that horrid man --' ' what horrid man ? ' ask . there be some moment in life in which both man and woman feel themselves call on to make a confidence ; in which not to do so require a disagreeable resolution and also a disagreeable suspicion . there be people of both sex who never make confidence ; who be never temp by momentary circumstance to disclose they secret . but such be generally dull , close , unimpassioned spirit , ' gloomy gnome who live in cold dark mine . ' there be nothing of the gnome about ; and she therefore resolve to tell the whole story about . ' that horrid man ; that , ' say she , ' do you not see that he follow I out of the dining - room ? ' 'Of course I do and be sorry enough ; but I could not help it . I know you would be annoyed . but you and manage it badly between you . ' ' it be not he fault
fault nor mine either . you know how I dislike the idea of come in the carriage with that man . ' 'I be sure I be very sorry if that have lead to it . ' 'I do not know what have lead to it , ' say , almost cry again . ' but it have not be my fault . ' ' but what have he do , my dear ? ' 'he be a abominable , horrid , hypocritical man , and it would serve he right to tell the bishop about it . ' ' believe I , if you want to do he a injury , you have far better tell . but what do he do , ? ' ' ugh ! ' exclaim . ' well , I must confess he be not very nice , ' say . ' nice ! ' say . ' he be the most fulsome , fawning , abominable man I ever see . what business have he to come to I ?--i that never give he the slightest tittle of encouragement -- I that always hate he , though I do take he part when other run he down . ' ' that be just where it be , my dear . he have hear that , and therefore fancie that of course you be in love with he . ' this be wormwood to . it be in fact the very thing which all she friend have be say for the last month past ; and which experience now prove to be true . resolve within herself that she would never again take any man 's part . the world with all its villainy , and all its ill - nature , might wag as it like ; she would not again attempt to set crooke thing straight . ' but what do he do , my dear ? ' say , who be really rather interested in the subject . ' he --o --he --' ' well -- come , it can not have be anything so very horrid , for the man be not tipsy . ' 'Oh , I be sure he be , ' say . 'I be sure he must have be tipsy . ' ' well , I declare I do not observe it . but what be it , my love ? ' ' why , I believe I can hardly tell you . he talk such horrid stuff that you never hear the like ; about religion , and heaven , and love -- oh dear , -- he be such a nasty man . ' 'I can really imagine the sort of stuff he would talk . well -- and then ? ' ' and then -- he take hold of I . ' ' take hold of you ? ' ' yes -- he somehow get close to I , and take hold of I --' ' by the waist ? ' ' yes , ' say Eleanor shuddering . ' and then -- ' ' then I jump away from he , and give he a slap on the face ; and run away along the path , till I see you . ' , ha , ha ! ' laugh heartily at the finale of the tragedy . it be delightful to she to think that have have he ear box . she do not quite appreciate the feeling which make she friend so unhappy at the result of the interview . to she think , the matter have end happily enough as regard the widow , who indeed be entitled to some sort of triumph among she friend . whereas would be due all those jibe and jeer which would naturally follow such a affair . he friend would ask he whether he ear tingle whenever he see a widow ; and he would be caution that beautiful thing be make to be look at , and not to be touch . such be 's views on such matter ; but she do not at the present moment clearly explain they to . she object be to endear herself to she friend ; and therefore , have have she laugh , she be ready enough to offer sympathy . could do anything ? should speak to the man , and warn he that in future he must behave with more decorum ? , indeed , she declare , would be more angry than any one else when he hear to what insult have be subject . ' but you will not tell he ? ' say with a look of horror . ' not if you do not like it , ' say ; ' but consider everything , I would strongly advise it . if you have a brother , you know , it would be unnecessary . but it be very right that should know that you have somebody by you that will , and can protect you . ' ' but my father be here . ' ' yes , but it be so disagreeable for clergyman to have to quarrel with each other ; and circumstance as you father be just at this moment , it would be very inexpedient that there should be anything unpleasant between he and . surely you and be intimate enough for you to permit he to take you part . ' be very anxious that she brother should at once on that very day settle matter with he future wife . thing have now come to that point between he and he father , and between he and he creditor , that he must either do so , or leave ; either do that , or go back to he unwashed associate , dirty lodging , and poor living at . unless he could provide himself with a income , he must
must go to or to - . he father the prebendary have not say this in so many word , but have he do so , he could not have signify it more plainly . such be the state of the case , it be very necessary that no more time should be lose . have see she brother 's apathy , when he neglect to follow out of the room , with anger which she could hardly suppress . it be grievous to think that should have so distance he . feel that she have play she part with sufficient skill . she have bring they together and induce such a degree of intimacy , that she brother be really relieve from all trouble and labour in the matter . and moreover , it be quite plain that be very fond of . and now it be plain enough also that he have nothing to fear from he rival . there be certainly a awkwardness in subject to a second offer on the same day . it would have be well , perhaps , to have put the matter off for a week , could a week have be spare . but circumstance be frequently too peremptory to be arrange as we would wish to arrange they ; and such be the case now . this be so , could not this affair of 's be turn to advantage ? could it not be make the excuse for bring and into still closer connection ; into such close connection that they could not fail to throw themselves into each other 's arm ? such be the game which now at a moment 's notice resolve to play . and very well she play it . in the first place , it be arrange that should not return in the 's carriage to . it so happen that be already go , but of that of course they know nothing . the signora should be induce to go first , with only the servants and she sister , and should take 's place in the second journey . be to be tell in confidence of the whole affair , and when the carriage be go off with the first load , be to be leave under 's special protection , so as to insure she from any further aggression from . while the carriage be get ready , be to seek out that gentleman and make he understand that he must provide himself with another conveyance back to . they immediate object should be to walk about together in search of . , in short , be to be the on whose wing they be to ride out of they present dilemma . there be a warmth of friendship and cordial kindness in all this , that be very soothing to the widow ; but yet , though she give way to it , she be hardly reconcile to do so . it never occur to she , that now that she have kill one dragon , another be about to spre up in she path ; she have no remote idea that she would have to encounter another suitor in she propose protector , but she hardly like the idea of put herself so much into the hand of young . she feel that if she want protection , she should go to she father . she feel that she should ask he to provide a carriage for she back to . she know would give she a seat . she know that she should not throw herself entirely upon friend whose friendship date as it be but from yesterday . but yet she could not say , ' no , ' to one who be so sisterly in she kindness , so eager in she good nature , so comfortably sympathetic as . they first go into the dining - room , look for they champion , and from thence to the drawing - room . here they find , still hang over the signora 's sofa ; or , rather , they find he sit near she head , as a physician might have sat , have the lady be he patient . there be no other person in the room . the guest be some in the tent , some few still in the dining - room , some at the bow and arrow , but most of they walk with Thorne through the park , and look at the game that be go on . all that have pass , and be pass between and the lady , it be unnecessary to give in detail . she be do with he as she do with all other . it be she mission to make fools of man , and she be pursue she mission with . she have almost get he to own he love for , and have subsequently almost induce he to acknowledge a passion for herself . he , poor man , be hardly aware what he be do or say , hardly conscious whether he be in heaven or hell . so little have he know of female attraction of that peculiar class which the signora own , that he become affect with a temporary delirium , when first subject to its power . he lose he head rather than he heart , and topple about mentally , reel in he idea as a drunken man do on he leg . she have whisper to he word that really mean nothing , but which come from such beautiful lip , and accompany by such lustrous glance , seem to have a mysterious significance , which he feel though he could not understand . in be thus be - siren , behave himself very differently from . the signora have say truly , that the two man be the contrast of each other
other ; that the one be all for action , the other all for thought . , when this lady lay upon he sense the overpowering breath of she charms , immediately attempt to obtain some fruition , to achieve some mighty triumph . he begin by catching at she hand , and progress by kiss it . he make vows of love , and ask for vows in return . he promise everlasting devotion , knelt before she , and swore that have she be on , would have no cause to hate the offspring of . but utter no oath , keep he hand mostly in he trousers pocket , and have no more thought of kissing than of kissing the . as soon as see enter the room , he blush and rise from he chair ; then he sit down again , and then again get up . the signora see the blush at once , and smile at the poor victim , but be too much confused to see anything . 'Oh , , ' say , 'I want to speak to you particularly ; we must arrange about the carriage , you know , ' and she stoop down to whisper to she sister . immediately withdraw to a little distance , and as have in fact much to explain before she could make the new arrangement intelligible , he have nothing to do but to talk to . ' we have have a very pleasant party , ' say he , use the tone he would have use have he declare that the sun be shin very brightly , or the rain be fall very fast . ' very , ' say , who never in she life have pass a more unpleasant day . 'I hope have enjoy himself . ' 'Oh , yes , very much , ' say , who have not see she father since she part from he soon after she arrival . ' he return to Barchester to - night , I suppose . ' ' yes , I believe so ; that be , I think he be stay at . ' 'Oh , stay at , ' say . ' he come from there this morning . I believe he be go back ; he do not exactly say , however . ' 'I hope be quite well . ' ' she seem to be quite well . she be here ; that be , unless she have go away . ' 'Oh , yes , to be sure . I be talk to she . look very well indeed . ' then there be a considerable pause : for could not at once make understand why she be to be send home in a hurry without she brother . ' be you return to , ? ' merely ask this by way of make conversation , but he immediately perceive that he be approach dangerous ground . ' no , ' say , very quietly ; 'I be go home to . ' 'Oh , ah , yes . I have forget that you have return . ' and then , find it impossible to say anything further , stand silent till have complete she plan , and stand equally silent , intently occupy as it appear in the arrangement of she ring . and yet these two people be thoroughly in love with each other ; and though one be a middle - aged clergyman , and the other a lady at any rate past the wishy - washy bread - and - butter period of life , they be as unable to tell they own mind to each other as any and , whose united age would not make up that to which have already attaine . consent to she sister 's proposal , and then the two lady again go off in quest of . -- and now 's guest be begin to take they departure , and the amusement of those who remain be become slack . it be get dark , and lady in morning costume be think that if they be to appear by candle - light they ought to readjust themselves . some young gentleman have be hear to talk so loud that prudent mamma determi to retire judiciously , and the more discreet of the male sex , whose libation have be moderate , feel that there be not much more left for they to do . morning party , as a rule , be failure . people never know how to get away from they gracefully . a picnic on a island or a mountain or in a wood may perhaps be permit . there be no master of the mountain bound by courtesy to bid you stay while in he heart he be longe for you departure . but in a private home or in private grounds a morning party be a bore . one be call on to eat and drink at unnatural hour . one be oblige to give up the day which be useful , and be then leave without resource for the evening which be useless . one get 's home fagged and desouvre , and yet at a hour too early for bed . there be not comfortable resource leave . card in these genteel day be among the thing taboo , and a rubber of whist be impracticable . all this begin now to be feel . some young people have come with some amount of hope that they might get up a dance in the evening , and be unwilling to leave till all such hope be at a end . other , fearful of stay longer than be expect , have order they carriage early , and be do they best to go , solicitous for they servants and horse . the countess and she noble brood
brood be among the first to leave , and as regard the Hon . , it be certainly time that he do so . she ladyship be in a great fret and fume . those horrid roads would , she be sure , be the death of she if unhappily she be catch in they by the dark of night . the lamp she be assure be good , but no lamp could withstand the jolting of the roads of . the property lay in the western division of the county . could not stay when the countess be gone . so the bishop be search for by the Rev . Messr . and , and find in one corner of the tent enjoy himself thoroughly in a disquisition on the hebdomadal board . he obey , however , the behest of the lady without finish the sentence in which he be promise to that he authority at should remain unimpaired ; and the episcopal horse turn they nos towards the palatial stable . then the go . before they do so manage to whisper a word into he daughter 's ear . of course , he say , he would undeceive the Grantly as to that foolish rumour about . ' no , no , no , ' say ; ' pray do not -- pray wait till I see you . you will be home in a day or two , and then I will explain to you everything . ' 'I shall be home to - morrow , ' say he . 'I be so glad , ' say . ' you will come and dine with I , and then we shall be so comfortable . ' promise . he do not exactly know what there be to be explain , or why 's mind should not be disabuse of the mistake into which he have fall ; but nevertheless he promise . he owe some reparation to he daughter , and he think that he might best make it by obedience . and thus the people be thin off by degree , as and walk about in quest of . they search might have be long , have they not happen to hear he voice . he be comfortably ensconce in the ha - ha , with he back to the sloping side , smoke a cigar , and eagerly engage in conversation with some youngster from the further side of the county , whom he have never meet before , who be also smoke under 's pupilage , and listen with open ear to a account give by he companion of some of the pastime of the eastern clime . ' , I be seek you everywhere , ' say . ' come up here at once . ' look up out of the ha - ha , and see the two lady before he . as there be nothing for he but to obey , he get up and throw away he cigar . from the first moment of he acquaintance with she he have like . have he be leave to he own device , have she be penniless , and have it then be quite out of the question that he should marry she , he would most probably have fall violently in love with she . but now he could not help regard she somewhat as he do the marble workshop at , as he have do he easel and palette , as he have do the lawyer 's chamber in ; in fact , as he have invariably regard everything by which it have be propose to obtain the means of living . appear before he , no longer as a beautiful woman , but as a new profession call matrimony . it be a profession indeed require but little labour , and one in which a income be insure to he . but nevertheless he have be as it be goad on to it ; he sister have talk to he of , just as she have talk of bust and portrait . do not dislike money , but he hate the very thought of earn it . he be now call away from he pleasant cigar to earn it , by offer himself as a husband to . the work indeed be make easy enough ; for in lieu of he have to seek the widow , the widow have apparently come to seek he . he make some sudden absurd excuse to he auditor , and then throw away he cigar , climb up the wall of the ha - ha and join the lady on the lawn . ' come and give you arm , ' say , ' while I set you on a piece of duty which , as a preux chevalier , you must immediately perform . you personal danger will , I fear , be insignificant , as you antagonist be a clergyman . ' immediately give he arm to , walk between she and he sister . he have liv too long abroad to fall into a 's habit of offer each a arm to two lady at the same time ; a habit , by the bye , which foreigner regard as a approach to bigamy , or a sort of incipient . the little history of 's misconduct be then tell to by he sister , 's ear tingl the while . and well they might tingle . if it be necessary to speak of the outrage at all , why should it be speak of to such a person as , and why in she own hearing ? she know she be wrong , and be unhappy and dispirit , and yet she could think of no way to extricate herself , no way to set herself right . spa she as much as she possibly could ,
, speak of the whole thing as though have take a glass of wine too much , say that of course there would be nothing more about it , but that step must be take to exclude from the carriage . ' need be under no alarm about that , ' say , ' for have go this hour past . he tell I that business make it necessary that he should start at once for . ' ' he be not so tipsy , at any rate , but what he know he fault , ' say . ' well , my dear , that be one difficulty over . now I will leave you with you true knight , and get off as quickly as I can . the carriage be here , I suppose , ? ' ' it have be here for the last hour . ' ' that be well . good - bye , my dear . of course you will come in to tea . I shall trust you to bring she , ; even by force if necessary . ' and so say , be off across the lawn , leave she brother alone with the widow . as go off , bethotch herself that , as have take he departure , there no longer exist any necessity for separa from he sister , who so much need he aid . it have be arrange that he should remain so as to preoccupy 's place in the carriage , and act as a social policeman to effect the exclusion of that disagreeable gentleman . but have effect he own exclusion , and there as no possible reason now why should not go with he sister . at least see none , and she say so much . 'Oh , let have she own way , ' say he . ' she have arrange it , and there will be no end of confusion if we make another change . always arrange everything in we house ; and rule we like a despot . ' ' but the signora ? ' say . 'Oh , the signora can do very well without I . indeed , she will have to do without I ,' he add , think rather of he study in , than of he Barchester hymeneal . ' why , you be not go to leave we ? ' ask . it have be say that be a man without principle . he certainly be so . he have no power of use active mental exertion to keep himself from do evil . have no ugliness in he eye ; virtue no beauty . he be void of any of those feeling which actuate man to do good . but he be perhaps equally void of those which actuate man to do evil . he get into debt with utter recklessness , think of nothing as to whether the tradesman would ever be pay or not . but he do not invent active scheme of deceit for the sake of extracte the goods of other . if a man give he credit , that be the man 's look - out ; trouble himself nothing further . in borrow money he do the same ; he give people reference to ' he governor ' , tell they that the ' old chap ' have a good income ; and agree to pay sixty per cent for the accommodation . all this he do without a scruple of conscience ; but then he never contrive active villainy . in this affair of he marriage , it have be represent to he as a matter of duty that he ought to put himself in possession of 's hand and fortune ; and at first he have so regard it . about she he have think but little . it be the customary thing for man situate as he be to marry for money , and there be no reason why he should not do what other around he do . and so he consent . but now he begin to see the matter in another light . he be set himself down to catch a woman , as a cat sit to catch a mouse . he be to catch she , and swallow she up , she and she child , and she house and land , in order that he might live on she instead of on he father . there be a cold , calculate , cautious cunning about this quite at variance with 's character . the prudence of the measure be quite as antagonistic to he feeling as the iniquity . and then , should he be successful , what would be the reward ? have satisfie he creditor with half of the widow 's fortune , he would be allow to sit down quietly at , keep economical house with the remainder . he duty would be to rock the cradle of the late 's child , and he highest excitement a demure party at rectory , should it ultimately turn out that the archdeacon be sufficiently reconcile to receive he . there be little in the programme to allure such a man as . would not the workshop , or whatever worldly career fortune might have in store for he , would not almost anything be better than this ? the lady herself be undoubtedly all that be desirable ; but the most desirable lady become nauseous when she have to be take as a pill . he be pledge to he sister , however , and let he quarrel with whom he would , it behove he not to quarrel with she . if she be lose to he all would be lose that he could ever hope to derive henceforward from the paternal roof -tree . he mother be apparently indifferent to he weal
weal or woe , to he want or to he warfare . he father 's brow get blacker and blacker from day to day , as the old man look at he hopeless son . and as for -- poor Madeline , whom of all of they he like the best , -- she have enough to do to shift for herself . no ; come what might , he must cling to he sister and obey she behest , let they be ever so stern ; or at the very least be see to obey they . could not some happy deceit bring he through in this matter , so that he might save appearance with he sister , and yet not betray the widow to she ruin ? what if he make a confidence of ? ' Tbe in this spirit that set about he wooing . ' but you be not go to leave ? ' ask . 'I do not know , ' he reply . 'I hardly know yet what I be go to do . but it be at any rate certain that I must do something . ' ' you mean about you profession ? ' say she . ' yes , about my profession , if you can call it one . ' ' and be it not one ? ' say . ' be I a man , I know none I should prefer to it , except painting . and I believe the one be as much in you power as the other . ' ' yes , just about equally so , ' say with a little touch of inward satire direct at himself . he know in he heart that he would never make a penny by either . 'I have often wonder , , why you do not exert yourself more , ' say , who feel a friendly fondness for the man with whom she be walk . ' but I know it be very impertinent in I to say so . ' ' Impertinent ! ' say he . ' not so , but much too kind . it be much too kind in you to take a interest in so idle a scamp . ' ' and make bust of the bishop , dean and chapter ? or perhaps , if I achieve great success , obtain a commission to put up a elaborate tombstone over a prebendary 's widow , a dead lady with a Grecian nose , a bandeau , and a intricate lace veil ; lie of course on a marble sofa , from among the leg of which death will be creep out and pok at he victim with a small toasting - fork . ' laugh ; but yet she think that if the surviving prebendary pay the bill the object of the artist as a professional man would , in great measure , be obtain . 'I do not know about the dean and chapter and the prebendary 's widow , ' say . ' of course you must take they as they come . but the fact of you have a great cathedral in which such ornament be require , could not but be in you favour . ' ' no real artist could descend to the ornamentation of a cathedral , ' say , who have he idea of the high ecstatic ambition of art , as indeed all artist have , who be not in receipt of a good income . ' building should be fitte to grase the sculpture , not the sculpture to grase the building . ' ' yes , when the work of art be good enough to merit it . do you , , do something sufficientely excellent , and we lady of will erect for it a fitting receptacle . come , what shall the subject be ? ' 'I will put you in you pony -chair , , as put on she lion . only you must promise to sit for I . ' ' my poney be too tame , I fear , and my broad - brim straw hat will not look so well in marble as the lace veil of the prebendary 's wife . ' ' if you will not consent to that , , I will consent to try no other subject in . ' ' you be determine , then , to push you fortune in other lands ? ' 'I be determined , ' say , slowly and significantly as he try to bring up he mind to a great resolve ; 'I be determine in this matter to be guide wholly by you . ' ' wholly by I ! ' say , astonished at , and not quite like he altered manner . ' wholly by you , ' say , drop he companion 's arm , and stand before she on the path . in they walk they have come exactly to the spot where have be provoke into slapping 's face . could it be possible that the place be peculiarly unpropitious to she comfort ? could it be possible that she should she have to encounter another amorous swain ? ' if you will be guide by I , , you will set yourself down to steady and persevering work , and you will be rule by you father as to the place in which it will be most advisable for you to do so . ' ' nothing could be more prudent , if only it be practicable . but now , if you will let I , I will tell you how it be that I will be guide by you , and why . will you let I tell you ? ' 'I really do not know what you can have to tell . ' ' no -- you can not know . it
it be impossible that you should . but we have be very good friend , , have we not ? ' ' yes , I think we have , ' say she , observe in he demeanour a earnestness very unusual with he . ' you be kind enough to say just now that you take a interest in I , and I be perhaps vain enough to believe you . ' ' there be no vanity in that ; I do so as you sister 's brother , -- and as my own friend also . ' ' well , I do not deserve that you should feel so kindly towards I , ' say ; ' but upon my word I be very grateful for it , ' and he pause awhile , hardly know how to introduce the subject that he have in hand . and it be no wonder that he find it difficult . he have to make know to he companion the scheme that have be prepare to rob she of she wealth ; he have to tell she that he love she without intend to marry she ; and he have also to bespeak from she not only he own pardon , but also that of he sister , and induce to protest in she future communication with that a offer have be duly make to she and duly reject . be not pro to be very diffident of he own conversational power , but it do seem to he that he be about to tax they almost too far . he hardly know where to begin , and he hardly know where he should end . 'I wish to be guide by you , ' say he ; ' and , indeed , in this matter , there be no one else who can set I right . ' 'Oh , that must be nonsense , ' say she . ' well , listen to I now , ; and if you can help it , pray do not be angry with I . ' 'Angry ! ' say she . 'Oh , indeed you will have cause to do so . you know how very much attach to you my sister be . ' acknowledge that she do . ' indeed she be ; I never know she to love any one so warmly on so short a acquaintance . you know also how well she love I ? ' Eleanor now make no answer , but she feel the blood tingle in she cheek as she gather from what he say the probable result of this double - barrel love on the part of . 'I be she only brother , , and it be not to be wonder at that she should love I . but you do not yet know -- you do not know how entirely the well - being of we family hang on she . without she to manage for we , I do not know how we should get on from day to day . you can not yet have observ all this . ' have indeed observe a good deal of this ; she do not however now say so , but allow he to proceed with he story . ' you can not therefore be surprised that should be most anxious to do the best for we all . say that she be not at all surprised . ' and she have have a very difficult game to play , -- a very difficult game . 's unfortunate marriage and terrible accident , my mother 's ill - health , my father 's absence from , and last , and worst perhaps my own roving , idle spirit have almost be too much for she . you can not wonder if among all she care one of the foremost be to see I settle in the world . ' on this occasion express no acquiescence . she certainly suppose that a formal offer be to be make , and could not but think that so singular a exordium be never before make by a gentleman in a similar position . have annoye she by the excess of he ardour . it be quiet clear that no such danger be to be fear from . Prudential motive alone actuate he . not only be he about to make love because he sister tell he , but he also take the precaution of explai all this before he begin . ' Twas thus , we may presume , that the matter present itself to . when he have get so far , begin poling in the gravel with a little cane which he carry . he still keep move on , but very slowly , and he companion move slowly by he side , not inclin to assist he in the task the performance of which appear to be difficult to he . ' know how fond she be of yourself , , can not you imagine what scheme should have occur to she ? ' 'I can imagine no better scheme , , than the one I propose to you just now . ' ' no , ' say he , somewhat lack - a - daisically ; 'I suppose that would be the best ; but think another plan might be join with it .-- she want I to marry you . ' a thousand remembrance flash across 's mind all in a moment -- how have talk about and praise she brother , how she have continually contrive to throw the two of they together , how she have encourage all manner of little intimacy , how she have with singular cordiality persist in treat as one of the family . all this have be do to secure she comfortable income for the benefit of one of the family ! such a
a feel as this be very bitter when it first impress itself on a young mind . to the old such plot and plans , such matur schem for obtain the goods of this world without the trouble of earn they , such long - head attempt to convert ' tuum ' into ' meum ' be the way of life to which they be accustom . ' Tis thus that many live , and it therefore behove all those who be well to do in the world be on they guard against those who be not . with they it be the success that disgust , not the attempt . but have not yet learn to look on she money as a source of danger ; she have not begin to regard herself as fair game to be hunt down by hungry gentleman . she have enjoy the society of the , she have greatly like the cordiality of , and have be happy in she new friend . now she see the cause of all that kindness , and she mind be open to a new phase of human life . ' , ' say she haughtily , ' have be contrive for I a great deal of honour , but she might have save herself the trouble . I a not sufficientely ambitious . ' ' pray do not be angry with she , , ' say he , 'or with I either . ' ' certainly not with you , , ' say she , with considerable sarcasm in she tone . ' certainly not with you . ' ' no , -- nor with she , ' say he imploringly . ' and why , may I ask you , , have you tell I this singular story ? for I may presume I may judge by you manner of tell it , that -- that -- that you and you sister be not exactly of one mind on the subject . ' ' no , we be not . ' ' and if so , ' say , who be now really angry with the unnecessary insult , which she think have be offer to she , ' and if so , why have it be worth you while to tell I all this ? ' 'I do once think , -- that you -- that you -- ' the widow now again become entirely impassive , and would not lend the slightest assistance to she companion . 'I do once think that you perhaps might -- might have be teach to regard I as more than a friend . ' ' never ! , ' say , ' never . if I have ever allow myself to do anything to encourage such a idea , I have be very much to blame , -- very much to blame , indeed . ' ' you never have , ' say , who really have a good - natured anxiety to make what he say as little unpleasant as possible . ' you never have , and I have see for some time that I have no chance ; but my sister 's hope run higher . I have not mistaken you , , though perhaps she have . ' ' then why have you say all this to I ? ' ' because I must not anger she . ' ' and will not this anger she ? upon my word , , I do not understand the policy of you family . oh , how I wish I be at home ! ' and as she express this wish , she could restrain herself no longer , but burst out into a flood of tear . poor be greatly move . ' you shall have the carriage to yourself go home , ' say he , ' at least you and my father . as for I I can walk , or for the matter of that it do not much signify what I do . ' he perfectly understand that part of 's grief arise from the apparent necessity of go back to in the carriage of she second suitor . this somewhat mollify she . 'Oh , , ' say she , ' why should you have make I so miserable ? what will have gain by tell I all this ? ' he have not even yet explain to she the most difficult part of he proposition ; he have not tell she that she be to be a party to the little deception which he intend to play off upon he sister . this suggestion have still to be make , and as it be absolutely necessary , he proceed to make it . we need not follow he through the whole of he statement . at last , and not without considerable difficulty , he make understand why he have let she into he confidence , see that he no longer intend she the honour of a formal offer . at last he make she comprehend the part which she be destin to play in this little family comedy . but when she do understand it , she be only more angry with he than ever : more angry , not only with he , but with also . she fair name be to bandy about between they in different sense , and each sense false . she be to play off by the sister against the father ; and then by the brother against the sister . she dear friend , with all she agreeable sympathy and affection , be strive to sacrifice she for the family welfare ; and , who , as he now proclaim himself , be over head and heel in debt , complete the compliment of own that he do not care to have he debt pay at so great a sacrifice to
to himself . then she be ask to conspire together with this unwilling suitor , for the sake of make the family believe that he have in obedience to they command do he best to throw himself thus away ! she lift up she face when she have finish , and look at he with much dignity , even through she tear , she say -- ' I regret to say it , ; but after what have pass , I believe that all intercourse between you family and myself have better cease . ' ' well , perhaps it have , ' say naively ; ' perhaps that will be better , at any rate for a time ; and then will think you be offended at what I have do . ' ' and now I will go back to the house , if you please , ' say . 'I can find my way by myself , : after what have pass , ' she add , ' I would rather go alone . ' ' but I must find the carriage for you , , and I must tell my father that you will return with he alone , and I must make some excuse to he for not go with you ; and I must bid the servant put you down at you own house , for I suppose you will not now choose to see they again in the close . ' there be a truth about this , and a perspicuity in make arrangement for lessen she immediate embarrassment , which have some effect in softening 's anger . so she suffer herself to walk by he side over the now desert lawn , till they come to the drawing - room window . there be something about which give he in the estimation of every one , a different standing from that which any other man would occupy under similar circumstance . angry as be , and great as be she cause for anger , she be not half as angry with he as she would have be with any one else . he be apparently so simple , so good - natured , so unaffected and easy to talk to , that she have already half - forgive he before he be at the drawing - room window . when they arrive there , be sit nearly alone with and Thorne ; one or two other unfortunate be there , who from one cause or another be still delay in get away ; but they be every moment get fewer in number . as soon as he have hand over to he father , start off to the front gate , in search of the carriage , and there wait lean patiently against the front wall , and comfortably smoke a cigar , till it come up . when he return to the room , and be alone with they host . ' at last , , ' say he cheerily , 'I have come to relieve you . and my father be the last ros in the very delightful summer you have give we , and desirable as 's society always be , now at least you must be glad to see the last flower pluck from the tree . ' Thorne declare that she be delighted to have and still with she ; and Thorne would have say the same , have he not be check by a yawn , which he could not suppress . ' Father , will you give you arm to ? ' say : and so the last adieux be make , and the prebendary lead out , follow by he son . 'I shall be home soon after you , ' say he , as the two get into the carriage . ' be you not come in the carriage ? ' say the father . ' no , no ; I have some one to see on the road , and shall walk . , mind you drive to 's house first . ' , look out of the window , see he with he hat in he hand , bow to she with he usual gay smile , as though nothing have happen to mar the tranquillity of the day . it be many a long year before she see he again . hardly speak to she on she way home : and she be safely deposit by at she own hall - door , before the carriage drive into the close . and thus we heroine play the last act of that day 's melodrama . and . by the before she start for , , careful soul , cause two letter to be write , one by herself and one by she lord , to the inhabitant of Puddingdale vicarage , which make happy the hearth of those within it . as soon as the departure of the horse leave the bishop 's stable - groom free for other service , that humble denizen of the diocese start on the bishop 's own pony with the two despatch . we have have so many letter lately that we will spare ourselves these . that from the bishop be simply a request that would wait upon he lordship the next morning at 11 a.m. ; and that from the lady be as simply a request that would do the same by she , though it be couch in somewhat longer and more grandiloquent phraseology . it have become a point of conscience with to urge the settlement of this great hospital question . she be resolve that should have it . she be resolve that there should be no more doubt or delay ; no more refusal and resignation , nor more secret negotiation carry on by on he own account in opposition to she behest . ' Bishop , '
' she say , immediately after breakfast , on the morning of that eventful day , ' have you sign the appointment yet ? ' ' no , my dear , not yet ; it be not exactly sign as yet . ' ' then do it , ' say the lady . the bishop do it ; and a very pleasant day indeed he spend at . and when he get home he have a glass of hot negus in he wife 's sitting - room , and read the last number of the ' ' of the day with great inward satisfaction . oh , husband , oh , my marital friend , what great comfort be there to be derive from a wife well obey ! much perturbation and flutter , high expectation and renew hope , be occasion at , by the receipt of those episcopal dispatche . , whose careful ear catch the sound of the pony 's foot as he trot up to the vicarage kitchen door , bring they in hurriedly to she husband . she be at the moment concoct the irish stew destin to satisfy the noonday want of fourteen young bird , let alone the parent couple . she have take the letter from the man 's hand between the fold of she capacious apron , so as to save they from the contamination of the stew , and in this guise she bring they to she husband 's desk . they at once divide the spoil , each take that address to the other . ' Quiverful , 'say she with impressive voice , ' you be to be at the palace at eleven to - morrow . ' ' and so be you , my dear , ' say he , almost gas with the importance of the tiding : and then they exchange letter . ' she would never have send for I again , ' say the lady , ' if it be not all right . ' 'Oh ! my dear , do not be too certain , ' say the gentleman . ' only think if it should be wrong . ' ' she would never have send for I , , if it be not all right , ' again argue the lady . ' she be stiff and hard and proud as pie -crust , but I think she be right at bottom . ' be 's verdict about , to which in after time she always adhere . people when they get they income double usually think that those through whose instrumentality this little ceremony be perform be right at bottom . 'Oh , ! ' say , rise from he well - worn seat . 'Oh , ! ' say ; and then the two , unmindful of the kitchen apron , the greasy finger , and the adherent irish stew , throw themselves warmly into each other 's arm . ' for heaven 's sake , do not let any one cajeal you out of it again , ' say the wife . ' let I alone for that , ' say the husband , with a look of almost fierce determination , press he fist as he speak rigidly on he desk , as though he have 's head below he knuckle , and mean to keep it there . 'I wonder how soon it will be , ' say she . 'I wonder whether it will be at all , ' say he , still doubtful . ' well , I will not say too much , ' say the lady . ' the cup have slip twice before , and it may fall altogether this time ; but I will not believe it . he will give you the appointment to - morrow . you will find he will . ' ' heaven send he may , ' say , solemnly . and who that consider the weight of the burden on this man 's back , will say that the prayer be a improper one ? there be fourteen of they -- fourteen of they live -- as have so powerfully urge in the presence of the bishop 's wife . as long as promotion cometh from any human source , whether north or south , east or west , will not such a claim as this hold good , in spite of all we examination test , detur digniori 's and optimist tendency ? it be fervently to be hope that it may . till we can become divine we must be content to be human , lest in we hurry for change we sink to something lower . and then the pair sit down lovingly together , talk over all they difficulty , as they so often do , and all they hope , as they so seldom be able to do . ' you have better call on that man , q , as you come away from the palace , ' say , point to a angry call for money from the draper , which the postman have leave at the vicarage that morning . Cormorant that he be , unjust , hungry cormorant ! when rumou first get abroad that the Quiverful be to go to the hospital this fellow with fawning eagerness have press he goods upon the wants of the poor clergyman . he have do so , feel that he should be pay from the hospital fund , and flatter himself that a man with fourteen child , and money wherewithal to clothe they , could not but be a excellent customer . as soon as the second rumour reach he , he apply for he money angrily . ' and the ' fourteen ' -- or such of they as be old enough to hope and discuss they hope , talk over they golden future . the
the tall - grow girl whisper to each other of possible party , of possible allowances for dress , of a possible piano -- the one they have in the vicarage be so weather - beaten with storm of year and child as to be no longer worthy of the name -- of the pretty garden , and the pretty house . ' Twa of such thing it must behove they to whisper . and the younger fry , they do not contend themselves with whisper , but shoute to each other of they new playground beneath we dear ex-warden 's well - love elm , of they future own garden , of marble to be procure in the wish - for city , and of the rumour which have reach they of a school . ' Tbe in vain that they cautious mother try to instil into they breast the very feeling she have strive to banish from that of they father ; ' twas in vain that she repeat to the girl that ' there be many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip ' ; ' twas in vain she attempt to make the child believe that they be to live at all they life . hope mount high and would not have themselves quell . the neighbour farmer hear this news , and come in to congratulate they . ' herself who have kind the fire , and in the first outbreak of she renew expectation she do it so thoroughly , that it be quite past she power to put it out again . poor matron ! good honest matron ! do thy duty in the state to which thou hast be call , heartily if not contentedly ; let the fire burn on -- on this occasion the flame will not scorch ; they shall warm thee and thine . ' Tis ordain that the husband of thine , that q of thy bosom , shall reign supreme for some year to come over the bedesman of 's hospital . and the last in all to mar they hope , have he hear and see all that have pass at Puddingdale that day , would have be . what want have he to set in opposition to those of such a regiment of young raven ? there be fourteen of they liive ! with he at any rate , let we say , that the argument would have be sufficient for the appointment of . in the morning , and he wife keep they appointment with that punctuality which bespeak a expectant mind . the friendly farmer 's gig be borrow , and in that they go , discuss many thing by the way . they have instruct the household to expect they back by one , and injunction be give to the eldest pledge to have ready by that accustomed hour the remainder of the huge stew which the provident mother have prepare on the previous day . the hand of the kitchen clock come round to two , three , four , before the farmer 's gig - wheel be agin hear at the vicarage gate . with what palpitating heart be the return wanderer greet ! 'I suppose , child , ' you all think we be never come back any more ? ' say the mother , as she slowly let down she solid foot till it rest on the step of the gig . ' well , such a day as we have have ! ' and then lean heavily on a big boy 's shoulder , she step once more on terra firma . there be no need for more than the tone of she voice to tell they that all be right . the irish stew might burn itself to cinder now . then there be such kissing and hug , such crying and laugh . could not sit still at all , but keep walk from room to room , then out into the garden , then down the avenue into the road , and then back again to he wife . she , however , lose no time so idly . ' we must go to work at once , girl ; and that in earnest . expect we to be in the hospital house on the 15th of . ' have express a wish that they should all be there on the next morning , the girl would have have nothing to say against it . ' and when will the pay begin ? ' ask the eldest boy . ' to - day , my dear , ' say the gratified mother . 'Oh , -- that be jolly , ' say the boy . ' insist on we go down to the house , ' continue the mother ; ' and when there I think I might save a journey by measure some of the room and window ; so I get a knot of tape from . be as civil as you please , now . ' 'I would not thank he , ' say the younger . 'Oh , that be the way of the world , my dear . they all do just the same . you might just as well be angry with the turkey cock for gobble at you . it be the bird 's nature . ' and as she enunciate to she bairnd the upshot of she practical experience , she pull from she pocket the portion of tape which show the length and breadth of the various room at the hospital house . and so we will leave she happy in she toil . the Quiverful have hardly leave the palace , and be still hold forth on the matter to she husband , when another visitor be announce in , the person of . the master of have ask for the bishop ,
, and not for , and therefore , when he be show into the study , he be surprised rather than rejoiced to find the lady there . but we must go back a little , and it shall be but a little , for a difficulty begin to make itself manifest in the necessity of disposing of all we friend in the small remainder of this one volume . oh , that would allow I a fourth ! it should transcend the other three as the seventh heaven transcend all the lower stage of celestial bliss . go home in the carriage that even from , have not without difficulty bring round he friend the archdeacon to a line of tactic much less bellicose than that which he own taste would have prefer . ' it will be unseemly in we to show ourselves in a bad humour ; and moreover we have no power in this matter , and it will therefore be bad policy to act as though we have . ' ' Tbe thus the master of argue . ' if ,' he continue , ' the bishop be determined to appoint another to the hospital , threats will not prevent he , and threat should not be lightly use by a archdeacon to he bishop . if he will place a stranger in the hospital , we can only leave he to the indignation of other . it be probable that such a step may not eventually injure you father - in - law . I will see the bishop , if you will allow I ,-- alone . ' at this the archdeacon wince visibly ; ' yes , alone ; for so I shall be calmer : and then I shall at any rate learn what he do mean to do in the matter . the archdeacon puffe and blow , put up the carriage window and then put it down again , argue the matter up to he own gate , and at last give way . everybody be against he ; he own wife , , and . ' pray keep he out of hot water , , ' have say to she guest . ' my dearest madam , I will do my best , ' the courteous master have reply . ' Twas thus he do it ; and earned for himself the gratitude of . and now we may return to the bishop 's study . have certainly not foresee the difficulty which here present itself . he ,--together with all the clerical world of , -- have hear it rumour about that do not confine herself to she wardrobe , still - room , and laundries ; but yet it have never occur to he that if he call on a bishop at one o'clock in the day , he could by any possibility find himself close with he wife ; or that if he do so , the wife would remain longer than necessary to make she curtsey . it appear , however , as though in the present case have no idea of retreating . the bishop have be very much pleased with on the preceding day , and of course think that have be very much pleased with he . he attribute the visit solely to compliment , and think it be a extremely gracious and proper thing for the master of to drive over from specially to call at the palace so soon after he arrival in the country . the fact that they be not on the same side either in politics or doctrine make the compliment the greater . the bishop , therefore , be all smile . and , who like people with good handle to they name , be also very well dispose to welcome the master of . ' we have a charming party at , master , have we not ? ' say she . 'I hope Grantly get home without fatigue . ' Dr say that they have all be a little tired , but be none the worse this morning . ' a excellent person , , ' suggest the bishop . 'An exemplary , I be tell , ' say . declare that he be very glad to hear it . 'I have not see she Sabbath - day school yet , ' continue the lady , ' but I shall make a point of do so before long . ' Dr merely bow at this intimation . he have something of and she school , both from and . ' by the bye , master , ' continue the lady , 'I wonder whether would like I to drive over and inspect she Sabbath - day school . I hear that it be most excellently keep . ' Dr really could not say . he have no doubt Mr Grantly would be most happy to see Proudie any day would do she the honour of call : that be , of course , if should happen to be at home . a slight cloud darken the lady 's brow . she see that she offer be not take in good part . this generation of unregenerated viper be still perverse , stiffneck , and harden in they antiquity . ' the archdeacon , I know , ' say she , ' set he face against these institution . ' at this laugh slightly . it be but a smile . have he give he cap for it he could not have help it . frown again . ' " little child , and forbid they not , " ' say she . ' be we not to remember that , ? " take heed that ye despise not one of these little one . " be we not to remember that , ? ' and at each of these question she raise at he
he a menace forefinger . ' certainly , madam , certainly , ' say the master , ' and so do the archdeacon , I be sure , on week day as well as on . ' ' on week day you can not take heed not to despise they , ' say , ' because they be out in the field . on week day they belong to they parent , but on they ought to belong to the clergyman . ' and the finger be again raise . the master begin to understand and to share the intense disgust which the archdeacon always express when 's name be mention . what be he to do with such a woman as this ? to take he hat and go would have be he natural resource ; but then he do not wish to be foil in he subject . ' my lord , ' say he , 'I want to ask you a question on business , if you would spare I one moment 's leisure . I know I must apologise for so disturb you ; but in truth , I will not detain you five minute . ' ' certainly , master , certainly , ' say the bishop ; 'my time be quite yours -- pray make no apology , pray make no apology . ' ' you have a great deal to do just at the present moment , bishop . do not forget how extremely busy you be at present , ' say , whose spirit be now up ; for she be angry with she visitor . 'I will not delay he lordship much above a minute , ' say the master of , rise from he chair , and expect that would now go , or else that the bishop would lead the way into another room . but neither event seem likely to occur , and stand for a moment silent in the middle of the room . ' perhaps it be about 's , ' suggest . , lose in astonishment , and not know what else on earth to do , confess that he business with the bishop be connect with 's . ' he lordship have finally confer the appointment on this morning , ' say the lady . make a simple reference to the bishop , and find that the lady 's statement be formally confirm , he take he leave . ' that come of the reform bill ,' he say to himself as he walk down the bishop 's avenue . ' well , at any rate the play bishop be not so bad as that . ' it have be say that , as he start for , receive a despatch from he friend , which have the effect of put he in that high good - humour which subsequent event somewhat untowardly damp . it run as follow . it be shortness will be its sufficient apology : my dear Sir ,-- I wish you every success . I do not know that I can help you , but if I can I will . ' yours ever ' T.T. ' 30/9 / 185 -' there be more in this than in all 's flummery ; more than in all the bishop 's promise , even have they be ever so sincere ; more than in any archbishop 's good work , even have it be possible to obtain it . would do for he what he could . have from he youth upward be a firm believer in the public press . he have dabble in it himself ever since he have take he degree , and regard it as the great arranger and distributor of all future british terrestrial affair whatever . he have not yet arrive at the age , a age which sooner or later come to most of we , which dissipate the golden dream of youth . he delighte in the idea of wrest power from the hand of he country 's magnate , and place it in a custody which be at any rate nearer to he own reach . thousand broad sheet disperse themselves daily among he reading fellow- citizen , form in he eye a better for supremacy than a throne at , a cabinet in , or even a assembly at . and on this subject we must not quarrel with , for the feeling be too general to be meet with disrespect . be as good , if not better than he promise . on the follow morning the , spout forth public opinion with sixty thousand loud clarion , do proclaim to the world that be the fittest man for the vacant post . it be pleasant for to read the follow line in the news - room , which he do within thirty minute after the morning train from have reach the city . " it be just now five year since we call the attention of we reader to the quiet city of . from that day to this , we have in no way meddle with the affair of that happy ecclesiastical community . since then , a old bishop have die there , and a young bishop have be install ; but we believe we do not do more than give some customary record of the interesting event . be we about to meddle very deeply in the affair of the diocese . if any of the chapter feel a qualm of conscience on read this , let it be quiet . above all , let the mind of the new bishop be at rest . we be now not armed for war , but approach the rever towers of the old cathedral with a olive - branch in we hand . ' it will be remembe that at the time allude to , now five year past
past , we have occasion to remark on the state of a charity at call 's . we think that it be maladminister , and that the very estimable and reverend gentleman who hold the office of warden be somewhat too highly pay for duty which be somewhat too easily perform . this gentleman -- and we say it in all sincerity and with no touch of sarcasm -- have never look on the matter in this light before . we do not wish to take praise to ourselves whether praise be due or not . but the consequence of we remark be , that the warden do look into the matter , and find on do so that he himself could come to no other opinion than that express by we , he very creditably throw up the appointment . the then bishop then as creditably decline to fill the vacancy till the affair be put on a better footing . parliament then take it up ; and we have now the satisfaction of inform we reader that 's will be immediately re-open under new auspices . Heretofore , provision be make for the maintenance of twelve old man . this will now be extend to the fair sex , and twelve elderly woman if any such can be find in , will be add to the establishment . there will be a matron ; there will , it be hope , be school attach for the poorest of the child of the poor , and there will be a steward . the warden , for there will still be a warden , will receive a income more in keep with the extent of the charity than that heretofore pay . the stipend we believe will be 450 . we may add that the excellent house which the former warden inhabit will still be attach to the situation . ' Barchester hospital can not perhaps boast a world - wide reputation ; but as we advertise to its state of decadence , we think it right also to advert to its renaissance . may it go up and prosper . whether the salutary reform which have be introduce within it 's wall have be carry as far as could have be desire , may be doubtful . the important question of the school appear to be somewhat left to the discretion of the new warden . this might have be make the most important part of the establishment , and the new warden , whom we trust we shall not offend by the freedom of we remark , might have be select with some view to he fitness as schoolmaster . but we will not now look a gift horse in the mouth . may the hospital go on and prosper ! the situation of warden have of course be offer to the gentleman who so honourable vacate it five year since ; but we be give to understand that he have decline it . whether the lady who have be introduce , be in he estimation too much for he power of control , whether it be that the diminished income do not offer to he sufficient temptation to resume the old place , or that he have in the meantime assume other clerical duty , we do not know . we be , however , inform that he have refuse the offer , and that the situation have be accept by , the vicar of . ' so much we think be due to . but while we be on the subject of , we will venture with all respectful humility to express we opinion on another matter , connect with the ecclesiastical polity of that ancient city . , the dean , die yesterday . a short record of he death , give he age , and the various piece of preferment which he have at different time held , will be find in another column in this paper . the only fault we know in he be he age , and as that be a crime of which we may all hope to be guilty , we will not bear heavily on it . may he rest in peace ! but though the great age of a expiring dean can not be make matter of reproach , we be not inclin to look on such a fault as at all pardonable in a dean just bring to the birth . we do hope the day of sexagenarian appointment be past . if we want deans , we must want they for some purpose . that purpose will necessarily be better fulfil by a man of forty than by a man of sixty . if we be to pay deans at all , we be to pay they for some sort of work . that work , be it what it may , will be best perform by a workman in the prime of life . , we see , be eighty when he die . as we have as yet complete no plan for position superannuated clergyman , we do not wish to get rid of any exist deans of that age . but we prefer have as few such as possible . if a man of seventy be now appoint , we beg to point out to -- that he will be past all use in a year or two , if indeed he be not so at the present moment . he lordship will allow we to remind he that all man be not evergreen like himself . ' we hear that 's name have be mention for this preferment . be at present chaplain to the bishop . a better man could hardly be select . he be a man of talent , young , active , and conversant with the affair of the cathedral ; he be moreover , we conscientiously believe
believe , a truly pious clergyman . we know that he service in the city of have be highly appreciate . he be a eloquent preacher and a ripe scholar . such a selection as this would go far to raise the confidence of the public in the present administration of church patronage , and would teach man to believe that from henceforth the establishment of we church will not afford easy couch to wear - out clerical voluptuary . ' stand at a reading - desk in the news - room , digest this article with considerable satisfaction . what be therein say as the hospital be now comparatively matter of indifference to he . he be certainly glad that he have not succeed in restore to the place the father of that virago who have so audaciously outrage all decency in he person ; and be so far satisfied . but 's nominee be appoint , and he be so far dissatisfied . he mind , however , be now soar above or . he be sufficientely conversant with the tactic of the to know that the pith of the article would lie in the last paragraph . the place of honou be give to he , and it be indeed as honourable as even he could have wish . he be very grateful to he friend , and with full heart look forward to the day when he might entertain he in princely style at he own full - spread board in the deanery dining - room . it have be well for that have die in the autumn . those caterer for we morning repast , the staff of the , have be sorely put to it for the last month to find a sufficiency of proper pabulum . just then there be no talk of a new american president . no wonderful tragedy have occur on railway train in , or elsewhere . there be a dearth of broken banks , and a dead dean with the necessity for a live one be a godsend . have die in , would probably not have know so much about the piety of . and here we will leave for a while in he triumph ; explain , however , that he feeling be not altogether of a triumphant nature . he rejection by the widow , or rather the method of he rejection , gal he terribly . for day to come he positively feel the sting upon he cheek , whenever he think of what have be do to he . he could not refrain from call she by harsh name , speak to himself as he walk through the street of . when he say he prayer , he could not bring himself to forgive she . when he strove to do so , he mind recoil from the attempt , and in lieu of forgiving , run off in a double spirit of vindictiveness , dwell on the extent of the injury he have receive . and so he prayer drop senseless from he lip . and then the signora ; what would he not have give to be able to hate she also ? as it be , he worship the very sofa on which she be ever lie . and thus it be not all rise colour with , although he hope run high . at , when she get home from on the evening of 's , be very unhappy , and moreover very tired . nothing fatigue the body so much as weariness of spirit , and 's spirit be indeed weary . have civilly but not very cordially ask she in to tea , and she manner of refusal convince the worthy doctor that he need not repeat the invitation . he have not exactly make himself a party to the intrigue which be to convert the late 's patrimony into a income for he hopeful son , but he have be well aware what be go on . and he be thus well aware also , when he perceive that decline accompany they home in the carriage , that the affair have go off . be very much afraid that would have dart out upon she , as the prebendary get out at he own door , but thoughtfully save she from this , by cause the carriage to go round by she house . this also understood , and allow to pass by without remark . when she get home , she find in the drawing - room with the child in she lap . she rush forward , and , throw herself on she knee , kiss the little fellow till she almost frightene he . 'Oh , , I be so glad you do not go . it be a odious party . ' now the question of 's going have be one greatly moo between they . , when invite , have be the guest of the Grantlys , and , who have chiefly know at the hospital or at rectory , have forget all about . she sister - in - law have implor she to go under she wing , and have offer to write to , or to call on she . but have decline . in fact , have not be very popular with such people as the , and he sister would not go among they unless she be specially ask to do so . ' well then , ' say cheerfully , 'I have the less to regret . ' ' you have nothing to regret ; but oh ! , I have -- so much -- so much ;' -- and then she begin kiss she boy , whom she caress have arouse from he slumber . when she raise she head , see that the tear be run down she cheek . ' good heaven ,
, , what be the matter ? what have happen to you ?-- , -- what be the matter ? ' and get up with the boy still in she arm . ' give he to I -- give he to I , ' say the young mother . ' give he to I , Mary , 'and she almost tore the child out of she sister 's arm . the poor little fellow murmure somewhat at the disturbance , but nevertheless nestle himself close into he mother 's bosom . ' Here , , take the cloak from I . my own , own darling , darl , darl jewel . you be not false to I . everybody else be false ; everybody else be cruel . will care for nobody , nobody , nobody , but she own , own , own , little man ;' and she again kiss and press the baby , and cry till the tear run down over the child 's face . ' who have be cruel to you , ? ' say . 'i hope I have not . ' now , in this matter , have great cause for uneasiness . she could not certainly accuse she loving sister - in - law of cruelty ; but she have to do that which be more galling ; she have to accuse herself of a imprudence against which she sister - in - law have warn she . have never encourage 's acquaintance with , and she have positively discourage the friendship of the as far as she usual gentle mode of speaking have permit . have only laugh at she , however , when she say that she disapprove of married woman who live apart from they husband , and suggest that never go to church . now , however , must either hold she tongue , which be quite impossible , or confess herself to have be utterly wrong , which be nearly equally so . so she stave off the evil day by more tear , and consol herself by induce little to rouse himself sufficiently to return she caress . ' he be a darling -- as true as gold . what would mamma do without he ? would lie down and die if she have not she own to give she comfort . ' this and much more she say of the same kind , and for a time make no other answer to 's inquiry . this kind of consolation from the world 's deceit be very common . mother obtain it from they child , and man from they dog . some man even do so from they walking - stick , which be just as rational . how be it that we can take joy to ourselves in that we be not deceive by those who have not attaine the art to deceive we ? in a true man , if such can be find , or a true woman , much consolation may indeed be take . in the caress of she child , however , do receive consolation ; and may ill befall the man who would begrudge it to she . the evil day , however , be only postpone . she have to tell she disagreeable tale to , and she have also to tell it to she father . must it not , indeed , be tell to the whole circle of she acquaintance before she could be make to stand all right with they ? at the present moment there be no one to whom she could turn for comfort . she hat ; that be a matter of course , in that feel she revell . she hate and despise the Stanhope ; but that feel distress she greatly . she have , as it be , separate herself from she old friend to throw herself into the arm of this family ; and then how have they intend to use she ? she could hardly reconcile herself to she own father , who have believe ill of she . have turn . that she could have forgive have the Mentor turn out to be in the wrong ; but Mentor in the right be not to be pardon . she could not but hate the archdeacon ; and now she hate he even worse than ever , for she must in some sort humble herself before he . she hate she sister , for she be part and parcel of the archdeacon . and she would have hat if she could . he have pretend to regard she , and yet before she face he have hang over that italian woman as though there have be no beauty in the world but hers -- no other woman worth a moment 's attention . and would have to learn all this about ! she tell herself she hate he , and she know that she be lie to herself as she do so . she have no consolation but she baby , and of that she make the most . , though she could not surmise what it be that have so violently affect she sister - in - law , see at once she grief be too great to be keep under control , and wait patiently till the child should be in he cradle . ' you will have some tea , , ' she say . ' oh , I do not care , ' say she ; though in fact she must have be very hungry , for she have eat nothing at . quietly make the tea , and butter the bread , laid aside the cloak , and make thing look comfortable . 'he be fast asleep , ' say she , ' you be very tired ; let I take he up to bed . ' but would not
not let she sister touch he . she look wistfully at she baby 's eye , see that they be lose in the deepest slumber , and then make a sort of couch for he on the sofa . she be determine that nothing should prevail upon she to let he out of she sight that night . ' come , Nelly , ' say , 'do not be cross with I . I at least have do nothing to offend you . ' 'I can not cross , ' say . ' be you angry then ? surely you can not be angry with I . ' ' no , I can not angry ; at least not with you . ' ' if you be not , drink the tea I have make for you . I be sure you must want it . ' do drink it , and allow herself to be persuade . she eat and drank , and as the inner woman be recruit she feel a little more charitable towards the world at large . at last she find word to begin she story , and before she go to bed , she have make a clean breast of it and tell everything -- everything , that be , as to the lover she have reject : of she say not a word . 'I know I be wrong , ' say she , speak of the blow she have give to ; ' but I do not know what he might do , and I have to protect myself . ' ' he richly deserve it , ' say . ' Deserve it ! ' say , whose mind as regard be almost bloodthirsty . ' have I stab he with a dagger , he would have deserve it . but what will they say about it at ? ' 'I do not think I should tell they , ' say . begin to think that she would not . there could have be no kinder comforter than . there be not the slightest dash of triumph about she when she hear of the scheme , nor do she allude to she former opinion when call she late friend a base , design woman . she re-echo all the abuse that be heape on 's head , and never hint that she have say as much before . 'I tell you so ! I tell you so ! ' be the croak of a true job 's comforter . but , when she find she friend lie in she sorrow and scrape herself with potsherd , forbore to argue and to exult . acknowledge the merit of the forbearance , and at length allow herself to be tranquillise . on the next day she do not go out of the house . Barchester she think would be crowd with and ; perhaps also with and . indeed there be hardly any one among she friend whom she could have meet , without some cause of uneasiness . in the course of the afternoon she hear that the dean be dead ; and she also hear that have be finally appoint to the hospital . in the evening she father come to she , and then the story , or as much of it as she could bring herself to tell he , have to be repeat . he be not in truth much surprised at 's effrontery ; but he be oblige to act as though he have be , to save he daughter 's feeling . he be , however , anything but skilful in he deceit , and she see through it . 'I see , ' say she , ' that you think it only the common course of thing that should have treat I in this way . ' she have say nothing to he about the embrace , nor yet of the way in which it have be meet . 'I do not think it at all strange , ' say he , ' that any one should admire my . ' ' it be strange to I , ' say she , ' that any man should have so much audacity , without ever have receive the slightest encouragement . ' to this answer nothing . with the archdeacon it would have be the text for a rejoinder , which would not have disgrace the Shuhite . ' but you will tell the archdeacon , ' ask . ' tell he what ? ' say she sharply . ? ' continue . ' you will tell ; you will let they know that they wrong you in suppose that this man 's address would be agreeable to you . ' ' they may find out they own way , ' say she ; 'I shall not ever willingly mention 's name to either of they . ' ' but I may . ' 'I have no right to hinder you from do anything that may be necessary to you own comfort , but pray do not do it for my sake . never think well of I , and never will . I do not know now that I a even anxious that he should do so . ' and then they go to the affair of the hospital . ' but be it true , papa ? ' ' what , my dear , ' say he . ' about the dean ? yes , I fear quite true . indeed , I know there be no doubt about it . ' ' poor . I be so sorry for she . but I do not mean that , ' say . ' but about the hospital , papa ? ' yes , my dear . I believe it be true that be to have it . ' 'Oh , what a shame ! ' '
' no , my dear , not at all , not at all a shame : I be sure I hope it will suit he . ' ' but , papa , you know it be a shame . after all you hope , all you expectation to get back you old house , to see it give away in this way to a perfect stranger ! ' 'My dear , the bishop have a right to give it to whom he please . ' 'I deny that , papa . he have no such right . it be not as though you be a candidate for a new piece of preferment . if the bishop have a grain of justice -- ' ' the bishop offer it to I on he term , and as I do not like the term , I refuse it . after that , I can not complain . ' ' term ! he have not right to make term . ' 'I do not know about that ; but it seem he have the power . but to tell you the truth , Nelly , I be as well satisfi as it be . when the affair become the subject of angry discussion , I thoroughly wish to be rid of it altogether . ' ' but you do want to go back to the old house , papa . you tell I so yourself . ' ' yes , my child , I do . for a short time I do wish it . and I be foolish in do so . I be get old now ; and my chief worldly wish be for peace and rest . have I go back to the hospital , I should have have the endless contention with the bishop , contention with he chaplain , and contention with the archdeacon . I be not up to this now , I be not able to meet such trouble ; and therefore I be not ill - pleased to find myself leave to the little church of 's . I shall never starve , ' add he , laugh 'as long as you be here . ' ' but if you will come and live with I , papa ? ' she say earnestly , take he by both he hand . ' if you will do that , if you will promise that , I will own that you be right . ' 'I will dine with you to - day , at any rate . ' ' no , but live here altogether . give up that close , odious little room in . ' ' my dear , it be a very nice little room ; and you be really quite uncivil . ' 'Oh , papa , do not joke . it be not a nice place for you . you say you be grow old , though I be sure you be not . ' 'be I not , my dear ? ' 'no , papa , not old -- not to say old . but you be quite old enough to feel the want of a decent room to sit in . you know how lonely and I be here . you know nobody ever sleep in the big front bed - room . it be really unkind of you to remain there alone , when you be so much want here . ' ' thank you , Nelly -- thank you . but , my dear -- ' ' if you have be live here , papa , with we , as I really think you ink to have do , consider how lonely we be , there would have be none of all this dreadful affair about . ' , however , do not allow himself to be talk over into give up he own and only little pie a terre in the . he promise to come and dine with he daughter , and stay with she , and visit she , and do everything but absolutely live with she . it do not suit the peculiar feeling of the man to tell he daughter that though she have reject , and be ready to reject , some other more favoured suitor would probably soon appear ; and that on the appearance of such a suitor the big front bed - room might perhaps be more frequently in requisition than at present . but doubtless such a idea cross he mind , and add its weight to the other reason which make he decide on still keep the close , odious little room in . the evening pass over quietly and in comfort . be always happier with she father than with any one else . he have not , perhaps , any natural taste for baby - worship , but he be always ready to sacrifice himself , and therefore make a excellent third in a trio with he daughter and in singe the praise of the wonderful child . they be stand together over they music in the evening , the baby have again be put to be upon the sofa , when the servant bring in a very small note in a beautiful pink envelope . it quite fill the room with perfume as it lay upon the small salver . and be both at the piano , and be sit close to they , with the violoncello between he leg ; so that the elegance of the epistle be visible to they all . ' please , ma 'am , 's coachman say he be to wait for a answer , ' say the servant . get very red in the face as she take the note in she hand . she have never see the writing before . 's epistle , to which she be well accustom , be of a very different
different style and kind . she generally write on large note - paper ; she twist up she letter into the shape and sometimes into the size of cock hat ; she address they in a sprawling manly hand , and not unusually add a blot or a smudge , as though such be she own peculiar sign - manual . the address of this note be write in a beautiful female hand , and the gum wafer bore on it a impress of a gilt coronet . though have never see such a one before , she guesse that it come from the signora . such epistle be very numerously send out from any house in which the signora might happen to be dwell , but they be rarely address to lady . when the coachman be tell by the lady 's maid to take the letter to , he openly express he opinion that there be some mistake about it . Whereupon the lady 's maid box the coachman 's ear . have Slope see in how meek a spirit the coachman take the rebuke , he might have learn a useful lesson , both in philosophy and religion . the note be as follow . it may be take as a faithful promise that no further letter whatever shall be transcribe at length in these page . ' my dear -- I ask you , as a great favour , to call on I to - morrow ? you can say what hwe will best suit you ; but quite early , if you can . I need hardly say that if I could call upon you I should not take this liberty with you . 'I partly know what occur the other day , and I promise you that you shall meet with no annoyance if you will come to I . my brother leave we for to - day ; from thence he go to . ' it will probably occur to you that I should not thus intrude on you , unless I have that to say to you which may be of considerable moment . pray therefore excuse I , even if you do not grant my request , and believe I , ' very sincerely yours , the three of they sit in consultation on this epistle for some ten or fifteen minute , and then decide that should write a line say that she would see the signora the next morning , at twelve o'clock . the at we must now return to the , and see how they behave themselves on they return from . , who come back in the first homeward journey with she sister , wait in palpitating expectation till the carriage drive up to the door a second time . she do not run down or stand at the window , or show in any outward manner that she look for anything wonderful to occur ; but , when she hear the carriage - wheel , she stand up with erect ear , listen for 's footfall on the pavement or the cheery sound of 's voice welcome she in . have she hear either , she would have feel that all be right ; but neither sound be there for she to hear . she hear only she father 's slow step , as he ponderously let himself down from the carriage , and slowly walk along the hall , till he get into he own private room on the ground floor . ' send to I ,' he say to the servant . ' there be something wrong now , ' say , who be lie on she sofa in the back drawing - room . ' it be all up with , ' reply . 'I know , I know , ' she say to the servant , as he bring up the message . ' tell my father I will be with he immediately . ' ' 's wooing go astray , ' say . 'I know it would . ' ' it have be he own fault then . she be ready enough . I be quite sure , ' say , with that sort of ill - nature which be not uncommon when one woman speak of another . ' what will you say to he now ? ' by ' he ' the signora mean they father . ' that will be as I find he . he be ready to pay two hundred pound for , to stave off the worst of he creditor , if this marriage have go on . must now have the money instead , and go and take he chance . ' ' where be he now ? ' ' heaven know ! smoke at the bottom of 's ha - ha , or philander with some of those . nothing will ever make a impression on he . but he will be furious if I do not go down . ' ' no ; nothing ever will . but do not be long , , for I want my tea . ' and so go down to she father . there be a very black cloud on the old man 's brow ; blacker than he daughter could ever remember to have see there . he be sit in he own arm -chair , not comfortably over the fire , but in the middle of the room , wait till she should come and listen to he . ' what have become of you brother ? ' he say , as soon as the door be shut . 'I should rather ask you , ' say . 'I leave you both at , when I come away . what have you do with ? ' ' ! nonsense . the woman have go home as she ought to do . and heartily glad
glad I be that she should not be sacrifice to so heartless a reprobate . ' 'Oh , papa ! ' 'a heartless reprobate ! tell I now where he be , and what he be go to do . I have allow myself to be foole between you . marriage indeed ! who on earth that have money , or credit , or respect in the world to lose , would marry he ? ' ' it be no use you scolde I , papa . I have do the best I could for he and you . ' ' and be nearly as bad , ' say the prebendary , who be in truth , very , very angry . ' oh , I suppose we be all bad , ' reply . the old man emitte a huge leonine sigh . if they be all bad , who have make they so ? if they be unprincipled , selfish , and disreputable , who be to be blame for the education which have have so injuriious a effect . 'I know you will ruin I among you , ' say he . ' why , papa , what nonsense that be . you be live within you income this minute , and if there be any new debt , I do not know of they . I be sure there ink to be none , for we be dull enough here . ' ' be those bills of 's pay ? ' ' no , they be not . who be to pay they ? ' ' she husband may pay they . ' 'her husband ! would you wish I to tell she you say so ? do you wish to turn she out of you home ? ' 'I wish she would know how to behave herself . ' ' why , what on earth have she do now ? poor Madeline ! to -day be only the second time she have go out since we come to this vile town . ' he then sit silent for a time , think in what shape he would declare he resolve . ' well , papa , ' say , ' shall I stay here , or may I go up - stair and give mamma she tea ? ' ' you be in you brother 's confidence . tell I what he be go to do ? ' ' nothing , that I be aware of . ' ' nothing -- nothing ! nothing but eat and drink , and spend every shilling of my money he can lay he hand upon . I have make up my mind , . he shall eat and drink no more in this house . ' ' very well . then I suppose he must go back to . ' ' he may go where he pleasis . ' ' that be easily say , papa ; but what do it mean ? you can not let he live --' ' it mean this , ' say the doctor , speak more loudly than be he wont , and with wrath flashing from he eye ; ' that as sure as rule in heaven , I will not maintain he any longer in idleness . ' 'Oh , rule in heaven ! ' say . ' it be no use talk about that . you must rule he here on earth ; and the question be , how you can do it . you can not turn he out of the house penniless , to beg about the street . ' ' he may beg where he like . ' ' he must go back to . that be the cheapest place he can live at , and nobody there will give he credit for above two or three hundred pauls . but you must let he have the means of go . ' 'as sure as -- ' ' oh papa , do not swear . you know you must do it . you be ready to pay two hundred pound for he if the marriage come off . half that will start he to . ' ' what ? give he a hundred pound ! ' ' you know we be all in the dark , papa , ' say she , think it expedient to change the conversation . ' for anything we know , he may be at this moment engage to . ' ' , ' say the father , who have see the way in which have get into the carriage , while he son stood apart without even offer she he hand . ' well , then , he must go to . ' say . just at this moment the lock of the front door be hear , and 's quick care detect she brother 's cat - like step in the hall . she say nothing , feel that for the present have better keep out of she father 's way . but also hear the sound of the lock . ' who be that ? ' he demand . make no reply , and he ask again . ' who be that that have just come in ? open the door . who be it ? ' 'I suppose it be . ' ' bid he to come here , ' say the father . but , who be close to the door and hear the call , require no further bidding , but walk in with a perfectly unconcerned and cheerful air . it be this peculiar insouciance which anger , even more than he son 's extravagance . ' well , sir , ' say the doctor . ' and how do you get home , sir , with you fair companion ? ' say . 'I suppose she be not up - stair , ? '
' ' , ' say , ' papa be in no humour for joking . he be very angry with you . ' 'Angry ! ' say , raise he eyebrow , as though he have never yet give he parent cause for a single moment 's uneasiness . ' sit down , if you please , sir , ' say very sternly , but not now very loudly . ' and I will trouble you to sit down , too , . you mother can wait for she tea a few minute . ' sit down on the chair nearest the door , in somewhat of a perverse sort of manner ; as much as though she would say -- well , here I be ; you sha not say I do not do as I be bid ; but I will be whipped if I give way to you . and she be determine not to give way . she too be angry with ; but she be not the less ready on that account to defend he from he father . also sit down . he draw he chair close to the library table , upon which he put he elbow , and then rest he face comfortably on one hand , he begin draw little picture on a sheet of paper with the other . before the scene be over have have complete admirable figure of , , and , and begin a family piece to comprise the whole set of Lookalofts . ' would it suit you , sir , ' say the father , 'to give I some idea as to what you present intention be ?-- what way of liive you propose to yourself ? ' 'I will do anything you suggest , sir , ' say . ' no , I shall suggest nothing further . my time for suggesting have go by . I have only one order to give , and that be , that you leave my house . ' 'to - night ? ' say ; and the simple tone of the question leave the doctor without any adequately dignified method of reply . ' do not quite mean to - night , ' say , 'at least I suppose not . ' ' to - morrow perhaps , ' suggest . ' yes sir , to - morrow , ' say the doctor . ' you shall leave this to - morrow . ' ' very well , sir . will the 4.30 p.m. train be soon enough ? ' say , as he ask , put the finishing touch to 's high - heel boot . ' you may go how and when and where you please , so that you leave my house to - morrow . you have disgrace I , sir ; you have disgrac yourself , and I , and you sister . ' 'I be glad at least sir , that I have not disgrace my mother , ' say . could hardly keep she countenance ; but the doctor 's brow grow still blacker than ever . be execute he chef d'ouvre in the delineation of 's nose and mouth . ' you be a heartless reprobate , sir ; a heartless , thankless , good - for - nothing reprobate . I have do with you . you be my son -- that I can not help ; but you shall have no more part or parcel in I as my child , nor I in you as you father . ' 'Oh , papa , papa ! you must not , shall not say so , ' say . 'I will say so , and do say so , ' say the father , rise from he chair . ' and now leave the room , sir . ' ' stop , stop , ' say ; ' why do not you speak , ? why do not you look up and speak ? it be you manner that make he so angry . ' ' he be perfectly indifferent to all decency , to all propriety , ' say the doctor ; and then he shoute out , ' leave the room , sir ! do you hear what I say ? ' ' Papa , papa , I will not let you part so . I know you will be sorry for it . ' and then she add , get up and whisper into he ear . ' be he only to blame ? think of that . we have make we own bed , and , such as it be , we must lie on it . it be no use for we to quarrel among ourselves , ' and as she finish she whisper , finish off the countess 's bustle , which be so well do that it absolutely seem to be sway to and for on the paper with its usual lateral motion . ' my father be angry at the present time , ' say , look up for a moment from he sketch , ' because I be not go to marry . what can I say on the matter ? it be true that I be not go to marry she . in the first place -- ' ' that be not true , sir , ' say ; ' but I will not argue with you . ' ' you be angry just this moment because I would not speak , ' say , go on with a young . ' give over drawing , ' say , go up to he and take the paper from under he hand . the caricature , however , she preserve , and show they afterwards to the friend of the , the Proudy , and . , deprive of he occupation , throw himself back in he chair and wait
wait further order . ' I think it will certainly be for the best that should leave this at once , perhaps to - morrow , ' say ; ' but pray , papa , let we arrange some scheme together . ' ' if he will leave to - morrow , I will give he 10 , and he shall be pay 5 a month by the banker at as long as he stay permanently in that place . ' ' well , sir ! it will not be long , ' say ; ' for I shall be starve to death in about three month . ' ' he must have marble to work with , ' say . 'I have plenty there in the studio to last I three month , ' say . ' it will be no use attempt anything large in so limit a time ; unless I do my own tombstone . ' term , however , be ultimately come to , somewhat more liberal than those propose , and the doctor be induce to shake hand with he son , and bid he good - night . would not go up to tea , but have it bring to he in he study by he daughter . but go up - stair and spend a pleasant evening . he finish the Lookaloft , greatly to the delight of he sister , though the manner of portray they decollete dress be not the most refin . find how matter be go , he by degree allow it to escape from he that he have not press he suit upon the widow in a very urgent way . 'I suppose , in point of fact , you never propose at all ? ' say . 'Oh , she understand that she might have I if she wish , ' say he . ' and she do not wish , ' say the signora . ' you have throw I over in the most shameful manner , ' say . 'I suppose you tell she all about my little plan ? ' ' well , it come out somehow ; at least the most of it . ' ' there be a end of that alliance , ' say ; ' but it do not matter much . I suppose we shall all be back in soon . ' 'I be sure I hope so , ' say the signora ; 'I be sick of the sight of black coat . if that come here any more , he will be the death of I . ' ' you have be the ruin of he , I think , ' say . ' and as for a second black - coate lover of mine , I be go to make a present to he of another lady with most singular disinterestedness . ' the next day , true to he promise , pack up and go of by the 4.30 p.m. train , with L 20 in he pocket , bound for the marble quarry of . and so he disappear from we scene . at twelve o'clock on the day follow that on which go , bold , true also to she word , knock at 's door with a timid hand and palpitat heart . she be at once show up to the back drawing - room , the fold door of which be closed , so that in visit the signora , be not necessarily throw into any communication with those in the front room . as she go up the stair , she none of the family , and be so far save much of the annoyance which she have dread . ' this be very kind of you , ; very kind , after what have happen , ' say the lady on the sofa with she sweetest smile . ' you write in such a strain that I could not but come to you . ' 'I do , I do ; I want to force you to see I . ' ' well , signora ; I be here . ' ' how could you be to I . but I suppose I must put up with that . I know you think you have reason to be displease with we all . poor ! if you know all , you would not be angry with he . ' 'I be not angry with you brother -- not in the least . but I hope you do not send for I to talk about he . ' ' if you be angry with , that be worse ; for you have no warmer friend in all . but I do not send for you to talk about this -- pray bring you chair nearer , , so that I may look at you . it be so unnatural to see you keep so far off from I . ' do as she be bid , and bring she chair closer to the sofa . ' and now , , I be go to tell you something which you may think indelicate ; but yet I know that I be right in do so . ' say nothing , but feel inclin to shake in she chair . the signora , she know , be not very particular , and that which to she appear to be indelicate might to appear to be extremely indecent . 'I believe you know ? ' would have give the world not to blush , but she blood be not at she own command . she do blush up to she forehead , and the signora , who have make she sit in a special light in order that she might watch she , see that she do so . ' yes -- I be acquaint with he . that be , slightly .
. he be a intimate friend of , and be my brother - in - law . ' ' well ; if you know , I be sure you must like he . I know and like he much . everybody that know he must like he . ' feel it quite impossible to say anything in reply to this . she blood be rush about she body she know not how or why . she feel as though she be swing in she chair ; and she know that she be not only red in the face , but also almost suffocate with heat . however , she sit still and say nothing . ' how stiff you be with I , , ' say the signora ; ' and I the while be do for you all that one woman can do to serve another . ' a kind of thought come over the widow 's mind that perhaps the signora 's friendship be real ; and that at any rate it could not hurt she ; and another kind of thought , a glimmering of a thought , come to she also , -- that be to precious to be lose . she despise the signora ; but might she not stoop to conquer ? it should be but the smallest fraction of a stoop ! 'I do not want to be stiff , ' she say , ' but you question be so very singular . ' ' well , then , I will ask you one more singular still , ' say , raise herself on she elbow and turn she own face full upon she companion 's . ' do you love he , love he with all you heart and soul , with all the love you bosom can feel ? for I can tell you that he love you , worship you , think of you and nothing else , be now think of you as he attempt to write he sermon for next 's preaching . what would I not give to be love in such a way by such a man , that be , if I be a object for any man to love ! ' get up from she seat and stood speechless before the woman who be now address she in this impassioned way . when the signora thus allude to herself , the widow 's heart be soften , and she put she own hand , as though caressingly , on that of she companion which be rest on the table . the signora gras it and go on speaking . ' what I tell you be 's own truth ; and it be for you to use it as may be best for you own happiness . but you must not betray I . he know nothing of this . he know nothing of my know he inmost heart . he be simple as a child in these matter . he tell I he secret in a thousand way because he could not dissemble ; but he do not dream that have tell it . you know it now , and I advise you to use it . ' return the pressure of the other 's hand with a infinitesimal soupcon of a squeeze . ' and remember , ' say the signora , ' he be not like other man . you must not expect he to come to you with vow and oath and pretty present , to kneel at you foot , and kiss you shoe - string . if you want that , there be plenty to do it ; but he will not be one of they . ' 's bosom nearly burst with a sigh ; but , not heede she , go on . ' with he , yea will stand for yea , and nay for nay . though he heart should break for it , the woman who shall reject he once , will have reject he once and for all . remember that . and now , , I will not keep you , for you be flatter . I partly guess what use you will make of what I have say to you . if ever you be a happy wife in that man 's house , we shall be far away ; but I shall expect you to write I one line to say that you have forgive the sins of the family . ' half whisper that she would , and then without utter another word , crept out of the room , and down the stair , open the front door for herself without hear or see any one , and find herself in the close . it would be difficult to analyse 's feeling as she walk home . she be nearly stupefy by the thing that have be say to she . she feel sore that she heart should have be so search and riddle by a comparative stranger , by a woman whom she have never like and never could like . she be mortify that the man whom she own to herself that she love should have conceal he love from she and show it to another . there be much to vex she proud spirit . but there be , nevertheless , a under - stratum of joy in all this which buoy she up wondrously . she try if she could disbelieve what have say to she ; but she find that she could not . it be true ; it must be true . she could not , would not , do not doubt it . on one point she fully resolve to follow the advice give she . if it should ever please to put such a question to she as suggest , she ' yea ' should be ' yea ' . would
would not all she misery be at a end , if she could talk of they to he openly , with she hand rest on he shoulder ? 's with the SIGNORA on the follow day the signora be in she pride . she be dress in she brightest of morning dress , and have quite a levee round she couch . it be a beautifully bright afternoon ; all the gentleman of the neighbourhood be in , and those who have the entry of 's house be in the signora 's back drawing - room . and be in the front room , and such of the lady 's squire as could not for the moment get near the centre of attraction have to waste they fragrance on the mother and sister . the first who come and the last to leave be . this be the second visit he have pay to since he have meet she at . he come he know not why , to talk about he know not what . but , in truth , the feeling which now troublead he be new to he , and he could not analyse they . it may seem strange that he should thus come dangling about because he be in love with ; but it be nevertheless the fact ; and though he could not understand why he do so , understand it well enough . she have be gentle and kind to he , and have encourage he staying . therefore he stay on . she press he hand when he first greet she ; and whisper to he little nothing . and then she eye , brilliant and bright , now mirthful , now melancholy , and invincible in either way ! what man with warm feeling , blood unchilled , and a heat not guard by a triple steel of experience could have withstand those eye ! the lady , it be true , intend to do no mortal injury ; she merely choose to inhale a slight breath of incense before she hand the casket over to another . whether would willingly have spare even so much be another question . and then come . all the world now know that be a candidate for the deanery , and that he be generally consider to be the favourite . , therefore , walk rather largely upon the earth . he give to himself a portly air , such as might become a dean , spoke but little to other clergyman , and shunn the bishop as much as possible . how the meagre little prebendary , and the burly chancellor , and all the minor canons and vicar choral , ay , and all the chorister too , cower and shook and walk about with long face when they read or hear of that article of the . now be come the day when nothing would avail to keep the impure spirit from the cathedral pulpit . that pulpit would indeed be he own . Precentor , vicar , and chorister might hang up they harps on the willows . Ichabod ! Ichabod ! the glory of they house be depart from they . , great as he be with embryo grandeur , still come to see the signora . indeed , he could not keep himself away . he dream of that soft hand which have kiss so often , and of the imperial brow which he lip have once press , and he then dream also of further favour . and Thorne be there also . it be the first visit he have ever pay to the signora , and he make it not without due preparation . Thorne be a gentleman usually precise in he dress , and prone to make the most of himself in a unpretending way . the grey hair in he whisker be eliminate perhaps once a month ; those on he head be soften by a mixture which we will not call a dye ; it be only a wash . he tailor live in 's , and he bootmaker at the corner of that street and . he be particular in the article of glove , and the get up of he shirts be a matter not lightly think of in the laundry . on the occasion of the present visit he have rather overdone he usual effort , and cause some little uneasiness to he sister , who have not hithertoo receive very cordially the proposition for a lengthen visit from the signora at . there be other also there -- young man about the city who have not much to do , and who be induce by the lady 's charms to neglect that little ; but all give way to , who be somewhat of a grand signor , as a country gentleman always be in a provincial city . 'Oh , , this be so kind of you ! ' say the signora . ' you promise to come ; but I really do not expect it . I think you country gentleman never keep you pledge . ' 'Oh , yea , sometimes , ' say , look rather sheepish , and make salutation a little too much in the style of the last century . ' you deceive none but you consti-stit - stit ; what do you call the people that carry you about in chair and pelt you with egg and apple when they make you a member of parliament ? ' ' one another also , sometimes , signora , ' say , with a deanish sort of smirk on he face . ' country gentleman do deceive one another sometimes , do not they , ? ' Thorne give he a look which undress he completely for the moment ; but he soon remember he high hope , and recover himself quickly , sustain
sustain he probable come dignity by a laugh at 's expense . 'I never deceive a lady , at any rate , ' say ; 'especially when the gratification of my own wish be so strong a inducement to keep I true , as it now be . ' Thorne go on thus awhile , with antediluvian grimace and compliment which he have pick up from , and the signora at every grimace and at every bow smile a little smile and bow a little bow . , however , be keep stand at the foot of the couch , for the new dean sat in the seat of honour near the table . Mr Arabin the while be stand with he back to the fire , he coat tail under he arm , gaze at she with all he eye -- not quite in vain , for every now and again a glance come up at he , bright as a meteor out of heaven . 'Oh , , you promise to let I introduce my little girl to you . can you spare a moment ?-- will you see she now ? ' Thorne assure she that he could , and would see the young lady with the greatest pleasure in life . , might I trouble you to ring the bell ? ' say she ; and when get up she look at and point to the chair . , however , be much too slow to understand she , and would have recover he seat have not the signora , who never choose to be unsuccessful , somewhat summarily order he out of it . 'Oh , , I must ask you to let Thorne sit here just for a moment or two . I be sure you will pardon I . we can take a liberty with you this week . next week , you know , when you move into the dean 's house , we shall all be afraid of you . ' , with a air of much indifference , rise from he seat , and , walk into the next room , become greatly interested in 's worsted work . and then the child be brotch in . she be a little girl , about eight year of age , like she mother , only that she enormous eye be black , and she hair quite jet . she complexion too be very dark , and bespeak she foreign blood . she be dress in the most outlandish and extravagant way in which clothes could be put on a child 's back . she have great bracelet on she naked little arm , a crimson fillet braide with gold round she head , and scarlet shoe with high heel . she dress be all flounce , and stuck out from she as though the object be to make it lie off horizontally from she little hip . it do not nearly cover she knee ; but this be aton for by a loose pair of drawer which seem make throughout of lace ; then she have on pink silk stocking . it be thus that the last of the be habitually dress at the hour when visitor be will not to call . ' , my love , ' say the mother ,-- be ever a favourite name with the ladie of the family , ' , my love , come here . I be tell you about the beautiful party poor mamma go to . this be ; will you give he a kiss , dearest ? ' put up she face to be kiss , as she do to all she mother 's visitor ; and then Thorne find that he have get she , and , which be much more terrible to he , all she finery , into he arm . the lace and starch crumple against he waistcoat and trousers , the greasy black curl hang upon he cheek , and one of the bracelet clasp scratch he ear . he do not at all know how to hold she . however , he have on other occasion be compelle to fondle little niece and nephew , and now set about the task in the mode he always use . ' Diddle , diddle , diddle , diddle , ' say he , put the child on one knee , and work away with it as though he be turn a knife - grinder 's wheel with he foot . ' , , ' say , crossly . 'I do not want to be diddle diddle . let I go , you naughty old man , you . ' poor Mr Thorne put the child down quietly on the ground , and draw back he chair ; , who have return to the pole star that attract he , laugh aloud ; wince and shut he eye ; and the signora pretend not to hear she daughter . 'Go to , lovey , ' say the mamma , ' and ask she it if be not time for you to go out . ' but little , though she have not exactly like the nature of 's attention , be accustom to be play with by gentleman , and do not relish the idea of be send so soon to she aunt . ' , go when I tell you , my dear . ' but still go pout about the room . ' , do come and take she , ' say the signora . ' she must go out ; and the day get so short now . ' and thus end the much - talk of interview between and the last of the . Thorne recovere from the child 's crossness sooner than from 's laughter . he could put up with be call a old man by a infant , but he do
do not like to be laugh at by the bishop 's chaplain , even though that chaplain be about to become a dean . he say nothing , but he show plainly enough that he be angry . the signora be ready enough to avenge he . , ' say she , ' I hear that you be triumph on all side . ' ' how so , ' say he smile . he do not dislike be talk to about the deanery , though , of course , he strongly deny the imputation . ' you carry the day both in love and war . ' do not look quite so satisfied as he have do . , ' continue the signora , 'do not you think be a very lucky man ? ' ' not more than he deserve , I be sure , ' say . ' only think , , he be to be we new dean ; of course we all know that . ' ' indeed , signora , ' say , 'we all know nothing about it . I can assure you i myself -- ' ' he be to be the new dean -- there be no manner of doubt of it , . ' ' , ' say . ' pass over the head of old man like my father and -- ' 'Oh -- oh ! ' say . ' the archdeacon would not accept it , ' say ; whereupon smile abominably , and say , as plainly as a look could speak , that the grape be sour . ' go over all we head , ' continue the signora ; ' for , of course , I consider myself one of the chapter . ' ' if I be ever dean , ' say --'that be , be I ever to become so , I should glory in such a canoness . ' 'Oh , , stop ; I have not half do . there be another canoness for you to glory in . be not only to have the deanery , but a wife to put in it . ' again look disconcerted . 'a wife with a large fortune , too . it never rain but it pour , do it ? ' 'no , never , ' say , who do not quite relish talk about and he affair . ' when will it be , ? ' ' when will what be ? ' say he . 'Oh ! we know when the affair of the dean will be : a week will settle that . the new hat , I have no doubt , have already be order . but when will the marriage come off ? ' ' do you mean mine or , ' say he , strive to be facetious . ' well , just then I mean yours , though perhaps , after all , 's may be first . but we know nothing of he . he be too close for any of we . now all be open and above board with you ; which , by the bye , , I beg to tell you I like much the best . he who run can read that be a favoured lover . come , , when be the widow to be make ? ' to Arabin this badinage be peculiarly painful ; and yet he could not tear himself away and leave it . he believe , still believe with that sort of belief which the fear of a thing engender , that would probably become the wife of . of 's little adventure in the garden he know nothing . for atch he know , might have have a adventure of quite a different character . he might have throw himself at the widow 's foot , be accept , and then return to town a jolly , thrive wooer . the signora 's joke be bitter enough to , but they be quite as bitter to . he still stand lean against the fire - place , fumbl with he hand in he trouser 's pocket . ' come , come , , do not be so bashful , ' continue the signora . ' we all know that you propose to the lady the other day at . tell we with what word she accept you . be it with a simple " yes " , or with two " no , no ' " , which make a affirmative ? or do silence give consent : or do she speak out with that spirit which so well become a widow , and say openly , " by my troth , sir , you shall make I as soon as it be you pleasure to do so " ? ' have seldom in he life feel himself less at he case . there sit , laugh silently . there stand he old antagonist , , ga at he with all he eye . there round the door between the two rooms be cluster a little group of people , include and the . and , all listen to he discomfiture . he know that it depend solely on he own wit whether or no he could throw the joke back upon the lady . he know that it stand he to do so if he possibly could ; but he say not a word . t''Tis conscience that make coward of we all . ' he feel on he cheek the sharp point of 's finger , and do not know who might have see the blow , who might have tell the tale to this pestilent woman who take such delight in jeer he . he stand there , therefore , red as a carbuncle and mute as a fish ; grinn just sufficiently to show he tooth ; a object of
of pity . but the signora have no pity ; she know nothing of mercy . she present object be to put down , and she be determined to do it thoroughly , now that she have he in she power . ' what , , no answer ? why it can not possibly be that this woman have be fool enough to refuse you ? she surely can not be look out after a bishop . but I see how it be , . Widow be proverbially cautious . you should have let she alone till the new hat be on you head ; till you could show she the key of the deanery . ' ' , ' say he at last , try to speak in a tone of dignify reproach , ' you really permit yourself to talk on such solemn subject in a very improper way . ' ' Solemn subject -- what solemn subjects ? surely a dean 's hat be not such a solemn subject . ' 'I have no aspiration such as those you impute to I . perhaps you will drop the subject . ' 'Oh , certainly , ; but one word first . go to she again with the prime minister 's letter in you pocket . I will wager my shawl to you shovel she do not refuse you then . ' 'I must say , signora , that I think you be speak of the lady in a very unjustifiable manner . ' ' and one other piece of advice , ; I will only offer you one other ;' and then she commence singing -- ' it be gude to be merry and wise , , it be gude to be honest and true ; it be gude to be off with the old love , , before you be on with the new -- , ha , ha ! ' and the signora , throw herself back on she sofa , laugh merrily . she little reck how those who hear she would , in they own imagination , fill up the little history of 's first love . she little care that some among they might attribute to she the honour of he earlier admiration . she be tired of and want to get rid of he ; she have ground for anger with he , and she choose to be revenge . how get out of that room he never himself know . he do succeed ultimately , and probably with some assistance , in get he he have and escape into the air . at last he love for the signora be cure . whenever he again think of she in he dream , it be not as of a angel with azure wing . he connect she rather with fire and brimstone , and though he could still believe she to be a spirit , he banish she entirely out of heaven , and find a place for she among the infernal gods . when he weigh in the balance , as he not seldom do , the two woman to whom he have attach himself in , the pre-eminent place in he soul 's hatred be usually allot to the signora . the during the entire next week be ignorant who be to be its new dean on morning . be decidedly the favourite ; but he do not show himself in the cathedral , and then he sank a point or two in the betting . on , he get a scolding from the bishop in the hearing of the servants , and down he go till nobody would have he at any price ; but on he receive a letter , in a official cover , mark private , by which he fully recover he place in the public favour . on , he be say to be ill , and that do not look well ; but on morning he go down to the railway station , with a very jaunty air ; and when it be ascertain that he have take a first - class ticket for , there be no longer any room for doubt on the matter . while matter be in this state of ferment at , there be not much mental comfort at . we friend the archdeacon have many grounds for inward grief . he be much displease at the result of 's diplomatic mission to the palace , and do not even scruple to say to he wife that have he go himself he would have manage the affair much better . he wife do not agree with he , but that do not mmend the matter . 's appointment to the hospital be , however , a fait accompli , and 's acquiescence in that appointment be not less so . nothing would induce to make a public appeal against the bishop ; and the master of quite approve of he not do so . 'I do not know what have come to the master , ' say the archdeacon over and over again . ' he use to be ready enough to stand up for he order . ' ' my dear archdeacon , ' Grantly would say in reply , ' what be the use of always fight ? I really think the master be right . ' the master , however , have take step of he own , of which neither the archdeacon nor he wife know anything . ' then 's success be henbane to ; and 's impropriety be as bad . what would be all the world to if should become the of and marry he wife 's sister ! he talk of it , and talk of it till he be nearly ill . almost wish that the marriage be done and over , so that she might hear no more about
about it . and there be yet another ground of misery which cut he to the quick , nearly as closely as either of the two other . that paragon of a clergyman , whom he have bestow upon 's , that college friend of whom he have boast so loudly , that ecclesiastical knight before whose lance be to fall and bite the dust , that worthy bulwark of the church as it should be , that honoure representative of 's best spirit , be -- so at least he wife have tell he half a dozen time -- misconduct himself ! nothing have be see of at for the last week , but a good deal have , unfortunately , be heard of he . as soon as have find herself alone with the archdeacon , on the evening of the party , she have express herself very forcibly as to 's conduct on that occasion . he have , she declare , look and act and talk very unlike a decent parish clergyman . at first the archdeacon have laugh at this , and assure she that she need not trouble herself ; that would be find to be quite safe . but by degrees he begin to find out that he wife 's eye have be sharper than he own . other people couple the signora 's name with that of . the meagre little prebendary who live in the close , tell he to a nicety how often have visit at 's , and how long he have remain on the occasion of each visit . he have ask after at the cathedral library , and a officious little vicar choral have offer to go and see whether he could be find at 's . , when she have contrive to sound the first note on she trumpet , soon make a loud peal audible enough . it be too clear that have succumb to the italian woman , and that the archdeacon 's credit would suffer fearfully if something be not do to rescue the brand from the burning . besides , to give the archdeacon he due , he be really attach to , and grieve greatly at he backsliding . they be sit talk over they sorrow , in the drawing - room before dinner on that day after 's departure for ; and on this occasion Grantly speak she mind freely . she have opinion of she own about parish clergyman , and now think it right to give vent to they . ' it you would have be lead by I , archdeacon , you would never have put a bachelor into 's . ' ' but , my dear , you do not mean to say that all bachelor clergyman misbehave themselves . ' 'I do not know that clergyman be so much better than other man , ' say . ' it be all very well with a curate whom you have under you own eye , and whom you can get rid of if he persist in impropriety . ' ' but be a fellow , and could not have have a wife . ' ' then I would have find some one who could . ' ' but , my dear , be fellow never to get livings ? ' ' yes , to be sure they be , when they get engage . I never would put a young man into a living unless he be marry , or engage to be marry . now here be . the whole responsibility lie upon you . ' ' there be not at this moment a clergyman in all Oxford more respect for moral and conduct than . ' 'Oh , ! ' say the lady , with a sneer . ' what man choose to do at , nobody ever hear of . a man may do very well at who would bring disgrace on a parish ; and , to tell you the truth , it seem to I that be just such a man . ' the archdeacon groane deeply , but he have no further answer to make . ' you really must speak to he , archdeacon . only think what the Thornes will say if they hear that they parish clergyman spend he whole time philandering with this woman . ' the archdeacon groane again . he be a courageous man , and know well enough how to rebuke the younger clergyman of the diocese when necessary . but there be that about which make the doctor feel that it would be very difficult to rebuke he with good effect . ' you can advise he to find a wife for himself , and he will understand well enough what that mean , ' say Grantly . the archdeacon have nothing for it but groan . there be Mr Slope ; he be go to be make dean ; he be go to take a wife ; he be bout to achieve respectability and wealth ; and excellent family mansion , and a family carriage ; he would soon be among the comfortable elite of the ecclesiastical world of ; whereas he own protege , the true scion of the true church , by whom he have swear , would still be a poor vicar , and that with a very indifferent character for moral conduct ! it might be all very well recommend to marry , but how would Mr when marry support a wife ? thing be order themselves thus at draw - room when and be disturb in they sweet discourse by the quick rattle of a carriage and a pair of horse on the gravel sweep . the sound be not that of visitor , whose private carriage be generally bring up to country - house door with demure propriety , but belong rather to some person or
or person who be in a hurry to reach the house , and have not intention of immediately leave it . guest invite to stay a week , and who be conscious of arrive after the first dinner bell , would probably approach in such a manner . so might arrive a attorney with the news of a granduncle 's death , or a son from college with all the fresh honour of a double first . no one would have have himself drive to the door of a country house in such a manner who have the slightest doubt of he own right to force a entry . ' who be it ? ' say Grantly , look at she husband . ' who on earth can it be ? ' say the archdeacon to he wife . he then quietly get up and stand with the drawing - room door open in he hand . ' why , it be you father ! ' it be indeed , and alone . he have come by himself in a post -chaise with a couple of horse from , arrive almost after dark , and evidently full of news . he visit have usually be make in the quietest manner ; he have rarely presume to come without notice , and have always be drive up in a modest old green fly , with one horse , that hardly make itself hear as it crawl up to the hall door . ' good gracious , , be it you ? ' say the archdeacon , forget in he surprise the event of the last few year . ' but come in ; nothing be the matter , I hope ? ' ' we be very glad you be come , papa , ' say he daughter . 'I will go and get you room ready at once . ' 'I can not ware , archdeacon , ' say . be warden . ' oh , I know , I know , ' say the archdeacon , petulantly . 'I forget all about it at the moment . be anything the matter ? ' ' do not go at the moment , , ' say ; 'I have something to tell you . ' ' the dinner bell will ring in five minute , ' say she . ' will it ? ' say . ' then , perhaps I have better wait . ' he be big with news which he have come to tell , but which he know could not be tell without much discussion . he have hurry away to as fast as two horse could bring he , and now , finde himself there , he be willing to accept the reprieve which dinner would give he . ' if you have anything of moment to tell we , say the archdeacon , ' pray let we hear it at once . have go off ? ' ' no , she have not , ' say , with a look of great disclosure . ' have be make dean ? ' ' no , he have not ; but --' ' but what ? ' say the archdeacon , who be become very impatient . ' they have --' ' they have what ? ' say the archdeacon . ' they have offer it to I , ' say , with a modesty which almost prevent he speaking . ' good heaven ! ' say the archdeacon , and sank back exhaust in a easy - chair . ' my dear , dear , father , ' say , and throw she arm around he neck . ' so I think I have better come out and consult with you at once , ' say . ' consult ! ' shoute the archdeacon . ' but , my dear Harding , I congratulate you with my whole heart -- with my whole heart . I do indeed . I never hear anything in my life that give I so much pleasure ;' and he get hold of both he father - in - law 's hand , and shake they as though he be go to shake they off , and walk round and round the room , twirl a copy of the over he head , to show he extreme exultation . ' but --' begin . ' but I no buts , ' say the archdeacon . never be so happy in my life . it be just the proper thing to do . upon my honour , I will never say another word against -- the longest day I have to live . ' ' that be 's do , you may be sure , ' say , who greatly like the master of , he be a orderly marry man with a large family . 'I suppose it be , ' say the archdeacon . 'Oh , papa , I be so truly delighted , ' say Grantly , get up and kiss she father . ' but , my dear , ' say . it be all in vain that he strove to speak ; nobody would listen to he . ' well , , ' say the archdeacon , triumphing ; ' the deanery garden will be some consolation for the hospital elm . well , poor ! I will not begrudge he he good fortune any longer . ' no , indeed , ' say . ' poor woman , she have fourteen child . I be sure I be very glad they have get it . ' 'So be I , ' say . 'I would give twenty pound , ' say the archdeacon , 'to see how will look when he hear it . ' the idea of 's discomfiture for no small part of the archdeacon 's pleasure . at last be allow to go up -
- stair and wash he hand , have , in fact , say very little of all that he have come out to Plumstead on purpose to say . could anything more be say till the servants be go after dinner . the joy of be so uncontrollable that he could not refrain from call he father - in - law before the man ; and therefore , it be soon matter for discussion in the lower region how , instead of he daughter 's future husband , be to be the new dean , and various be the opinion on the matter . the cook and butler , who be advance in years , think that it be just as it should be ; but the footman and lady be maid , who be younger , think it be a great shame that should lose he chance . 'he be a mean chap all the same , ' say the footman ; ' and it can not along of he that I say so . but I always do admire the missus 's sister ; and she would well become the situation . ' while these be the idea down - stair , a very great difference of opinion exist above . as soon as the cloth be draw and the wine on the table , make for himself the opportunity of speaking . it be , however , with much troubling that he say -- ' it be very kind of --very kind , and I feel it deeply , most deeply . I be , I must confess , gratify by the offer -- ' 'I should think so , ' say the archdeacon . ' but , all the same , I be afraid that I can not accept it . ' the decanter almost fall from the archdeacon 's have upon the table ; and the start he make be so great as to make he wife jump from she chair . not accept the deanship ! if it really end in this , there would be no longer any doubt that he father - in - law be dement . the question now be whether a clergyman with low rank , and preferment amount to less than 200 pound a year , should accept high rank , 1200 pound a year , and one of the most desirable position which he profession have to afford ! ' what ! ' say the archdeacon , gas for breath , and star at he guest as though the violence of he emotion have almost throw he into a fit . ' what ! ' 'I do not find myself fit for new duty , ' urge . ' new duty ! what duty ? ' say the archdeacon , with unintended sarcasm . 'Oh , papa , ' say , ' nothing can be easier that what a dean have to do . surely you be more active than . ' ' he will not have half as much to do as at present , ' say . ' do you see what the say the other day about young man ? ' ' yes ; and I see that the say all that it could to induce the appointment of . perhaps you would wish to see make dean . ' make no reply to this rebuke , though he feel it strongly . he have not come over to Plumstead to have further contention with he son - in - law about , so he allow it to pass by . 'I know I can not make you understand my feeling ,' he say , ' for we have be cast in different mould . I may wish that I have you spirit and energy and power of combatting ; but I have not . every day that be add to my life increase my wish for peace and rest . ' ' and where on earth can a man have peace and rest if not in a deanery ? ' say the archdeacon . ' people will say I be too old for it . ' ' good heaven ! what people ? what need you care for any people ? ' ' but I think myself I be too old for any new place . ' ' dear papa , ' say , ' men ten year older than you have be appoint to new situation day after day . ' ' my dear , ' say he , ' it be impossible that I should make you understand my feeling , nor do I pretend to any great virtue in the matter . the truth be , I want the force of character which might enable I to stand against the spirit of the time . the call on all side now be for young man , and I have not the nerve to put myself in opposition to the demand . be the , when it hear of my appointment , to write article after article , set forth my incompetency , I be sure it would cost I my reason . I ought to be able to bear with such thing , you will say . well , my dear , I own that I ink . but I feel my weakness and I know that I can not . and , to tell you the truth , I know no more than a child what the dean have to do . ' ' Pshaw ! ' exclaim the archdeacon . ' do not be angry with I , archdeacon ; do not let we quarrel about it , . if you know how keenly I feel the necessity of have to disoblige you in this matter , you would not be angry with I . ' this be a dreadful blow to . nothing could possibly have suite he
he better than have Harding in the deanery . though he have never look down on Harding on account of he great poverty , he do fully recognise the satisfaction of have those belong to he in comfortable position . it would be much more suitable that should be dean of than vicar of and precentor to boot . and then the great discomfiture of that arch enemy of all that be respectable in , of that new low church clerical parvenu that have fall amongst they , that alone would be worth more , almost than the situation itself . it be frightful to think that such unhoped for good fortune should be mar by the absurd crotchet and unwholesome hallucination by which allow himself to be lead astray . to have the cup so near he lip and then to lose the drinking of it , be more than could endure . and yet it appear as though he would have to endure it . in vain he threaten and in vain he coax . do not indeed speak with perfect decision of refuse the proffer glory , but he would not speak with anything like decision of accept it . when press again and again , he would again and again allege that he be wholly unfitted to new duty . it be in vain that the archdeacon try to insinuate , though he could not plainly declare , that there be no new duty to perform . it be in vain he hint that in all case of difficulty he , the archdeacon , be willing and able to guide a weak - minded dean . seem to have a foolish idea , not only that there be new duty to do , and that no one should accept the place who be not himself prepare to do they . the conference end in a understanding that should at once acknowledge the letter he have receive from the minister 's private secretary , and should beg that he might be allow two day to make up he mind ; and that during those two day the matter should be consider . on the follow morn the archdeacon be to drive back to . show she talent for - on 's return to from , which be effect by he in due course in company with the archdeacon , some tiding of a surprising nature meet he . he be , during the journey , subject to such a weight of unanswerable argument , all of which go to prove that it be he bounden duty not to interfere with the paternal government that be so anxious to make he a dean , that when he arrive at the chemist 's door in , he barely know which way to turn himself in the matter . but , perplex as he be , he be doom to further perplexity . he find a note there from he daughter , begge he to most urgently to come to she immediately . but we must again go back a little in we story . Thorne have not be slow to hear the rumour respect , which have so much disturb the happiness of . and she , also , be unhappy to think that she parish clergyman should be accuse of worshippe a strange goddess . she , also , be of opinion , that rector and vicar should all be married , and with that good - natured energy which be characteristic of she , she put she wit to work to find a fitting match for . , in this difficulty , could think of no better remedy than a lecture from the archdeacon . Thorne think that a young lady , marriageable , and with a dowry , might be of more efficacy . in look through the catalogue of she unmarried friend , who might possibly be in want of a husband , and might also be fit for such a promotion as a country parsonage affords , she could think of no one more eligible than ; and , consequently , lose no time , she go into on the day of 's discomfiture , the same day that she brother , have have he interesting interview with the last of the , and invite to bring she nurse and baby to and make a protract visit . suggest a month or two , intend to use she influence afterwards in prolonge it so as to last out the winter , in order that might have a opportunity of become fairly intimate with he intend bride . ' we will have too , ' say Thorne to herself ; ' and before the spring they will know each other ; and in twelve or eighteen month ' time , if all go well , will be domicil at 's ' ; and then the kind - hear lady give herself some not undeserved praise for she match genius . be take a little by surprise , but the matter end in she promising to go to , for at any rate a week or two ; and on the day previous to that on which she father drive out to , she have have herself drive out to . Thorne would not perplex she with she embryo lord on that same evening , think that she would allow she a few hour to make herself at home ; but on the follow morning arrive . ' and now , ' say Thorne to herself ,' I must contrive to throw they in each other 's way . ' that same day , after dinner , , with a assume air of dignity which she could no maintain , with tear that she could not suppress , with a flutter which she could not conquer , and a joy which she could not hide , tell
tell that she be engage to marry , and that it behove she to get back home to as quick as she could . to say simply that Thorne be rejoice at the success of the scheme , would give a very faint idea of she feeling on the occasion . my reader may probably have dreamt before now that they have have before they some terrible long walk to accomplish , some journey of twenty or thirty mile , a amount of labou frightful to anticipate , and that immediately on start they have ingeniously find some accommodating short cut which have bring they without fatigue to they work 's end in five minute . Thorne be wake feeling be somewhat of the same nature . my reader may perhaps have have to do with child , and may on some occasion have promise to they young charge some great gratification intend to come off , perhaps at the end of the winter , or at the beginning of summer . the impatient juveniles , however , will not wait , and clamorously demand they treat before they go to bed . Thorne have a sort of feeling that a inexperienced gunner , who have ill calculate the length of the train that he have laid . the gunpowder explode much too soon and poor Thorne feel that she be blow up by the strength of she own petard . Thorne have have lover of she own , but they have be gentleman of old - fashioned and deliberate habit . be heart also have not always be hard , though she be still a virgin spinster ; but it have never yield in this way at the first assault . she have intend to bring together a middle - aged studious clergyman , and a discreet matron who might possibly be induce to marry again ; and in do she have throw fire among tinder . well , it be all as it should be , but she do feel perhaps a little put out by the precipitancy of she own success ; and perhaps a little vexed at the readiness of to be woo . she say , however , nothing about it to any one , and ascribe it all to the altered manners of the new age . they mother and grandmother be perhaps a little more deliberate ; but , it be admit on all side that thing be conduct very differently now that in former time . for atch Thorne know of the matter , a couple of hour might be quite sufficient under the new regime to complete that for which she in she ignorance have allot twelve month . but we must not pass over the wooing so cavalierly . it have be tell , with perhaps tedious accuracy , how dispose of two of she lover at ; and it must also be tell with equal accuracy , and if possible with less tedium , how she encounter . it can not be deny that when accept be invitation , she remember that be in the parish of 's . since she interview with the signora she have do little else than think about , and the appeal that have be make to she . she could not bring herself to believe or try to bring herself to believe , that what she have be tell be untrue . think of it how she would , she could not but accept it as a fact that be fond of she ; and then when she go further , and ask herself the question , she could not but accept it as a fact also that she be fond of he . if it be destin for she to be the partner of he hope and sorrow , to whom she could she look for friendship so properly as to ? this invitation be like a ordained step towards the fulfilment of she destiny , and when she also hear that be expect to be at on the follow day , it seem as though all the world be conspir in she favour . well , do she not deserve it ? in that affair of , have not all the world conspire against she ? she could not , however , make herself easy and at home . when in the evening after dinner Thorne expatiate on the excellence of 's qualitie , she hint that any little rumour which might be ill - naturedly spread abroad concern he really mean nothing , find herself unable to answer . when Thorne go a little further and declare that she do not know a prettier vicarage - house in the country than 's , remember the project bow - window and the project priestess still hold she tongue ; though she ear tingle with the conviction that all the world would know that she be in love with . well ; what could that matter if they could only meet and tell each other what each now long to tell ? and they do meet . come early in the day , and find the two lady together at work in the drawing - room . , who have she know all the truth would have vanish into air at once , have no conception that she immediate absence would be a blessing , and remain chat with they till luncheon - time . could talk about nothing but the 's beauty , would discuss no people but the . this be very distressing to , and not very satisfactory to . but yet there be evidence of innocence in he open avowal of admiration . and then they have lunch , and then go out on parish duty ; and and Thorne be leave to take a walk together . ' do you think the be so lovely as people say
say ? ' ask as they be come home . ' she be very beautiful certainly , very beautiful , ' Thorne answer ; ' but I do not know that any one consider she lovely . she be a woman all man would like to look at ; but few I imagine would be glad to take she to they heart , even be she unmarried and not afflict as she be . ' there be some comfort in this . make the most of it till she get back to the house . she be then leave alone in the drawing - room , and just as it be get dark come in . it be a beautiful afternoon in the beginning of , and be sit in the window to get the advantage of the last daylight for she novel . there be a fire in the comfortable room , but the weather be not cold enough to make it attractive ; and as she could see the sun set from where she sit , she be not very attentive to she book . when he enter stand a while with he back to the fire in he usual way , merely utter a few commonplace remark about the beauty of the weather , while he pluck up courage for the more interesting converse . it can not probably be say that he have resolve then and there to make a offer to . we believe seldom make such resolve . and have do so , it be true ; but gentlemen generally propose without any absolutely define determination as to they do so . be now the case with . ' it be a lovely sunset , ' say , answer he on the dreadfully trite subject which he have choose . could not see the sunset from the hearth - rug , as he have to go close to she . ' very lovely , ' say he , stand modestly so far away from she be to avoid touch the flounce of she dress . then it appear that he have nothing further to say ; so after gaze for a moment in silence at the brightness of the setting sun , he return to the fire . find that it be quite impossible for herself to commence a conversation . in the first place she could find nothing to say ; word , which be generally plenty enough with she , would not come to she relief . and , moreover , do what she could , she could hardly prevent herself from crying . ' do you like ? ' say , speak from the safely distant position which he have assume on the hearth - rug . ' yes , indeed , very much ! ' 'I do not mean and . I know you like they ; but the style of the house . there be something about old - fashioned mansion , build as this be , and old - fashioned garden , that to I be especially delightful . ' 'I like everything old - fashioned , ' say ; 'old - fashioned thing be so much the honestest . ' 'I do not know about that , ' say , gently laugh . ' that be a opinion on which very much may be say on either side . it be strange how widely the world be divide on a subject which so nearly concern we all , and which be so close beneath we eye . some think that we be quickly progress towards perfection , while other imagine that virtue be disappear from the earth . ' ' and you , , what do you think ? ' say . she feel somewhat surprised at the tone which this conversation be take , and yet she be quite relieved at he say something which enable herself to speak without show any emotion . ' what do I think , ? ' and then he rumble he money with he hand in he trousers pocket , and look and speak very little like a thrive lover . ' it be the bane of my life that on important subject I acquire no fix opinion . I think , and think , and go on thinking ; and yet my thought be run over in different direction . I hardly know whether or no we do lead more confidently than we fathers do on those high hope to which we profess to aspire . ' 'I think the world grow more worldly every day , ' say . ' that be because you see more of it than when you be younger . but we should hardly judge by what we see , -- we see so very very little . ' there be then a pause for a while , during which continue to turn over he shilling and half - crown . ' if we believe in , we can hardly think that mankind in general will now be allow to retrograde . ' , whose mind be certainly engage otherwise than on the general state of mankind , make no answer to this . she feel thoroughly dissatisfied with herself . she could not force she thought away from the topic on which the signora have speak to she in so strange a way , and yet she know that she could not converse with in a unrestrained natural tone till she do so . she be most anxious not to show to he any special emotion , and yet she feel that if he look at she he would at once see that she be not at ease . but he do not look at she . instead of do so , he leave the fire - place and begin walk up and down the room . take up she book resolutely ; but
but she could not read , for there be a tear in she eye , and do what she would it fall on she cheek . when 's back be turn to she she wip it away ; but another be soon come down she face in its place . they would come ; not a deluge of tear that would have betraye she at once , but one by one , single monitor . do not observe she closely , and they pass unseen . , thus pass up and down the room , take four of five turn before he speak another word , and sit equally silent with she face bend over she book . she be afraid that she tear would get the better of she , and be prepare for a escape from the room , when in he walk stand opposite to she . he do not come close up , but stand exactly on the spot to which he course bring he , and then , with he hand under he coat tail , thus make a confession . ' , ' say he , 'I owe you retribution for a great offence of which I have be guilty towards you . ' 's heart beat so that she could not trust herself to say that he have never be guilty of any offence . so then go on . 'I have think much of it since , and I be now aware that I be wholly unwarranted in put to you a question which I once ask you . it be indelicate on my part , and perhaps unmanly . no intimacy which may exist between myself and you connection , , could justify it . nor could the acquaintance which exist between ourselves . ' the word acquaintance struck cold on 's heart . be this to she doom after all ? 'I therefore think it right to beg you pardon in a humble spirit , and I now do so . ' what be to say to this ? she could not say much , because she be cry , and yet she must say something . she be most anxious to say that something graciously , kindly , and yet not in such a manner as to betray herself . she have never feel herself so much at a loss for word . ' indeed I take no offence , . ' 'Oh , but you do ! and have you not do so , you would not have be yourself . you be as right to be offend , as I be wrong to so offend you . I have not forgive myself , but I hope to hear that you forgive I . ' she be now past speak calmly , though she still continue to hide she tear , and , after pause a moment in vain for she reply , be walk off towards the door . she feel that she could not allow he to go unanswered without grievously sinn against all charity ; so , rise from she seat , she gently touch he arm and say : 'Oh , , do not go till I speak to you ! I do forgive you . you know that I forgive you . ' he take the hand that have so gently touch he arm , and then gaze into she face as if he would peruse there , as though write in a book , the whole future destiny of he life ; and as he do so , there be a sober and seriousness in he own countenance , which find herself unable to sustain . she could only look down upon the carpet , let she tear trickle as they would , and leave she hand within he . it be but for a minute that they stand so , but the duration of that minute be sufficient to make it ever memorable to both . be sure now that she be love . no word , be they eloquence what it might , could be more impressive than that eager , melancholy gaze . why do he look into she eye ? why do he not speak to she ? could it be that he look for she to make the first sign ? and he , though he know little of woman , even he know that he be love . he have only to ask and it would be all he own , that inexpressible loveliness , those ever speak but yet now mute eye , that feminine brightness and eager loving spirit which have so attract he since first he have encounter it at 's . it might , must all be he own now . on no other supposition be it possible that she should allow she hand to remain thus clasp within he own . he have only to ask . ah ! but that be the difficulty . do a minute suffice for all this ? Nay , perhaps it might be more than a minute . ' --' at last he say , and then stop himself . if he could not speak , how be she to do so ? he have call she by she name , the same name that any merest stranger would have use ! she withdraw she hand from he , and move as though to return to she seat . ' ! ' he then say , in he softest tone , as though the courage be still afraid of give offence , by the freedom which he take . she look slowly , gently , almost piteously up into he face . there be at any rate no anger there to deter he . ' ! ' he again exclaim ; and in a moment he have she clasp to he bosom . how this be
be do , whether the do be with he , or she , whether she have fly thither conquer by the tenderness of he voice , or he with a violence not likely to give offence have draw she to he breast , neither of they know ; nor can I declare . there be now that sympathy between they which hardly admit of individual motion . they be one and the same , -- one flesh , -- one spirit , -- one life . ' , my own , my own , my wife ! ' she venture to look at he through she tear , and he , bow he face down over hers , press he lip upon she brow ; he virgin lip , which since a beard first grow upon he ching , have never yet taste the luxury of a woman 's cheek . she have be tell that she yea must be yea , or she nay , nay ; but she be call on for neither the one nor the other . she tell that she be engage to , but no such word have pass between they , no promise have be ask or give . 'Oh , let I go , ' say she ; ' let I go now . I be too happy to remain , -- let I go , that I may be alone . ' he do not try to hinder she ; he do not repeat he kiss ; he do not press another on she lip . he might have do so , have he be so minded . she be now all he own . he take he arm from round she waist , he arm that be trembl with a new delight , and let she go . she fle like a roe to she own chamber , and then , have turn the bolt , she enjoy the full luxury of she love . she idolise , almost worship this man who have so meekly beg she pardon . and he be now she own . oh , how she weep and cry and laugh , as the hope and fear and misery of the last few week pass in remembrance through she mind . ! that any one should have da to think that she who have be choose by he could possibly have mate herself with ! that they should have da to tell he , also , and subject she bright happiness to such a needless risk ! and then she smile with joy as she think of all the comfort that she could give he ; not that he care for comforts , but that it would be so delicious for she to give . she get up and ring for she maid that she might tell she little boy of he new father ; and in she own way she do tell he . she desire she maid to leave she , in order that she might be alone with she child ; and there , while he lay sprawling on the bed , she pour forth the praise , so unmeaning to he , of the man she have select to guard he infancy . she could not be happy , however , till she have make take the child to himself , and thus , as it be , adopt he as he own . the moment the idea struck she she take the baby in she arm , and , open she door , run quickly down to the drawing - room . she at once find , by the step still pace on the floor , that he be there ; and a glance within the room tell she that he be alone . she hesitate a moment , and then hurrie in with she precious charge . meet she in the middle of the room . ' there , ' say she , breathless with she haste ; ' there , take he -- take he and love he . ' take the little fellow from she , and kiss he again and again , pray to bless he . ' he shall be all as my own -- all as my own , ' say he . , as she stoop to take back she child , kiss the hand that hold he , and then rush back with she treasure to she chamber . it be then that 's younger daughter be win for the second time . at dinner neither she nor be very bright , but they silence occasion no remark . in the drawing - room , as we have before say , she tell Thorne what have occur . the next morning she return to , and go over with he budget of news to the archdeacon . as be not there , he could only satisfy himself by tell Grantly how that he intend himself the honour of become she brother - in - law . in the ecstasy of she joy at hearing such tiding , vouchsaf he a warmer welcome than any he have yet receive from . ' good heaven ! ' she exclaim -- it be the general exclamation of the rectory . ' poor ! dear . what monstrous injustice have be do she !-- well , it shall all be make up now . ' and then she think of the signora . ' what lie people tell , ' she say to herself . but people in this matter have tell no lie at all . the Thorne leave the dining - room , have form no intention of revealing to she what have occur ; but when she be seat beside she hostess on the sofa the secret drop from she almost unaware . be but a bad hypocrite , and she find herself quite
quite unable to continue talk about , as though he be a stranger , while she heart be full of he . when , pursue she own scheme with discreet zeal , ask the young widow whether , in she opinion , it would not be a good thing for to get married , she have nothing for it but to confess the truth . 'I suppose it would , ' say , rather sheepishly . Thorne amplify on the idea . 'Oh , , ' say , ' he be go to be marry . I be engage to he . ' now Thorne know very well that there have be no such engagement when she have be walk with in the morning . she have also hear enough to be tolerably sure that there have be no preliminary to such a engagement . she be , therefore , as we have before describe , take a little by surprise . but , nevertheless , she embrace she guest , and cordially congratulate she . have no opportunity of speak another word to Arabin that even , except such word as all the world might hear ; and these , as may be suppose , be few enough . Thorne do she best to leave they in privacy ; but , who know nothing of what have occur , and another guest , a friend of he , entirely interfere with she good intention . so poor have to go to bed without one sign of affection . she state , nevertheless , be not to be pitie . the next morning she be up early . it be probable , she think , that by go down a little before the usual hour of breakfast , she might find alone in the dining - room . might it not be that she would calculate that a interview would thus be possible ? thus think , be dress a full hour before the time fix at the household for morning prayer . she do not at once go down . she be afraid to seem to be too anxious to meet she lover ; though , heaven know , she anxiety be intense enough . she therefore sit herself down at she window , and repeatedly look at she watch , nurse she child till she think she might venture forth . when she find herself at the dining - room door , she stand a moment , hesitate to turn the handle ; but when she hear 's voice inside she hesitat no longer . she object be defeat , and she might now go in as soon as she like without the slightest imputation on she delicacy . and be stand on the hearth - rug , discuss the merit of the colt ; or rather , be discuss , and be listen . that interesting animal have rub the stump of he tail against the wall of he stable , and occasion much uneasiness to the master of the horse . have but wait another minute , Thorne would have be in the stable . Thorne , when he see he lady guest , repress he anxiety . the colt must do without he . and so the three stood , say little or nothing to each other , till at last the master of the house , find that he could no longer bear the present state of suspense respect he favourite young steed , make a elaborate apology to , and escape . as he shut the door behind he , almost wish that he have remaine . it be not that she be afraid of , but she hardly yet know how to address he . he , however , soon relieve she from she embarrassment . he come up to she , and take bother she hand in he , he say , , , you and I be to be man and wife . be it so ? ' she look up into he face , and she lip for themselves into a single syllable . she utter no sound , but he could read the affirmative plainly in she face . ' it be a great trust , ' say he , 'a very great trust . ' ' it be -- it be , ' say , not exactly take what he have say in the sense that he have mean . ' it be a very great trust , and I will do my utmost to deserve it . ' ' and I also will do my utmost to deserve it , ' say very solemnly . and then , win he arm round she waist , he stand there gaze at the fire , and she with she head lean in he shoulder , stand by he , well satisfied with she position . they neither of they speak , or find any want of speaking . all that be needful for they to say have be say . the yea , yea , have be speak by in she own way -- and that way have be perfectly satisfactory to . and now it remain to they each to enjoy the assurance of the other 's love . and how great that luxury be ! how far it surpass any other pleasure which have allow to he creature ! and to a woman 's heart how doubly delightful ! when the ivy have find its tower , when the delicate creeper have find its strong wall , we know how the parasite plant grow and prosper . they be not create to stretch forth they branch alone , and endure without protection the summer 's sun and the winter 's storm . they but spread themselves on the ground , and cower unseen in the dingy shade . but when they have find they firm supporter ,
, how wonderful be they beauty ; how all pervading and victorious ! what be the turret without its ivy , or the high garden wall without the jasmine which give it its beauty and fragrance ? the hedge without the honeysuckle be but a hedge . there be 's feeling still half exist , but now half conquer by the force of human nature , that a woman should be asham of she love till the husband 's right to she compel she to acknowledge it . we would fain preach a different doctrine . a woman should glory in she love ; but on that account let she take the more care that it be such as to justify she glory . do glory in hers , and she feel , and have cause to feel , that it deserv to be hold as glorious . she could have stand there for hour with he arm around she , have fate and Thorne permit it . each moment she creep nearer to he bosom , and feel more and more certain that there be she home . what now to she be the archdeacon 's arrogance , she sister 's coldness , or she dear father 's weakness ? what need she care for the duplicity of such friend as ? she have find the strong shield that should guard she from all wrongs , the trusty pilot that should henceforward guide she through the shoal and rock . she would give up the heavy burden of she independence , and once more assume the position of a woman , and the duty of a trusting and love wife . and he , too , stand there fully satisfied with he place . they be both look intently on the fire , as though they could read there they future fate , till at last turn she face towards he . ' how sad you be , ' she say , smile ; and indeed he face be , if not sad , at least serious . ' how sad you be , love ! ' ' , ' say he , look down at she ; 'no , certainly not sad . ' she sweet loving eye be turn towards he , and she smile softly as he answer she . the temptation be too strong even for the demure propriety of , and , bend over she , he press he lip to hers . immediately after this , Thorne appear , and they be both delighted to hear that the tail of the colt be not materially injured . it have be 's intention to hurry over to as soon as possible after he return to , in order to secure the support of he daughter in he meditated revolt against the archdeacon as touch the deanery ; but he be spare the additional journey by hear that have return unexpectedly home . as soon as he have read she note he start off , and find she wait for he in she own house . how much each of they have to tell the other , and how certain each be that the story which he or she have to tell would astonish the other ! ' my dear , I be so anxious to see you , ' say , kiss he daughter . 'Oh , papa , I have so much to tell you ! ' say the daughter , return he embrace . ' my dear , they have offer I the deanery ! ' say , anticipate by the suddenness of the revelation the tiding which have to give he . 'Oh , papa , ' say she , forget she own love and happiness in she joy at the surprising news ; 'oh , papa , can it be possible ? dear , papa , how thoroughly , thoroughly happy that make I ! ' ' but , my dear , I think it best to refuse it . ' 'Oh , papa ! ' 'I be sure you will agree with I , , when I explain it to you . you know , my dear how old I be . if I live , I -- ' ' but , papa , I must tell you about myself . ' ' well , my dear . ' 'I do wonder how you will take it . ' ' take what ? ' ' if you do not rejoice at it , if it do not make you happy , if you do not encourage I , I shall break my heart . ' ' if that be the case , Nelly , I certainly will encourage you . ' ' but I fear you will not . I do so fear you will not . and yet you can not but think I be the most fortunate woman live on 's . ' ' be you , dearest ? then I certainly will rejoice with you . come , Nelly , come to I , and tell I what it be . ' 'I be go --' he lead she to the sofa , and seate himself beside she , with both she hand in he . ' you be go to be marry , Nelly . be not that it ? ' ' yes , ' she say , faintly . ' that be if you will approve ;' and then she blush as she remember the promise which she have so lately volunteer to he , and which she have so utterly forgotten in make she engagement with . think for a moment who the man could be whom he be to be call upon to welcome as he son - in - law . a week since he would have have no doubt whom to name . in that case he would have be prepare
prepare to give he sanction , although he would have do so with a heavy heart . now he know that at any rate it would not be , though he be perfectly at a loss to guess who could possibly have fill he place . for a moment he think that the man might be , and he very soul sank within he . ' well , Nelly ? ' 'Oh , papa , promise I that , for my sake , you will love he . ' ' come , Nelly , come ; tell I who it be . ' ' but you will love he , papa ? ' ' Dearest , I must love any one that you love . ' then she turn he face to he , and whisper into he ear the name of . no man that she could have name could have more surprised or more delighte he . have he look round the world for a son - in - law to he taste , he could have select no one whom he would have prefer to . he be a clergyman ; he hold a living in the neighbourhood ; he be of a set to which all 's own partiality most closely adhere ; he be the great friend of ; and he be , moreover , a man of whom kknow nothing but what he approve . nevertheless he surprise be so great as to prevent the immediate expression of he joy . he have never think of in connection with he daughter ; he have never imagine that they have any feeling in common . he have fear that he daughter have be make hostile to clergyman of 's stamp by she intolerance of the archdeacon 's pretension . have he be put to wish , he might have wish for for a son - in - law ; but have he be put to guess , the name would never have occur to he . ! ' he exclaim ; ' impossible ! ' 'Oh , papa , for heaven 's sake do not say anything against he ! if you do love I , do not say anything against he . oh , papa , it be do , and must not be undone -- oh , papa ! ' ! where be the promise that she would make no choice for herself without she father 's approval ? she have chosen , and now demand he acquiescence . 'Oh , papa , be not he good ? be not he noble ? be not he religious , high - minded , everythe that a good man possibly can be ? ' and she cling to she father , beseech he for he consent . ' my Nelly , my child , my own daughter ! he be ; he be noble and good and high - minded ; he be all that a woman can love and admire . he shall be my son , my own son . he shall be as close to my heart as you be . my Nelly , my child , my happy , happy child ! ' we need not pursue the interview any further . by degrees they return to the subject of the new promotion . try to prove to he , as the have do , that he age could be no bar to he be a very excellent dean ; but those argument have now even less weight than before . he say little or nothing , but sit meditative . every now and then he would kiss he daughter , and say , ' yes , ' or ' no , ' or ' very true , ' or ' well , my dear , I can not quite agree with you there , ' but he could not be get to enter sharply into the question of 'to be or not to be 's dean of . of she and she happiness , of and he virtue , he would talk as much as desire ; and , to tell the truth , that be not a little ; but about the deanery he would now say nothing further . he have get a new idea into he head -- why should not be the new dean ? the Archdeacon be satisfy with the state of affair the archdeacon , in he journey into , have be assure by Hard that all they prognostication about and be groundless . , however , have find it very difficult to shake he son - in - law 's faith in he own acuteness . the matter have , to , be so plainly corroborate by such patent evidence , borne out by such endless circumstance , that he at first refuse to take as true the positive statement which make to he of 's own disavowal of the impeachment . but at last he yield in a qualified way . he bring himself to admit that he would at the present regard he past conviction as a mistake ; but in do this he so guard himself , that if , at any future time , should come forth to the world as , he might still be able to say : ' there , I tell you so . remember what you say and what I say ; and remember also for come year , that I be right in this matter -- as in all other . ' he carry , however , he concession so far as to bring himself to undertake to call at 's house , and he do call accordingly , while the father and the daughter be yet in the middle of they conference . have have so much to hear and to say that he have forget to advertise of the honour that await
await she , and she hear she brother - in - law 's voice in the hall , while she quite unprepared to see he . ' there be the archdeacon , ' she say , spring up . ' yes , my dear . he tell I to tell you that he would come to see you ; but , to tell the truth , I have forget all about it . ' fle away , regardless of all she father 's entreaty . she could not now , in the first hour of she joy , bring herself to bear all the archdeacon 's retraction , apology , and congratulation . he would have so much to say , and would be so tedious in say it ; consequently , the archdeacon , when he be show into the drawing - room , find on one there but . ' ' you must excuse , ' say . ' be anything the matter ? ' ask the doctor , who at once anticipate that the whole truth about have at last come out . ' well , something be the matter . I wonder whether you will be much surprised ? ' the archdeacon see by he father - in - law 's manner that after all he have nothing to tell he about . ' no , ' say he , ' certainly not -- nothing will ever surprise I again . ' very many man nowadays , besides the archdeacon , adopt or affect to adopt the nil admirari doctrine ; but nevertheless , to judge from they appearance , they be just as subject to sudden emotion as they grandfather and grandmother be before they . ' what do you think have do ? ' ! it be nothing about that daughter of 's , I hope ? ' 'no , not that woman , ' say , enjoy he joke in he sleeve . ' not that woman ! be he go to do anything about any woman ? why can not you speak out if yo have anything to say ? there be nothing I hate so much as these sort of mystery . ' ' there shall be no mystery with you , archdeacon ; though , of course , it must go no further at present . ' ' well . ' ' . you must promise I you will tell no one else ? ' ' Nonsense ! ' exclaim the archdeacon , who be become angry in he suspense . ' you can not have any secret about . ' ' only this -- that he and be engage . ' it be quite clear to see by the archdeacon 's face , that he do not believe a word of it . ' ! it be impossible ! ' ' , at any rate , have just tell I so . ' ' it be impossible , ' repeat the archdeacon . ' well , I can not say I think it be impossible . it certainly take I by surprise ; but that do not make it impossible . ' ' she must be mistaken . ' assure he that there be no mistake ; that he would find , on return home , that have be at with the express object of make to same declaration , that even Thorne know all about it ; and that , in fact , the thing be as clearly settle as any such arrangement between a lady and a gentleman could be . ' good heaven ! ' say the archdeacon , walk up and down 's draw - room . ' good heaven ! good heaven ! ' now , these exclamation certainly betoken faith . properly gather from it that , at last , do believe the fact . the first utterance clearly evince a certain amount of distaste at the information he have receive ; the second , simply indicate surprise ; and the tone of the third , fancie that he could catch a certain gleam of satisfaction . the archdeacon have truly express the workings of he mind . he could not but be disgusted to find how utterly astray he have be in all he anticipation . have he only be lucky enough to have suggest the marriage himself when he first bring into the country , he character for judgment and wisdom would have receive a addition which would have class he at any rate next to . and why have he not do so ? might he not have foreseen that would want a wife in the parsonage ? he have foresee that would want a husband ; but should he not also have perceive that be a man much more likely to attract she than ? the archdeacon find that he have be at fault , and of course could not immediately get over he discomfiture . then he surprise be intense . how sly the pair of young turtle dove have be with he . how egregiously they have hoax he . he have preach at against she fancied attachment to , at the very time she be in love with he own protege , ; and have absolutely take that same into he confidence with reference to the dread of 's alliance . it be very natural that the archdeacon should feel surprise . but there be also great ground for satisfaction . look at the match by itself , it be the very thing to help the doctor out of he difficulty . in the first place , the assurance that he should never have for he brother - in - law be in itself a great comfort . then be , of all man , one with whom it would best suit he to be utterly connect . but the crowning comfort be the blow that this
this marriage would give to . he have now certainly lose he wife ; rumou be begin to whisper that he might possibly lose he position in the palace ; and if would only be true , the great danger of all would be surmount . in such case it might be expect that would own himself vanquish , and take himself altogether away from . and so the archdeacon would again be able to breath the pure air . ' well , well , ' say he . ' good heaven ! good heaven ! ' and the tone of the fifth exclamation make fully aware that content be reign in the archdeacon 's bosom . and then slowly , gradually , and craftily , propound he own new scheme . why should not be the new dean ? slowly , gradually , thoughtfully , fall into he father - in - law 's view . much as he like , sincere as he be in he admiration for that gentleman 's ecclesiastical ability , he would not have sanction a measure which would have rob he father - in -law of he fairly - earn promotion , be it at all practicable to induce he father - in - law to accept the promotion which he have earn . but the archdeacon have , on a former occasion , receive proof of the obstinacy with which could adhere to he own view in opposition to the advice of all he friend . he know tolerably well that nothing would induce the meek , mild man before he to take the high place offer to he , if he think it wrong to do so . know this , he also say to himself more than once ; ' why should not be dean of ? ' it be at last arrange between they that they would together start to by the earliest train on the follow morning , make a little detour to Oxford on they journey . 's counsel , they imagine , might perhaps be of assistance to they . these matter settle , the archdeacon hurrie off , that he might return to Plumstead and prepare for he journey . the day be extremely fine , and he come into the city in a open gig . as he be drive up the he encounter at a crossing . have he not pull up rather sharply , he would have run over he . the two have never speak to each other since they have meet on a memorable occasion in the bishop 's study . they do not speak now ; but they look at each other full in the face , and 's countenance be as impudent , as triumphant , as defiant as ever . have not know to the contrary , he would have imagine that he enemy have win the deanship , the wife , and all the rich honour , for which he have be strive . as it be he have lost everything that he have in the world , and have just receive he conge from the bishop . in leave the town the archdeacon drive by the well - remember entrance of 's hospital . there , at the gate , be a large , untidy , farmer 's wagon , laden with untidy - look furniture ; and there , inspect the arrival , be good -- not dress in she best -- not very clean in she apparel -- not graceful as to she bonnet and shawl ; or , indeed , with many feminine charms as to she whole appearance . she be busy at domestic work in she new house , and have just venture out , expect to see no one on the arrival of the family chattel . the archdeacon be down upon she before she know where she be . she acquaintance with or he family be very slight indeed . the archdeacon , as a matter of course , know every clergyman in the archdeaconry ; it may almost be say the diocese , and have some acquaintance , more or less intimate , with they wife and family . with he have be concerned on various matter of business ; but of . he have see very little . now , however , he be in too gracious a mood to pass she by unnoticed . the Quiverful , one and all , have look for the bitterest hostility from ; they know he anxiety for should return to he old home at the hospital , and they do not know that a new home have be offer to he at the deanery . be therefore not a little surprised and not a little rejoiced also , at the tone at which she be address . ' how do you do , ?-- how do you do ? ' say he , stretch he left hand out of the gig , as he speak to she . 'I be very glad to see you employ in so pleasant and useful a manner ; very glad indeed . ' thank he , and shake hand with he , and look into he face suspiciously . she be not sure whether the congratulation and kindness be or be not ironical . ' pray tell from I ,' he continue , ' that I be rejoice at he appointment . it be a comfortable place , , and a comfortable house , and I be very glad to see you in it . good - bye , good - bye . ' and he drive on , leave the lady well - pleased and astonished at he good nature . on the whole thing be go well with the archdeacon , and he could afford to be charitable to . he look forth from he gig smilingly on all the world
world , and forgave every one in they sins , except only and . have he see the bishop , he would have feel inclin to pat even he kindly on the head . he determine to go home by 's . this would take he some three mile out of he way ; but he feel that he could not leave Plumstead comfortably without say one word of good fellowship to . when he reach the parsonage the vicar be still out ; but , from what he have hear , he do not doubt but that he would meet he on the road between they two house . he be right in this , for about halfway home , at a narrow turn , he come upon , who be on horseback . ' well , well , well , well , ' say the archdeacon loudly , joyously , and with supreme good humour ; ' well , well , well , well ; so , after all , we have no further cause to fear . ' 'I hear from that they have offer the deanery to , ' say the other . have lose more than the deanery , I find , ' and then the archdeacon laugh jocosely . ' come , come , , you have keep you secret well enough . I know all about it now . ' 'I have have no secret , archdeacon , 'say the other with a quiet smile . ' none at all -- not for a day . it be only yesterday that I know my own good fortune , and to - day I go over to to ask you approval . from what have say to I , I be lead to hope that I shall have it . ' 'With all my heart , with all my heart , ' say the archdeacon cordially , hold he friend by the hand . ' it be just as I would have it . she be a excellent young woman ; she will not come to you empty - hand ; and I think she will make you a good wife . if she do she duty by you as she sister do by I , you will be a happy man ; that be all I can say . ' and as he finish speak , a tear might have be observe in each of the doctor 's eye . ' warmly return the archdeacon 's grasp , but he say little . he heart be too full for speak , and he could not express the gratitude which he feel . understand he as well as though he have speak for a hour . ' and mind , , ' say he , ' no one but myself shall tie the knot . we will get out to , and it shall come off there . I will make stir herself , and we will do it in style . I must be off to to - morrow on special business . Hard go with I . but I will be back before you bride have get she wedding - dress ready . ' and so they parte . on he journey home the archdeacon occupy he mind with preparation for the marriage festivities . he make a great resolve that he would ato to for all the injury he have do she by the munificence of he future treatment . he would show she what be the difference in he eye between a and a Arabin . on one other thing also he decide with a firm mind : if the affair of the dean should not be settle in 's favour , nothing should prevent he put a new front and bow - window to the dining - room at 's parsonage . ' so we be sell after all , , ' say he to he wife , accost she with a kiss as soon as he enter he house . he do not call he wife above twice or thrice in a year , and these occasion be great high day . ' have have more sense then we give she credit for , ' say Grantly . and there be great content in Plumstead rectory that even ; and promise she husband that she would now open she heart , and take into it . she have decline to do so . to the palace and we must now take leave of , and of the bishop , and of . these leave - takings in novel be as disagreeable as they be in real life ; not so sad , indeed , for they want the reality of sadness ; but quite as perplexing , and generally less satisfactory . what novelist , what Field , what , what , or , or , can impart a interest to the last chapter of he fictitious history ? promise of two child and superhuman happiness be of no avail , nor assurance of extreme respectability carry to a age far exceed that usually allot to mortal . the sorrow of we heroe and heroine , they be you delight , oh public ! they sorrow , or they sins , or they absurdity ; not they virtue , good sense , and consequent rewards . when we begin to tind we final page with couleur de rise , as in accordance with fix rule we must do , we altogether extinguish we own power of pleasing . when we become dull we offend you intellect ; and we must become dull or we should offend you taste . a late writer , wish to sustain he interest to the last page , hang he hear at the end of the third volume . the consequence be , that no one should read he novel . and who can
can apportion out and dovetail he incident , dialogue , character , and descriptive morsel , so as to fit they all exactly into 439 page , without either compresse they unnaturally , or extend they artificially at the end of he labour ? do I not myself know that I be at this moment in want of a dozen page , and that I be sick with cudgell my brain to find they ? and then when everything be do , the kindest - hear critic of they all invariably twit we with the incompetency and lameness of we conclusion . we have either become idle and neglect it , or tedious and over -laboure it . it be insipid or unnatural , over - strained or imbecile . it mean nothing , or attempt too much . the last scene of all , as all last scene we fear must be : ' be second childishness , and mere , tooth , san eyes , san taste , san everything . ' I can only say that if some crintic , who thoroughly know he work , and have laboure on it till experience have make he perfect , will write the last fifty page of a novel in the way they should be write . I , for one , will in future do my best to copy the example . guide by my own light only , I despair of success . for the last week or ten day , have see nothing of , and very little of the bishop . he still live in the palace , and still go through he usual routine work ; but the confidential doings of the diocese have pass into other hand . he have see this clearly , and mark it well ; but it have not much disturb he . he have indulge in other hope till the bishop 's affair have become dull to he , and he be moreover aware that , as regard the diocese , have checkmate he . it have be explain , in the beginning of these page , how three or four be contende together as to who , in fact , should be bishop of . each of they have now admit to himself ( or boast to herself ) that be victorious in the struggle . they have go through a competitive examination of considerable severity , and she have come forth the winner , facile princep . have , for a moment , run she hard , but it be only for a moment . it have become , as it be , acknowledge that 's hospital should be the testing point between they , and now be already in the hospital , the proof of 's skill and courage . all this do not break 's spirit , because he have other hope . but , ala , at last there come to he a note from he friend , inform he that the deanship be dispose of . let we give he due . he do not lie prostrate , under this blow , or give himself to vain lamentation ; he do not henceforward despair of life , and call upon gods above and god below to carry he off . he sit himself down in he chair , count out what money he have in hand , for present purpose , and what other be come to he , bethotch himself as to the best sphere for he future exertion , and at once write off a letter to a rich sugar - refiner 's wife in , who , as he well know , be much give to the entertainment and encouragement of serious young evangelical clergyman . he be again , he say , ' upon the world , have find the air of a cathedral town , and the very nature of cathedral service , uncongenial to he spirit ' ; and then he sit awhile , make firm resolve as to he manner of parting from the bishop , and also as to he future conduct . ' at last he rise , and twitch he mantle blue , to -morrow to fresh wood and pasture new . ' receive a formal command to wait upon the bishop , he rise and proceed to obey it . he ring the bell and desire the servant to inform he master that if it suit he lordship , he , , be ready to wait upon he . the servant , who well understand that be no longer in the ascendant , bring back a message , say that , ' he lordship desire that would attend he immediately in he study . ' wait about ten minute more to prove he independence , and then go into the bishop 's room . there , as have expect , he find , together with she husband . ' Hum , ha -- Slope , please take a chair , ' say the gentleman bishop . ' pray be seat , , ' say the lady bishop . ' thank ye , thank ye , 'say , and walk round to the fire , he throw himself into one of the arm -chair that grac the hearth - rug . , ' say the bishop , ' it have become necessary that I should speak to you definitively on a matter that have for some time be press itself on my attention . ' ' may I ask whether the subject be in any way connect with myself ? ' say . ' it be so -- certainly , -- yes , it certainly be connect with yourself , . ' ' then , my lord , if I may be allow to express a wish , I would prefer that no discussion on the subject should take place between we in
in the presence of a third party . ' ' do not alarm yourself , , ' say , 'no discussion be at all necessary . the bishop merely intend to express he own wish . ' 'I merely intend , , to express my own wish -- no discussion will be at all necessary , ' say the bishop , reiterat he wife 's word . ' that be more , my lord , than we any of we can be sure of , ' say ; 'I cannot , however , force to leave the room ; nor can I refuse to remain here , if it be you lordship 's wish that I should do so . ' ' it be certainly he lordship 's wish , 'say . , ' begin the bishop , in a solemn , serious voice , ' it grieve I to have to find fault . it grieve I much to find fault with a clergyman ; but especially so with a clergyman in you position . ' ' why , what have I do amiss , my lord ? ' demand , loudly . ' what have you do amiss , ? ' say , stand erect before the culprit , and raise that terrible forefinger . ' do you dare to ask the bishop what you have do amiss ? do not you conscience --' ' , pray let it be understand , once for all , that I will have no word with you . ' 'Ah , sire , but you will have word , ' say she ; ' you must have word . why have you have so may word with that ? why have you disgrace yourself , you a clergyman , by constantly consort with such a woman as that -- with a married woman -- with one altogether unfit for a clergyman 's society ? ' ' at any rate , I be introduce to she in you drawing - room , ' return . ' and shamefully you behave there , ' say , ' most shamefully . I be wrong to allow you to remain in the house a day after what I then see . I should have insist on you instant dismissal . ' 'I have yet to learn , , that you have the power to insist either on my go from hence or on my staying here . ' ' what ! ' say the lady ; 'I be not to have the privilege of saying who shall and who shall not frequent my own drawing - room ! I be not to save my servants and dependent from have they moral corrupt by improper conduct ! I be not to save my own daughter from impurity ! I will let you see , , whether I have the power or whether I have not . you will have the goodness to understand that you no longer fill any situation about the bishop ; and as you room will be immediately want in the palace for another chaplain , I must ask you to provide yourself with apartment as soon as may be convenient to you . ' 'My lord , ' say , appeal to the bishop , and so turn he back completely on the lady , ' will you permit I to ask that I may have from you own lip and decision that you may have come to on this matter ? ' ' certainly , , certainly , ' say the bishop ; ' that be but reasonable . well , my decision be that you have better look for some other preferment . for the situation which you have lately hold I do not think you be well suit . ' ' and what , my lord , have be my fault ? ' ' that be one fault , ' say ; ' and a very abominable fault she be ; very abominable , and very disgraceful . , , fie ! you a evangelical clergyman indeed ! ' ' my lord , I desire to know for what fault I be turn out of you lordship 's house . ' ' you hear what say , ' say the bishop . ' when I publish the history of this transaction , my lord , as I decidedly shall do in my own vindication , I presume you will not wish I to state that you have discard I at you wife 's bidding -- because she have object to my be acquaint with another lady , the daughter of one of the prebendary of the chapter ? ' ' you may publish as you please , sir , ' say . ' but you will not be insane enough to publish any of you doings in . do you think I have not hear of you kneeling at that creature 's foot -- that be if she have any foot -- and of you constant slobber over she hand ? I advise you to beware , , of what you do and say . Clergymen have be unfrocked for less than what you have be guilty of . ' 'my lord , if this go on I shall be obliged to indict this woman -- I mean -- for defamation of character . ' 'I think , , you have better now retire , ' say the bishop . 'I will enclose to you a cheque for any balance that may be due to you ; and , under the present circumstance , it will of course be better for all party that you should leave the palace at the earliest possible moment . ' , however , you wish to remain in this neighbourhood , ' say , ' and will solemnly pledge yourself never again to see that woman , and will promise also to be more
more circumspect in you conduct , the bishop will mention you name to , who now want a curate at . the house be , I imagine , quite sufficient for you requirement : and there will moreover by a stipend of fifty pound a year . ' ' May forgive you , madam , for the manner in which you have treat I , ' say , look at she with a very heavenly look ; 'and remember this , madam , that you yourself may still have a fall ;' and he look at she with a very worldly look . ' as to the bishop , I pity he ! ' and so say , leave the room . thus end the intimacy of the of with he confidential chaplain . be right in this ; namely , that be not insane enough to publish to the world any of he doings in . he do not trouble he friend with any write statement of the iniquity of , or the imbecility of she husband . he be aware that it would be wise in he to drop for the future all allusion to he doings in the cathedral city . after the interview just record , he leave , shak the dust off he foot as he enter the railway carriage ; and he give no longing linger look after the cathedral towers , as the train hurrie he quickly out of they sight . it be well know that the family of the never starve ; they always fall on they foot like cat , and let they fall where they will , they live on the fat of the land . we do so . on he return to town he find that the sugar - refiner have die , and that the widow be inconsolable ; or , in other word , in want of consolation . consol she , and soon find himself settle with much comfort in the house in . he possess himself , also before long , of a church in the vicinity of the , and become known to fame as one of the most eloquent preacher and pious clergyman in that part of the metropolis . there let we leave he . of the bishop and he wife very little further need be say . from that time forth nothing material occur to interrupt the even course of they domestic harmony . very speedily , a further vacancy on the bench of bishop give the seat in the of , which he at first so anxiously long for . but by this time , he have become a wiser man . he do certainly take he seat , and occasionally register a vote in favour of government view on ecclesiastical matters . but he have thoroughly learn that he proper sphere of action lay in close contiguity with 's wardrobe . he never again aspire to disobey , or see even to wish for autocratic diocesan authority . if ever he think of freedom , he do so , as man think of the millennium , as of a good time which may be come , but which nobody expect to come in they day . might be say still to bloom , and be , at any rate , strong ; and the bishop have no reason to apprehend that he would be speedily visit with the sorrow of a widower 's life . he be still bishop of . he have so grac that throne , that the government have be adverse to translate he , even to higher duty . there may he remain , under safe pupilage , till the new - fangled manners of the age have discover he to be superannuate , and bestow on he a pension . as for , we prayer for she be that she may live for ever . the Possession of the DEANERy and the new Warden of the and the archdeacon together make they way to , and there , by dint of cunning argument , they induce the master of also to ask himself this momentous question : ' why should not be of ? ' he of course , for a while try he hand at persuading Hard that he be foolish , over-scrupulous , self - will , and weak - minded ; but he try in vain . if would not give way to , it be not likely that he would give way to ; more especially now that so admirable a scheme as that of induct into the deanery have be set on foot . when the master find that he eloquence be vain , and hear also that be about to become 's son - in - law , he confess that he also would , under such circumstance , be glad to see he old friend and protege , the fellow of he college , place in the comfortable position that be go a - begging . ' it might be the means , you know , master , of keep out , ' say the archdeacon with grave caution . ' he have no more chance of it , ' say the master , ' that we college chaplain . I know about it than that . ' Grantly have be right in she surmise . it be the master of who have be instrumental in represent in high place the claim of have from the government ; and he now consent to use he best endeavour towards get the offer transfer to . the three of they go on to together , and there they remain a week , to the great disgust of , and most probably also of . the minister be out of town in one direction , and he private secretary in another . the clerk who remain could do nothing
nothing in such a matter as this , and all be difficulty and confusion . the two doctor seem to have plenty to do ; they bustl here and they bustl there , and complain at they club in the evening that they have be drive off they leg ; but have no occupation . once or twice he suggest that he might perhaps return to . he request , however , be peremptorily refuse , and have nothing for it but to while away he time in . at length a answer from the great man come . the master of have make he proposition through the of . now the bishop , tough but newly gif with he diocesan honour , be a man of much weight in the clerico -political world . he be , if not as pious , at any rate as wise as , and have be with so much effect all thing to all man , that though he be great among the don of , he have be select for the most favourite seat on the bench by a . to he have make know he wish and he argument , and the bishop have make they know to the of . the marquis , who be of the , and who by most man be suppose to hold the highest office out of the cabinet , trafficke much in affair of this kind . he not only suggest the arrangement to the minister over a cup of coffee , stand on a drawing - room rug in , but he also favourably mention 's name in the ear of a distinguished person . and so the matter be arrange . the answer of the great man come , and be make of . the three clergyman who have come up to town on this important mission dine together with great glee on the day on which the news reach they . in a silent manner , they toast with full bumper of claret . the satisfaction of all of they be supreme . the master of have be successful in he attempt , and success be dear to we all . the archdeacon have trample upon , and have lift to high honour the young clergyman whom he have induce to quit the retirement and comfort of the university . so at least the archdeacon think ; though , to speak sooth , not he , but circumstance have trample on . but the satisfaction of be , of all perhaps , the most complete . he lay aside he usual melancholy manner , and bring forth little quiet joke from the utmost mirth of he heart ; he pok fun at the archdeacon about 's marriage , and quizze he for he improper love for . on the follow day they all return to . it be arrange that should know nothing of what have be do till he receive the minister 's letter from the hand of he embryo father - in - law . in order that no time be lose , a message have be send to he by the preceding night 's post , begge he to be at the deanery at the hour that the train from arrive . there be nothing in this which surprise . it have somehow get about through all bah that be the new dean , and all be prepared to welcome he with pealing bell and full heart . have certainly have a party ; there have certainly be those in who be prepared to congratulate he on he promotion with assume sincerity , but even he own party be not break - heart by he failure . the inhabitant of the city , even the high - soule ecstatic young lady of thirty - five , have begin to comprehend that they welfare and the welfare of the place , be connect in some mysterious manner with the daily chants of the bi-weekly anthem . the expenditure of the palace have not add greatly to the popularity of the bishop 's side of the question ; and , on the whole , there be a strong reaction . when it become known to all the world that be to be the new dean , all the world rejoice heartily . , as we have say , be not surprise at the summon which call he to the deanery . he have not as yet see Harding since have accept he , nor have he see he since he have learnt of he future father - in - law 's preferment . there be nothing more natural , more necessary , than that they should meet each other at the earliest possible moment . be wait at the deanery parlour when and be drive up from the station . there be some excitement in the bosom of they all , as they meet and shake hand ; but far too much to enable either of they to begin he story and tell it in a proper equable style of narrative . be some minute quite dumbfounded , and could only talk in short , spasmodic sentence about he love and good fortune . he slip in , as best he could , some sort of congratulation about the deanship , and then go on with he hope and fear -- hope that he might be receive as a son , and fear that he hardly deserve such good fortune . then he go back to the dean ; it be the most thoroughly satisfactory appointment , he say , of which he have ever hear . ' but ! but ! but --' say ; and then fail to get any further , he look imploringly at the archdeacon . ' the truth be , , ' say the doctor , ' that , after all you be not destin
destin to be the son - in - law to a dean . be I either : more be the pity . ' look to he for explanation . ' be not Hard to be the new dean ? ' ' it appear not , ' say the archdeacon . 's face fall a little , and he look from one to the other . it be plainly to be see from they both that there be no cause for unhappiness in the matter , at least not of a unhappiness to they ; but there be as yet no clarification of the mystery . ' think how old I be , ' say Harding imploringly . ' ! ' say the archdeacon . ' that be all very well , but it will not make a young man of I , ' say . ' and who be to be the dean ? ' ask . ' yes , that be the question , ' say the archdeacon . ' come , , since you obstinately refuse to be anything else , let we know who be to be the man . he have get the nomination in he pocket . ' with eye brim full of tear , pull out the letter and hand it to he future son - in - law . he try to make a little speech , but fail altogether . have give up the document , he turn round to the wall , feign to blow he nose , and then sit himself down on the old dean 's dingy horse - hair sofa . and here we find it necessary to bring we account of the interview to a end . can we pretend to describe the rapture with which be receive by he daughter . she weep with grief and with joy ; with grief that she father should , in he old age , still be without that rank and worldly position , which , accord to she idea , he have so well earn ; and with joy that he , she darl father , should have bestow on that other dear one the good thing of which he himself would not open he hand to take possession . and she , again show he weakness . in the melee of the exposal of they love and reciprocal affection , he find himself unable to resist the entreaty of all party that he lodging in the should be give up . would not live in the deanery , she say , unless she father liv there also . would not be dean , unless would be co -dean with he . the archdeacon declare that he father - in - law should not have he own way in everything , and carry he off to , that he might remain there till and be in a state to receive he at they own mansion . press by such argument as these , what could a weak man do but yield ? but there be yet another task which it behove to do before he could allow himself to be at rest . have be say in these page of the state of those remain old man who have live under he sway at the hospital . but not on this account must it be presume that he have forget they , or that in they state of anarchy and in they want of government he have omit to visit they . he visit they constantly , and have latterly give they to understand that they would soon be require to subscribe they adherence to a new master . there be now but five of they , one of they not have be but quite lately carry to he rest -- but five of the full number , which have hithertoo be twelve , and which be now to be raise to twenty - four , include woman . of these old , who for many year , have be the favourite of the late warden , be one ; and , who have be the humble mean from drive that warden from he home , be another . now resolve that he himself would introduce the new warden to the hospital . he feel that many circumstance might conspire to make the man receive Mr Quiverful with aversion and disrespect ; he feel also that might himself feel some qualm of conscience if he enter the hospital with a idea that he do so in hostility to he predecessor . therefore determined to walk in , arm in arm , with , and to ask from these man they respectful obedience to they new master . on return to , he find that have not yet sleep in the hospital house , or enter on he new duty . he accordingly make known to that gentleman he wish , and he proposition be not reject . it be a bright clear morning , though in , that and , arm in arm , walk through the hospital gate . it be one trait in we old friend 's character that he do nothing with parade . he omit , even in the more important doings of he life , that sort of parade by which most of we deem it necessary to grase we important doings . we have housewarming , christening , and gala day ; we keep , if not we own birthday , those of we child ; we be apt to fuss ourselves , if call upon to change we residence , and have , almost all of we , we little state occasion . , have no state occasion . when he leave he old house , he go forth from it with the same quiet composure as though he be merely take he daily walk ; and now that he re-enter it with
with another warden under he wing , he do so with the same quiet step and calm demeanour . he be a little less upright than he have be five year , nay , it be nearly six year ago ; he walk perhaps a little slower ; he footfall be perhaps a thought less firm ; otherwise one might have same that he be merely return with a friend under he arm . this friendliness be everything to . to he , even in he poverty , the think that he be supplant a brother clergyman so kind and courteous as , have be very bitter . under he circumstance it have be impossible for he to refuse the proffer boon ; he could not reject the bread that be offer to he child , or refuse to ease the heavy burden that have so long oppress that poor wife of he ; nevertheless , it have be very grievous to he to think that in go to the hospital he might encounter the ill will of he breth in the diocese . all this have fully comprehended . it be for such feeling as these , for the nice comprehension of such motive , that he heart and intellect be peculiarly fitte . in most matter of worldly import the archdeacon set down he father - in - law as little better than a fool . and perhaps he be right . but in some other matter , equally important if they be rightly judge , , have he be so minded , might with as much propriety have set down he son - in - law for a fool . few man , however , be constitute as be . he have that nice appreciation of the feeling of other which belong of right exclusively to woman . in arm they walk into the inner quadrangle of the building , and there the five old man meet they . shook hand with they all , and then do the same . with Harding shook hand twice , and be about to repeat the ceremony but the old man give he no encouragement . 'I be very glad to know that at last you have a new warden , ' say Harding in a very cheery voice . ' we be very old for any change , ' say one of they ; ' but we do suppose it be all for the best . ' ' certainly -- certainly , it be for the best , ' say . ' you will again have a clergyman of you own church under the same roof with you , and a very excellent clergyman you will have . it be a great satisfaction to I to know that so good a man be come to take care of you , and that it be no stranger , but a friend of my own , who will allow I from time to time to come in and see you . ' ' we be thankful to you reverence , ' say another of they . 'I need not tell you , my good friend , ' say , ' how extremely grateful I be to for he kindness to I ,-- I must say he uncalled for , he unexpected kindness . ' ' he be always very kind , ' say a third . ' what I can do to fill the void which he leave here , I will do . for you sake and my own I will do so , and especially for he sake . but to you who have know he , I can never be the same well - love friend and father that he have be . ' ' no , no , sir , ' say old , who hitherto have hold he peace ; ' no one can be that . not if the new bishop send a hangel to we from heaven . we do not doubt you will do you best , sir , but you will not be like the old master ; not to we old one . ' ' , , fie ! how dare you talk in that way ! ' say ; but as he scold the old man he still hold he by he arm , and press it with warm affection . there be no get any enthusiasm in the matter . how could five old man totter away to they final resting - place be enthusiastic on the reception of a stranger ? what could be to they , or they to ? have indeed come back to they , some last flicker of joyous light might have shone forth on they aged cheek ; but it be in vain to bid they rejoice because be about to move he fourteen child from into the hospital house . in reality they do no doubt receive advantage , spiritual as well as corporal ; but this they could neither anticipate nor acknowledge . it be a dull affair enough , this introduction of ; but still it have its effect . the good which intend do not fall to the ground . all the world , include the five old bedesman , treat with the more respect , because have thus walk in arm in arm with he , on he first entrance to he duty . and here in they new abode we will leave and and they fourteen child . may they enjoy the good thing which have at length give to they ! the end of a novel , like the end of a child 's dinner - party , must be make up of sweetmeat and sugar - plum . there be now nothing else to be tell but the gala doings of 's marriage , nothing more to be describe than the wedding dress , no further
further dialogue to be record than that which take place between the archdeacon who marry they , and and who be marry . ' will thou have this woman to thy wedded wife ? ' and ' will thou have this man to thy wedded husband , to live together accord to 's ordinance ? ' and each answer , 'I will ' . we have no doubt that they will keep they promise ; the more especially as the have leave before the ceremony be perform . have be somewhat more than two year a widow before she be marry to she second husband , and little be then able with due assistance to walk on he own leg into the drawing - room to receive the salutation of the assemble guest . give away the bride , the archdeacon perform the service , and the two , who be join in they labour by other young lady of the neighbourhood , perform the duty of bridesmaid with equal diligence and grace . superintend the breakfast and bouquet and distribute the card and cake . the archdeacon 's three son have also come home for the occasion . the eldest be great with learning , be regard by all who know he as a certain future double first . the second , however , bear the palm on this occasion , be resplendent in he new uniform . the third be just enter the university , and be probably the proudest of the three . but the most remarkable feature in the whole occasion be the excessive liberality of the archdeacon . he literally make present to everybody . as have already move out of the parsonage of 's , that scheme of elongat the dining - room be of course abandon ; but he would have refurnish the whole deanery have he be allow . he send down a magnificent piano by , give Arabin a cob which any dean in the land might have be proud to bestride , and make a special present to of a new pony chair that have gain a prize in the exhibition . do he even stay he hand here ; he buy a set of cameo for he wife , and a sapphire bracelet for ; shower pearl and workbox on be daughter , and to each of he son he present a cheque for 20 pound . on he bestow a magnificent violoncello with all the new - fashioned arrangement and expensive additions , which , on account of these novelty , that gentleman could never use with satisfaction to he audience or pleasure to himself . those who know the archdeacon well , perfectly understand the cause of he extravagance . ' Tbe thus that he sang he song of triumph over . this be he paean , he hymn of , he loud oration . he have gird himself with he sword , and go forth to the war ; now he be return from the field lae with the spoil of the foe . the cob , the cameo , the violoncello and the pianoforte , were all as it be trophy reave from the tent of he now conquer enemy . the after they marriage go abroad for a couple of month , accord the custom in such matter now duly establish , and then commence they deanery life under good auspices . and nothing can be more pleasant than the present arrangement of ecclesiastical affair in . the titular bishop never interfere , and not often . she sphere be more extended , more noble , and more suite to she ambition than that of a cathedral city . as long as she can do what she please with the diocese , she be willing to leave the dean and chapter to themselves . try he hand at subvert the old -established customs of the close , and from he failure she have learnt experience . the burly chancellor and the meagre little prebendary be not tease by any application respect - day school , the dean be leave to he own dominion , and the intercourse between and be confine to a yearly dinner by each to the other . at these dinner Dr Grantly will not take a part ; but he never fail to ask for and receive a full account of all that do or say . he ecclesiastical authority have be greatly shorn since the palmy day in which he reign supreme as mayor of the palace to he father , but nevertheless such authority as be now leave to he he can enjoy without interference . he can walk down of without feel that those who see he be compare he claim with those of . the intercourse between and the deanery be of the most constant and familiar description . since have be marry to a clergyman , and especially to a dignitary of the church , have find many more point of sympathy with she sister ; and on a come occasion , which be much look forward to by all party , she intend to spend a month or two at the deanery . she never think of spend a month in when little be bear ! the two sister do not quite agree on matter of church doctrine , though they difference be of the most amicable description . 's church be two degrees higher than that of . this may seem strange to those who will remember that be once accuse of partiality to ; but it be no less the fact . she like she husband 's silken vest , she like he adherence to the rubric , she specially like the eloquent philosophy of he sermon , and she like the red letter in she own prayer - book . it must not be presume that she have a taste for candle
