the by first publish in monthly installment in 1875 and 1876 and in book form in 1876 I I . . . , . " no one " . a to . another . the beginning of a . 's .-- no . I . 's .-- no . . . the gathering of . . a lover 's . . never ! XVII . good - . the of of himself . . 's . the 's . 's . . the . the beginning of the . the of the . the 's . the Duchess be Much . the two candidate for . " yes ;-- a lie ! " XXXI . " yes ;--with a Horsewhip in my " . " what be it of yours ? " Xxxiii . show that a man should not . the . in . the . the . . " get " . " come and try it " . the value of a . . . intend to make a . . " he want to get " . as for ! Xlviii . " have he Ill - treat you ? " . " where Is ? " 's . Coddl the . " I can sleep here to -night , I Suppose ? " Liii . . . 's . what the of . the . " " . " the and the last " . the . the and . have a to . the and . the . " there must be " . the of the . to . the 's . 's . at . the Lady at . " he think that we Day be number " . only the of . " I be Disgraced and Shamed " . the Great . who will it be ? Lxxvii . the Duchess in . the . the . the last meeting at I I it be certainly of service to a man to know who be he grandfather and who be he grandmother if he entertain a ambition to move in the upper circle of society , and also of service to be able to speak of they as of person who be themselves somebody in they time . no doubt we all entertain great respect for those who by they own energie have raise themselves in the world ; and when we hear that the son of a washerwoman have become or of we do , theoretically and abstractedly , feel a higher reverence for such self - make magnate than for one who have be as it be bear into forensic or ecclesiastical purple . but not the less must the offspring of the washerwoman have have very much trouble on the subject of he birth , unless he have be , when young as well as when old , a very great man indeed . after the goal have be absolutely reach , and the honour and the title and the wealth actually win , a man may talk with some humour , even with some affection , of the maternal tub ; -- but while the struggle be go on , with the conviction strong upon the struggler that he can not be altogether successful unless he be esteem a gentleman , not to be asham , not to conceal the old family circumstance , not at any rate to be silent , be difficult . and the difficulty be certainly not less if fortunate circumstance rather than hard work and intrinsic merit have raise above he natural place a aspirant to high social position . can it be expect that such a one when dine with a duchess shall speak of he father 's small shop , or bring into the light of day he grandfather 's cobbler 's awl ? and yet it be difficult to be altogether silent ! it may not be necessary for any of we to be always talk of we own parentage . we may be generally reticent as to we uncle and aunt , and may drop even we brother and sister in we ordinary conversation . but if a man never mention he belonging among those with whom he live , he become mysterious , and almost open to suspicion . it begin to be know that nobody know anything of such a man , and even friend become afraid . it be certainly convenient to be able to allude , if it be but once in a year , to some blood relation . , who in other respects have much in he circumstance on which to congratulate himself , suffer trouble in he mind respect he ancestor such as I have endeavoure to describe . he do not know very much himself , but what little he do know he keep altogether to himself . he have no father or mother , no uncle , aunt , brother or sister , no cousin even whom he could mention in a cursory way to he dearest friend . he suffer , no doubt ; -- but with spartan consistency he so hide he trouble from the world that no one know that he suffer . those with whom he liv , and who speculate often and wonder much as to who he be , never dream that the silent man 's reticence be a burden to himself . at no special conjuncture of he life , at no period which could be mark with the finger of the observer , do he glaringly abstain from any statement which at the moment might be natural . he never hesitate , blush , or palpably laboure at concealment ; but the fact remain that though a great many man and not a few woman kknow very well , none of they know whence he have come , or what be he family . he be a man , however ,
, naturally reticent , who never allude to he own affair unless in pursuit of some object the way to which be clear before he eye . Silence therefore on a matter which be common in the mouth of most man be less difficult to he than to another , and the result less embarrassing . dear old , who tell he friend at the club of every pound that he lose or win at the races , who boast of 's favour and mourn over 's coldness almost in public , who issue bulletin on the state of he purse , he stomach , he stable , and he debt , could not with any amount of care keep from we the fact that he father be a attorney 's clerk , and make he first money by discounte small bill . everybody know it , and , who like popularity , grieve at the unfortunate publicity . but be relieve from a burden which would have break he poor shoulders , and which even , who be a strong man , often find it hard to bear without wincing . it be admit on all side that be a " gentleman . " say that any other derivation of this difficult word than that which cause it to signify " a man of ancestry " be whimsical . there be many , who in define the term for they own use , still adhere to 's dictum ; -- but they adhere to it with certain unexpressed allowances for possible exception . the chance be very much in favour of the well - bear man , but exception may exist . it be not generally believe that be well bear ; -- but he be a gentleman . and this most precious rank be acced to he although he be employ , -- or at least have be employ , -- on business which do not of itself give such a warrant of position as be suppose to be afforde by the bar and the church , by the military service and by physic . he have be on the stock , and still in some manner , not clearly understand by he friend , do business in the City . at the time with which we be now concerned be thirty - three year old , and as he have begin life early he have be long before the world . it be know of he that he have be at a good private school , and it be report , on the solitary evidence of one who have there be he schoolfellow , that a rumour be current in the school that he school bill be pay by a old gentleman who be not related to he . Thence at the age of seventeen he have be send to a , and at the age of twenty - one have appear in , in a stockbroker 's office , where he be soon know as a accomplished linguist , and as a very clever fellow , -- precocious , not give to many pleasure , apt for work , but hardly trustworthy by employer , not as be dishonest , but as have a taste for be a master rather than a servant . indeed he period of servitude be very short . it be not in he nature to be active on behalf of other . he be soon active for himself , and at one time it be suppose that he be make a fortune . then it be know that he have leave he regular business , and it be suppose that he have lose all that he have ever make or have ever possess . but nobody , not even he own banker or he own lawyer , -- not even the old woman who look after he linen , -- ever really know the state of he affair . he be certainly a handsome man , -- he beauty be of a sort which man be apt to deny and woman to admit lavishly . he be nearly six foot tall , very dark , and very thin , with regular , well - cut feature indicate little to the physiognomist unless it be the great gift of self - possession . he hair be cut short , and he wear no beard beyond a absolutely black moustache . he tooth be perfect in form and whiteness , -- a characteristic which , though it may be a valued item in a general catalogue of personal attraction , do not generally recommend a man to the unconscious judgment of he acquaintance . but about the mouth and ching of this man there be a something of softness , perhaps in the play of the lip , perhaps in the dimple , which in some degree lessen the feeling of hardness which be produce by the square brow and bold , unflinching , combative eye . they who know he and like he be reconcile by the lower face . the greater number who know he and do not like he feel and resent ,-- even though in nine case out of ten they might express no resentment even to themselves , -- the pugnacity of he steady glance . for he be essentially one of those man who be always , in the inner workings of they minds , defend themselves and attack other . he could not give a penny to a woman at a crossing without a look which argue at full length she injustice in make she demand , and he freedom from all liability let he walk the crossing as often as he might . he could not seat himself in a railway carriage without a lesson to he opposite neighbour that in all the mutual affair of travelling , arrangement of foot , disposition of bag ,
, and open of window , it would be that neighbou be duty to submit and he to exact . it be , however , for the spirit rather than for the thing itself that he combat . the woman with the broom get she penny . the opposite gentleman when once by a glance he have expressed submission be allow he own way with he leg and with the window . I would not say that be prone to do ill - natured thing ; but he be imperious , and he have learn to carry he empire in he eye . the reader must submit to be tell one or two further and still smaller detail respect the man , and then the man shall be allow to make he own way . no one of those around he know how much care he take to dress himself well , or how careful he be that no one should know it . he very tailor regard he as be simply extravagant in the number of he coat and trousers , and he friend look upon he as one of those fortunate being to whose nature belong a facility of be well dress , or almost a impossibility of be ill dress . we all know the man , -- a little man generally who move seldom and softly , -- who look always as though he have just be send home in a bandbox . be not a little man , and move freely enough ; but never , at any moment , -- go into the city or come out of it , on horseback or on foot , at home over he book or after the maze of the dance , -- be he dress otherwise than with perfect care . money and time do it , but folk think that it grow with he , as do he hair and he nail . and he always ride a horse which charme good judge of what a park nag should be ;-- not a prancing , restless , giggling , sideway - go , useless garran , but a animal well make , well bitt , with perfect pace , on whom a rider if it please he could be as quiet as a statue on a monument . it often do please to be quiet on horseback ; and yet he do not look like a statue , for it be acknowledge through all that he be a good horseman . he live luxuriously too ,-- though whether at he ease or not nobody know , -- for he keep a brougham of he own , and during the hunting season he have two horse down at . there have once be a belief abroad that he be ruin , but they who interest themselves in such matter have find out , -- or at any rate believe that they have find out , -- that he pay he tailor regularly : and now there prevail a opinion that be a monied man . it be know to some few that he occupy room in a flat at , -- but to very few exactly where the room be situate . among all he friend no one be know to have enter they . in a moderate way he be give to hospitality , -- that be to infrequent but , when the occasion come , to graceful hospitality . some club , however , or tavern , or perhaps , in the summer , some river bank would be choose as the scene of these festivity . to a few , -- if , as suggest , amidst summer flower on the water 's edge to man and woman mix , -- he would be a courtly and efficient host ; for he have the rare gift of do such thing well . be over , and the east wind be still blow , and a great portion of the world be out of town take its holiday , when , on a unpleasant morning , travel into the city by the railway from . it be he custom to go thither when he do go , -- not daily like a man of business , but as chance might require , like a capitalist or a man of pleasure , -- in he own brougham . but on this occasion he walk down to the river side , and then walk from the into a dingy little court call , near the of , and go through a narrow dark long passage get into a little office at the back of a building , in which there sit at a desk a greasy gentleman with a new hat on one side of he head , who might perhaps be about forty year old . the place be very dark , and the man be turn over the leaf of a ledger . a stranger to city way might probably have say that he be idle , but he be no doubt fill he mind with that erudition which would enable he to earn he bread . on the other side of the desk there be a little boy copy letter . these be , -- commonly call , -- and he clerk . be a gentleman very well know and at the present moment favourably esteem on the stock . " what , ! " say he . " uncommon glad to see you . what can I do for you ? " " just come inside , -- will you ? " say . now within 's very small office there be a smaller office in which there be a safe , a small rickety Pembroke table , two chair , and a old washing - stand with a tumble towel . lead the way into this sanctum as though he know the
the place well , and follow he . " Beastly day , be not it ? " say . " yes , -- a nasty east wind . " " cut one in two , with a hot sun at the same time . one ought to hybernate at this time of the year . " " then why do not you hybernate ? " say . " business be too good . that be about it . a man have to stick to it when it do come . everybody can not do like you ; -- give up regular work , and make a better thing of a hour now and a hour then , just as it please you . I should not dare go in for that kind of thing . " " I do not suppose you or any one else know what I go in for , " say , with a look that indicate offence . " nor do not care , " say ; --" only hope it be something good for you sake . " have know well , now for some year , and be a overbearing man himself , -- somewhat even of a bully if the truth be speak , -- and by no means apt to give way unless hard press , have often try he " hand " on he friend , as he himself would have say . but I doubt whether he could remember any instance in which he could congratulate himself on success . he be try he hand again now , but do it with a faltering voice , have catch a glance of he friend 's eye . " I dare say not , " say . then he continue without change he voice or the nature of the glance of he eye , " I will tell you what I want you to do now . I want you name to this bill for three month . " open he mouth and he eye , and take the bit of paper that be tender to he . it be a promissory note for , which , if sign by he , would at the end of the specify period make he liable for that sum be it not otherwise pay . he friend be indeed apply to he for the assistance of he name in raise a loan to the amount of the sum name . this be a kind of favour which a man should ask almost on he knee , -- and which , if so ask , would certainly refuse . and here be ask it , -- whom have latterly regard as a opulent man , -- and ask it not at all on he knee , but , as one might say , at the muzzle of a pistol . " accommodation bill ! " say . " why , you be not hard up ; be you ? " " I be not go just at present to tell you much about my affair , and yet I expect you to do what I ask you . I do not suppose you doubt my ability to raise . " " oh , dear , no , " say , who have be look at and who have not borne the inspection well . " and I do not suppose you would refuse I even if I be hard up , as you call it . " there have be affair before between the two man in which have probably be the stronger , and the memory of they , add to the inspection which be still go on , be heavy upon poor Sexty . " oh , dear , no ;-- I be not think of refuse . I suppose a fellow may be a little surprised at such a thing . " " I do not know why you need be surprised , as such thing be very common . I happen to have take a share in a loan a little beyond my immediate means , and therefore want a few hundred . there be no one I can ask with a better grace than you . if you be not -- afraid about it , just sign it . " " oh , I be not afraid , " say , take he pen and write he name across the bill . but even before the signature be finish , when he eye be take away from the face of he companion and fix upon the disagreeable piece of paper beneath he hand , he repent of what he be do . he almost arrest he signature half - way . he do hesitate , but have not pluck enough to stop he hand . " it do seem to be a ---- odd transaction all the same , " he say as he lean back in he chair . " it be the commonest thing in the world , " say pick up the bill in a leisurely way , fold it and put it into he pocket - book . " have we name never be together on a bit of paper before ? " " when we both have something to make by it . " " you have nothing to make and nothing to lose by this . good day and many thanks ; -- though I do not think so much of the affair as you seem to do . " then take he departure and be leave alone in he bewilderment . " by , -- that be queer , " he say to himself . " who would have think of be hard up for a few hundred pound ? but it must be all right . he would not have come in that fashion , if it have not be all right .
. I ought not to have do it though ! a man ought never to do that kind of thing ;-- never ,-- never ! " and be much discontented with himself , so that when he get home that even to the wife of he bosom and he little family at , he by no means make himself agreeable to they . for that sum of sit upon he bosom as he eat he supper , and lay upon he chest as he sleep , -- like a nightmare . chapter ii on that same day dine with he friend at a new club call the progress , of which they be both member . the progress be certainly a new club , have as yet be open hardly more than three year ; but still it be old enough to have see many of the hope of its early youth become dim with age and inaction . for the have intend to do great thing for the liberal party , -- or rather for political liberality in general , -- and have in truth do little or nothing . it have be get up with considerable enthusiasm , and for a while certain fiery politician have believe that through the instrumentality of this institution man of genius , and spirit , and natural power , but without wealth , -- mean always themselves , -- would be supply with sure seat in parliament and a probable share in the government . but no such result have be achieve . there have be a want of something , -- some deficiency felt but not yet define , -- which have hitherto be fatal . the young man say it be because no old stager who know the way of pull the wire would come forward and put the club in the proper groove . the old man say it be because the young man be pretentious puppy . it be , however , not to be doubt that the party of have become slack , and that the liberal politician of the country , although a special new club have be open for the furtherance of they view , be not at present make much way . " what we want be organization , " say one of the lead young man . but the organization be not as yet forthcome . the club , nevertheless , go on its way , like other club , and man dine and smoke and play billiards and pretend to read . some few energetic member still hope that a good day would come in which they grand idea might be realise , -- but as regard the member generally , they be content to eat and drink and play billiards . it be a fairly good club , -- with a sprinkling of liberal lordling , a couple of dozen of member of parliament who have be make to believe that they would neglect they party duty unless they pay they money , and the usual assortment of barrister , attorney , city merchant and idle man . it be good enough at any rate for , who be particular about he dinner , and have a opinion of he own about wine . he have be hear to assert that , for real quiet comfort , there be not a club in equal to it ; but he hearer be not aware that in past day he have be blackball at the ---- and the g ---- . these be accident which have a gift of keeping in the background . he present companion , , have , as well as himself , be a original member ;-- and have be one of those who have hope to find in the club a stepping - stone to high political life , and who now talk often with idle energy of the need of organization . " for myself , " say , " I can conceive no vainer object of ambition than a seat in the british parliament . what do any man gain by it ? the few who be successful work very hard for little pay and no thanks , -- or nearly equally hard for no pay and as little thanks . the many who fail sit idly for hour , undergo the weary task of listen to platitude , and enjoy in return the now absolutely valueless privilege of have write on they letter . " " somebody must make law for the country . " " I do not see the necessity . I think the country would do uncommonly well if it be to know that no old law would be alte or new law make for the next twenty year . " " you would not have repeal the corn law ? " " there be no corn law to repeal now . " " modify the income tax ? " " I would modify nothing . but at any rate , whether law be to be alte or to be leave , it be a comfort to I that I need not put my finger into that pie . there be one benefit indeed in be in the house . " " you can not be arrest . " " well ; -- that , as far as it go ; and one other . it assist a man in get a seat as the director of certain company . people be still such ass that they trust a board of director make up of member of parliament , and therefore of course member be make welcome . but if you want to get into the house why do not you arrange it with you father , instead of waiting for what the club may do for you ? " " my father would not pay a shilling for such a purpose .
. he be never in the himself . " " and therefore despise it . " " a little of that , perhaps . no man ever work harder than he do , or , in he way , more successfully ; and have see one after another of he juniors become member of parliament , while he stick to the attorney , there be perhaps a little jealousy about it . " " from what I see of the way you live at home , I should think you father would do anything for you , -- with proper management . there be no doubt , I suppose , that he could afford it ? " " my father never in he life say anything to I about he own money affair , though he say a great deal about mine . no man ever be closer than my father . but I believe that he could afford almost anything . " " I wish I have such a father , " say . " I think that I should succeed in ascertain the extent of he capability , and in make some use of they too . " nearly ask he friend ,-- almost summon courage to ask he ,-- whether he father have do much for he . they be very intimate ; and on one subject , in which be much interested , they confidence have be very close . but the younger and the weaker man of the two could not quite bring himself to the point of make a inquiry which he think would be disagreeable . have never before , in all they intercourse , hint at the possibility of he have or have have filial aspiration . he have be as though he have be create self - sufficient , independent of mother 's milk or father 's money . now the question might have be ask almost naturally . but it be not ask . be a trouble to he father , -- but not a agonizing trouble , as be some son . he fault be not of a nature to rob he father 's cup of all its sweetness and to bring he grey hair with sorrow to the grave . have never have to ask himself whether he should now , at length , let he son fall into the lowest abyss , or whether he should yet again struggle to put he on he leg , again forgive he , again pay he debt , again endeavou to forget dishonour , and place it all to the score of thoughtless youth . have it be so , I think that , if not on the first or second fall , certainly on the third , the young man would have go into the abyss ; for be a stern man , and capable of come to a clear conclusion on thing that be nearest and even dearest to himself . but have simply show himself to be inefficient to earn he own bread . he have never decline even to do this , -- but have simply be inefficient . he have not declare either by word or action that as he father be a rich man , and as he be a only son , he would therefore do nothing . but he have try he hand thrice , and in each case , after but short trial , have assure he father and he friend that the thing have not suit he . leave without a degree , -- for the reading of the school do not suit he , -- he have go into a banking - house , by no means as a mere clerk , but with a expressed proposition from he father , back by the assent of a partner , that he should work he way up to wealth and a great commercial position . but six month teach he that banking be " a abomination , " and he at once go into a course of read with a barrister . he remain at this till he be call , -- for a man may be call with very little continuous work . but after he be call the solitude of he chamber be too much for he , and at twenty - five he find that the stock be the mart in the world for such talents and energie as he possess . what be the nature of he failure during the year that he go into the city , be know only to himself and he father ,-- unless kknow something of it also . but at six - and - twenty the stock be also abandon ; and now , at eight - and - twenty , have discover that a parliamentary career be that for which nature and he special genius have intend he . he have probably suggest this to he father , and have meet with some cold rebuff . be a good - look , manly fellow , six foot high , with broad shoulders , with light hair , wear a large silky bushy beard , which make he look older than he year , who neither by he speech nor by he appearance would ever be take for a fool , but who show by the very action of he body as well as by the play of he face , that he lack firmness of purpose . he certainly be no fool . he have read much , and , though he generally forget what he read , there be leave with he from he reading certain nebulous light , beget by other man 's think , which enable he to talk on most subject . it can not be say of he that he do much think for himself ; -- but he think that he think . he
he believe of himself that he have go rather deep into politics , and that he be entitled to call many statesman ass because they do not see the thing which he see . he have the great question of labour , and all that refer to union , strike , and lock - out , quite at he finger 's end . he know how the Church of should be disestablish and recompose . he be quite clear on question of finance , and see to a " t " how progress should be make towards communism , so that no violence should disturb that progress , and that in the due course of centurie all desire for personal property should be conquer and annihilate by a philanthropy so general as hardly to be account a virtue . in the meantime he could never contrive to pay he tailor 's bill regularly out of the allowance of L400 a year which he father make he , and be always dream of the comfort of a handsome income . he be a popular man certainly , -- very popular with woman , to whom he be always courteous , and generally like by man , to whom he be genial and good - natured . though he be not himself aware of the fact , he be very dear to he father , who in he own silent way almost admire and certainly like the openness and guileless freedom of a character which be very opposite to he own . the father , though he have never say a word to flatter the son , do in truth give he offspring credit for greater talent than he possess , and , even when appear to scorn they , would listen to the young man 's diatribe almost with satisfaction . and be very dear also to a sister , who be the only other living member of this branch of the family . much will be say of she in these page , and it be hope that the reader may take a interest in she fate . but here , in speaking of the brother , it may suffice to say , that the sister , who be endow with infinitely finer gift than he , do give credit to the somewhat pretentious claim of she less noble brother . indeed it have be perhaps a misfortune with that some people have believe in he , -- and a further misfortune that some other have think it worth they while to pretend to believe in he . among the latter might probably be reckon the friend with whom he be now dine at the progress . a man may flatter another , as occasionally do flatter , without preconcerted falsehood . it suit one man to be well with another , and the one learn gradually and perhaps unconsciously the way to take advantage of the foible of the other . now it be most material to that he should stand well with all the member of the family , as he aspire to the hand of the daughter of the house . of she regard he have already think himself nearly sure . of the father 's sanction to such a marriage he have reason to be almost more than doubtful . but the brother be he friend , -- and in such circumstance a man be almost justified in flatter a brother . " I will tell you what it be , , " say , as they stroll out of the club together , a little after ten o'clock , " the man of the present day will not give themselves the trouble to occupy they mind with matter which have , or should have , real interest . know all about it when he say that ' the proper study of mankind be man . ' but people do not read now , or if they do they do not take the trouble to understand he . " " man be too busy make money , my dear fellow . " " that be just it . money be a very nice thing . " " very nice , " say . " but the search after it be debase . if a man could make money for four , or six , or even eight hour a day , and then wash he mind of the pursuit , as a clerk in a office wash the copy and ledger out of he mind , then -- " " he would never make money in that way , -- and keep it . " " and therefore the whole thing be debase . a man cease to care for the great interest of the world , or even to be aware of they existence , when he whole soul be in spanish bond . they want to make a banker of I , but I find that it would kill I . " " it would kill I , I think , if I have to confine myself to spanish bond . " " you know what i mean . you at any rate can understand I , though I fear you be too far gone to abandon the idea of make a fortune . " " I would abandon it to - morrow if I could come into a fortune ready make . a man must at any rate eat . " " yes ; -- he must eat . but I be not quite sure , " say thoughtfully , " that he need think about what he eat . " " unless the beef be send up without horse radish ! " it have happen that when the two man sit down to they dinner the insufficient quantity of that vegetable supply by the steward of the club have be all consum ,
, and have complain of the grievance . " a man have a right to that for which he have pay , " say , with mock solemnity , " and if he pass over lach of that nature without observation he do a injury to humanity at large . I be not go to be catch in a trap , you know , because I like horse radish with my beef . well , I can not go farther out of my way , as I have a deal of reading to do before I court my Morpheus . if you will take my advice you will go straight to the governor . whatever Emily may feel I do not think she will say much to encourage you unless you go about it after that fashion . she have prim notion of she own , which perhaps be not after all so much amiss when a man want to marry a girl . " " forbid that I should think that anything about you sister be amiss ! " " I do not think there be much myself . woman be generally superficial , -- but some be honestly superficial and some dishonestly . Emily at any rate be honest . " " stop half a moment . " then they saunter arm in arm down the broad pavement lead from to the of 's column . " I wish I could make out you father more clearly . he be always civil to I , but he have a cold way of look at I which make I think I be not in he good book . " " he be like that to everybody . " " I never seem to get beyond the skin with he . you must have hear he speak of I in my absence ? " " he never say very much about anybody . " " but a word would let I know how the land lie . you know I well enough to be aware that I be the last man to be curiious as to what other think of I . indeed I do not care about it as much as a man should do . I be utterly indifferent to the opinion of the world at large , and would never object to the company of a pleasant person because the pleasant person abuse I behind my back . what I value be the pleasantness of the man and not he like or dislik for myself . but here the dearest aim of my life be concerned , and I might be guide either this way or that , to my great advantage , by know whether I stand well or ill with he . " " you have dine three time within the last three month in , and I do not know any other man , -- certainly no other young man , -- who have have such strong proof of intimacy from my father . " " yes , and I know my advantages . but I have be there as you friend , not as he . " " he do not care twopence about my friend . I want to give a dinner , but my father would not have he at any price . " " be out at elbow , and bet at billiards . I be respectable , -- or at any rate you father think so . you father be more anxious about you than you be aware of , and wish to make he house pleasant to you as long as he can do so to you advantage . as far as you be concerned he rather approve of I , fancie that my turn for make money be stronger than my turn for spend it . nevertheless , he look upon I as a friend of yours rather than he own . though he have give I three dinner in three month , -- and I own the greatness of he hospitality , -- I do not suppose he ever say a word in my favour . I wish I know what he do say . " " he say he know nothing about you . " " oh ; -- that be it , be it ? then he can know no harm . when next he say so ask he of how many of the man who dine at he house he can say as much . good night ;-- I will not keep you any longer . but I can tell you this ; -- if between we we can manage to handle he rightly , you may get you seat in parliament and I may get my wife ; -- that be , of course , if she will have I . " then they parte , but remain in the pathway , walk up and down by the side of the old military club , think of thing . he certainly know he friend , the , intimately , appreciate the man 's good quality , and be fully aware of the man 's weakness . by he question he have extract quite enough to assure himself that 's father would be adverse to he proposition . he have not feel much doubt before , but now he be certain . " he do not know much about I , " he say , muse to himself . " well , no ; he do not ; -- and there be not very much that I can tell he . of course he be wise , -- as wisdom go . but then , wise man do do foolish thing at interval . the discreetest of city banker be talk out of they money ; the most scrupulous of matron be talk out of they virtue ; the most experienced of statesman be
be talk out of they principle . and who can really calculate chance ? who lead forlorn hope generally push through without be wounded ; -- and the fifth or sixth here come to a title . " so much he say , palpably , though to himself , with he inner voice . then ,--impalpably , with no even inner voice , -- he ask himself what chance he might have of prevailing with the girl herself ; and he almost venture to tell himself that in that direction he need not despair . in very truth he love the girl and reverence she , believe she to be better and higher and nobler than other human being , -- as a man do when he be in love ; and so believe , he have those doubt as to he own success which such reverence produce . chapter Iii , be not a man to let grass grow under he foot when he have anything to do . when he be tired of walk backwards and forward over the same bit of pavement , subject all the while to a cold east wind , he go home and think of the same matter while he lay in bed . even be he to get the girl 's assurance of love , without the father 's consent he might find himself farther from he object than ever . be a man of old fashions , who would think himself ill - use and he daughter ill - use , and who would think also that a general offence would have be commit against good social manners , if he daughter be to be ask for she hand without he previous consent . should he absolutely refuse , -- why then the battle , though it would be a desperate battle , might perhaps be fight with other strategy ; but , give to the matter he best consideration , think it expedient to go at once to the father . in do this he would have no silly tremor . whatever he might feel in speak to the girl , he have sufficient self - confidence to be able to ask the father , if not with assurance , at any rate without trepidation . it be , he think , probable that the father , at the first attack , would neither altogether accede , or altogether refuse . the disposition of the man be averse to the probability of a absolute reply at the first moment . the lover imagine that it might be possible for he to take advantage of the period of doubt which would thus be create . be and have for a great many year be a barrister practising in the equity courts , -- or rather in one equity , for throughout a life 's work now extend to nearly fifty year , he have hardly ever go out of the single Vice - 's which be much better know by 's name than by that of the less eminent judge who now sit there . he have be a very peculiar , a very toilsome , but yet probably a very satisfactory life . he have begin he practice early , and have work in a stuff gow till he be nearly sixty . at that time he have amass a large fortune , mainly from he profession , but partly also by the careful use of he own small patrimony and by he wife 's money . know that he be rich , but no one know the extent of he wealth . when he submit to take a silk gown , he declare among he friend that he do so as a step preparatory to he retirement . the altered method of work would not suit he at he age , nor , -- as he say ,-- would it be profitable . he would take he silk as a honour for he declining year , so that he might become a bencher at he Inn . but he have now be work for the last twelve or fourteen year with he silk gown ,-- almost as hard as in younger day , and with pecuniary result almost as serviceable ; and though from month to month he declare he intention of take no fresh briefs , and though he do now occasionally refuse work , still he be there with he mind as clear as ever , and with he body apparently as little affect by fatigue . have not marry till he be forty , and he wife have now be two year dead . he have have six child , -- of whom but two be now leave to make a household for he old age . he have be nearly fifty when he youngest daughter be bear , and be therefore now a old father of a young child . but he be one of those man who , as in youth they be never very young , so in age be they never very old . he could still ride he cob in the park jauntily ; and do so carefully every morning in he life , after a early cup of tea and before he breakfast . and he could walk home from he chamber every day , and on Sunday could do the round of the parnks on foot . twice a week , on and , he dine at that old law club , the , and play whist after dinner till twelve o'clock . this be the great dissipation and , I think , the chief charm of he life . in the middle of he and he daughter usually go for a month to in , the seat of he cousin ; -- and this be the one duty of he life which be a burthan to he . but
but he have be make to believe that it be essential to he health , and to he wife 's , and then to he girl 's health , that he should every summer leave town for a time , -- and where else be he to go ? be a relation and a gentleman . Emily like . it be the proper thing . he hat , but then he do not know any place out of that he would not hate worse . he have once be induce to go up the Rhine , but have never repeat the experiment of foreign travel . Emily sometimes go abroad with she cousin , during which period it be suppose that the old lawyer spend a good deal of he time at the . he be a spare , thin , strongly make man , with spare light brown hair , hardly yet grizzl , with small grey whisker , clear eye , bushy eyebrow , with a long ugly nose , on which young barrister have be hear to declare that you might hang a small kettle , and with considerable vehemence of talk when he be oppose in argument . for , with all he well - know coolness of temper , could become very hot in a argument , when the nature of the case in hand require heat . on one subject all who know he be agree . he be a thorough lawyer . many doubt he eloquence , and some declare that he have know well the extent of he own power in abstaining from seek the higher honour of he profession ; but no one doubt he law . he have once write a book , -- on the mortgage of stock in trade ; but that have be in early life , and he have never since dabble in literature . he be certainly a man of whom man be generally afraid . at the whist - table no one would venture to scold he . in the court no one ever contradict he . in he own house , though he be very quiet , the servant dread to offend he , and be attentive to he slightest behest . when he condescende to ride with any acquaintance in the park , it be always acknowledge that old be to regulate the pace . he name be , and all he life he have be know as able ;-- a silent , far - see , close - fisted , just old man , who be not , however , by any means deficient in sympathy either with the suffering or with the joy of humanity . it be time and the court be not sit , but be in he chamber as a matter of course at ten o'clock . he know no real homely comforts elsewhere , -- unless at the whist - table at the . he eat and drank and sleep in he own house in , but he could hardly be say to live there . it be not there that he mind be awake , and that the power of the man be exercise . when he come up from the dining - room to join he daughter after dinner he would get she to se he a song , and would then seat himself with a book . but he never read in he own house , invariably fal into a sweet and placid slumber , from which he be never disturb till he daughter kiss he as she go to bed . then he would walk about the room , and look at he watch , and shuffle uneasily through half - a - hour till he conscience allow he to take himself to he chamber . he be a man of no pursuits in he own house . but from ten in the morning till five , or often till six , in the evening , he mind be active in some work . it be not now all law , as it use to be . in the drawer of the old piece of furniture which stand just at the right hand of he own arm -chair there be various book hide away , which he be sometimes asham to have see by he client , -- poetry and novel and even fairy tale . for there be nothing could not read in he chamber , though there be nothing that he could read in he own house . he have a large pleasant room in which to sit , look out from the ground floor of on to the garden belong to the , -- and here , in the centre of the metropolis , but in perfect quiet as far as the outside world be concerned , he have liv and still liv he life . at about noon on the day follow that on which have make he sudden swoop on and have then dine with , he call at and be show into the lawyer 's room . he quick eye at once discover the book which half hide away , and see upon it 's suspicious ticket . Barristers certainly never get they law book from , and at once know that he hope - for father - in - law have be read a novel . he have not suspect such weakness , but argue well from it for the business he have in hand . there must be a soft spot to be find about the heart of a old lawyer who spend he morning in such occupation . " how do you do , sy ? " say rise from he seat . " I hope I see you well , sir . " though he have be read a novel he tone and manner be very cold . have never be in before
before , and be not quite sure that he might not have commit some offence in come there . " take a seat , . be there anything I can do for you in my way ? " there be a great deal that could be do " in he way " as father ; -- but how be it to be introduce and the case make clear ? do not know whether the old man have as yet ever suspect such a feeling as that which he now intend to declare . he have be intimate at the house in , and have certainly ingratiate himself very closely with a certain , who have be 's sister and constant companion , who live in , close round the corner from , and spend very much of she time with . they be together daily , as though . have assume the part of a second mother , and be well aware that . know of he love . if there be real confidence between . and the old lawyer , the old lawyer must know it also ; -- but as to that feel that he be in the dark . the task of speak to a old father be not unpleasant when the lover know that he have be smile upon , and , in fact , approve for the last six month . he be go to be pat on the back , and make much of , and receive into the family . he be to be tell that he or he have be the best daughter in the world and will therefore certainly be the best wife , and he himself will probably on that special occasion be speak of with unqualified praise , -- and all will be pleasant . but the subject be one very difficult to broach when no previous light have be throw on it . , however , be not the man to stand shivering on the brink when a plunge be necessary , -- and therefore he make he plunge . " , I have take the liberty to call upon you here , because I want to speak to you about you daughter . " " about my daughter ! " the old man 's surprise be quite genuine . of course when he have give himself a moment to think , he know what must be the nature of he visitor 's communication . but up to that moment he have never mix he daughter and in he thought together . and now , the idea have come upon he , he look at the aspirant with severe and unpleasant eye . it be manifest to the aspirant that the first flash of the thing be painful to the father . " yes , sir . I know how great be my presumption . but , yet , have venture , I will hardly say to entertain a hope , but to have come to such a state that I can only be happy by hoping , I have think it best to come to you at once . " " do she know anything of this ? " " of my visit to you ? nothing . " " of you intentions ; -- of you suit generally ? be I to understand that this have any sanction from she ? " " none at all . " " have you tell she anything of it ? " " not a word . I come to ask you for you permission to address she . " " you mean that she have no knowledge whatever of you -- you preference for she . " " I can not say that . it be hardly possible that I should have learn to love she as I do without some consciousness on she part that it be so . " " what I mean be , without any beating about the bush , -- have you be make love to she ? " " who be to say in what make love consist , ? " " d ---- it , sir , a gentleman know . a gentleman know whether he have be play on a girl 's feeling , and a gentleman , when he be ask as I have ask you , will at any rate tell the truth . I do not want any definitions . have you be make love to she ? " " I think , , that I have behave like a gentleman ; and that you will acknowledge at least so much when you come to know exactly what I have do and what I have not do . I have endeavoure to commend myself to you daughter , but I have never speak a word of love to she . " " do know of all this ? " " yes . " " and have he encourage it ? " " he know of it , because he be my most intimate friend . whoever the lady might have be , I should have tell he . he be attach to I , and would not , I think , on he own account , object to call I he brother . I speak to he yesterday on the matter very plainly , and he tell I that I ought certainly to see you first . I quite agree with he , and therefore I be here . there have certainly be nothing in he conduct to make you angry , and I do not think that there have be anything in mine . " there be a dignity of demeanour and a quiet assure courage which have it be effect upon the old lawyer . he feel that he could not storm and talk in ambiguous language of what a " gentleman " would or would not
not do . he might disapprove of this man altogether as a son - in - law , -- and at the present moment he think that he do , -- but still the man be entitled to a civil answer . how be lover to approach the lady of they love in any manner more respectful than this ? " , " he say , " you must forgive I if I say that you be comparatively a stranger to we . " " that be a accident which would be easily cure if you will in that direction be as good as mine . " " but , perhaps , it be not . one have to be explicit in these matters . a daughter 's happiness be a very serious consideration , -- and some people , among whom I confess that I be one , consider that like should marry like . I should wish to see my daughter marry , -- not only in my own sphere , neither higher nor lower , -- but with some one of my own class . " " I hardly know , , whether that be intend to exclude I . " " well , -- to tell you the truth I know nothing about you . I do not know who you father be ,-- whether he be a Englishman , whether he be a , whether he be a protestant , -- not even whether he be a gentleman . these be question which I should not dream of ask under any other circumstance ;--would be matter with which I should have no possible concern , if you be simply a acquaintance . but when you talk to a man about he daughter --! " " I acknowledge freely you right of inquiry . " " and I know nothing of you mean ;-- nothing whatever . I understand that you live as a man of fortune , but I presume that you earn you bread . I know nothing of the way in which you earn it , nothing of the certainty or amount of you means . " " those thing be of course matter for inquiry ; but may I presume that you have no objection which satisfactory answer to such question may not remove ? " " I shall never willingly give my daughter to any one who be not the son of a english gentleman . it may be a prejudice , but that be my feeling . " " my father be certainly not a english gentleman . he be a Portuguese . " in admit this , and in thus subject himself at once to one clearly - state ground of objection , -- the objection be one which , though admit , carry with itself neither fault nor disgrace , -- feel that he have get a certain advantage . he could not get over the fact that he be the son of a Portuguese parent , but by admit that openly he think he might avoid present discussion on matter which might , perhaps , be more disagreeable , but to which he need not allude if the accident of he birth be to be take by the father as settle the question . " my mother be a english lady , " he add , " but my father certainly be not a . I never have the common happiness of know either of they . I be a orphan before I understand what it be to have a parent . " this be say with a patho which for the moment stop the expression of any further harsh criticism from the lawyer . could not instantly repeat he objection to a parentage which be matter for such melancholy reflection ; but he feel at the same time that as he have luckily land himself on a positive and undeniable ground of objection to a match which be distasteful to he , it would be unwise for he to go to other matter in which he might be less successful . by do so , he would seem to abandon the ground which he have already make good . he think it probable that the man might have a adequate income , and yet he do not wish to welcome he as a son - in - law . he think it possible that the Portuguese father might be a Portuguese nobleman , and therefore one whom he would be drive to admit to have be in some sort a gentleman ; -- but yet this man who be now in he presence and whom he continue to scan with the closest observation , be not what he call a gentleman . the foreign blood be prove , and that would suffice . as he look at he think that he detect jewish sign , but he be afraid to make any allusion to religion , lest should declare that he ancestor have be note as since first preach in the . " I be educate altogether in , " continue , " till I be send to a german university in the idea that the language of the continent be not generally well learn in this country . I can never be sufficientely thankful to my guardian for do so . " " I dare say ;-- I dare say . french and german be very useful . I have a prejudice of my own in favour of and . " " but I rather fancy I pick up more and at than I should have get here , have I stick to nothing else . " " I dare say ;-- I dare say . you may be a Admirable Crichton for what I know . " " I have not intend to make any boast , sir , but simply to vindicate those who
who have the care of my education . if you have no objection except that found on my birth , which be a accident -- " " when one man be a peer and another a ploughman , that be a accident . one do not find fault with the ploughman , but one do not ask he to dinner . " " but my accident , " say smile , " be one which you would hardly discover unless you be tell . have I call myself you would not know but that I be as good a as yourself . " " a man of course may be take in by falsehood , " say the lawyer . " if you have no other objection than that raise , I hope you will allow I to visit in . " " there may be ten thousand other objection , , but I really think that the one be enough . of course I know nothing of my daughter 's feeling . I should imagine that the matter be as strange to she as it be to I . but I can not give you anything like encouragement . if I be ever to have a son - in - law I should wish to have a son - in - law . I do not even know what you profession be . " " I be engage in foreign loans . " " very precarious I should think . a sort of gambling ; be not it ? " " it be the business by which many of the greatest mercantile house in the city have be make . " " I dare say ;-- I dare say ; -- and by which they come to ruin . I have the greatest respect in the world for mercantile enterprise , and have have as much to do as most man with mercantile question . but I be not sure that I wish to marry my daughter in the City . of course it be all prejudice . I will not deny that on general subject I can give as much latitude as any man ; but when one be own hearth be attack -- " " surely such a proposition as mine , , be no attack ! " " in my sense it be . when a man propose to assault and invade the very kernel of another man 's heart , to share with he , and indeed to take from he , the very dearest of he possession , to become part and parcel with he either for infinite good or infinite evil , then a man have a right to guard even he prejudice as precious bulwark . " as he say this be walk about the room with he hand in he trowser pocket . " I have always be for absolute toleration in matter of religion , -- have always advocated admission of and into , and even to the bench . in ordinary life I never question a man 's religion . it be nothing to I whether he believe in , or have no belief at all . but when a man come to I for my daughter -- " " I have always belong to the of , " say . " be at any rate a bad name to go to a Protestant church with , and I do not want my daughter to bear it . I be very frank with you , as in such a matter man ought to understand each other . personally I have like you well enough and have be glad to see you at my house . and you have seem to be friend , and I have have no objection to make . but marry into a family be a very serious thing indeed . " " no man feel that more strongly than I do , . " " there have better be a end of it . " " even though I should be happy enough to obtain she favour ? " " I can not think that she care about you . I do not think it for a moment . you say you have not speak to she , and I be sure she be not a girl to throw herself at a man 's head . I do not approve it , and I think it have better fall to the ground . it must fall to the ground . " " I wish you would give I a reason . " " because you be not English . " " but I be . my father be a foreigner . " " it do not suit my idea . I suppose I may have my own idea about my own family , ? I feel perfectly certain that my child will do nothing to displease I , and this would displease I . if we be to talk for a hour I could say nothing further . " " I hope that I may be able to present thing to you in a aspect so alte , " say as he prepare to take he leave , " as to make you change you mind . " " possibly ;--possibly , " say , " but I do not think it probable . good morning to you , sir . if I have say anything that have seem to be unkind , put it down to my anxiety as a father and not to my conduct as a man . " then the door be close behind he visitor , and be leave walk up and down he room alone . he be by no means satisfied with himself . he feel that he have be rude and at the same time not decisive . he have not explain to the man as he would
would wish to have do , that it be monstrous and out of the question that a daughter of the Wharton , one of the oldest family in , should be give to a friendless Portuguese , -- a probable ,-- about whom nobody know anything . then he remember that sooner or later he girl would have at least L60,000 , a fact of which no human being but himself be aware . would it not be well that somebody should be make aware of it , so that he girl might have the chance of suitor preferable to this swarthy son of ? he begin to be afraid , as he think of it , that he be not manage he matter well . how would it be with he if he should find that the girl be really in love with this swarthy son of ? he have never inquire about he girl 's heart , though there be one to whom he hope that he girl 's heart might some day be give . he almost make up he mind to go home at once , so anxious be he . but the prospect of have to spend a entire afternoon in be too much for he , and he remain in he chamber till the usual hour . , as he return from 's , westward to he club , be , on the whole , contente with the interview . he have expect opposition . he have not think that the cherry would fall easily into he mouth . but the conversation generally have not take those turn which he have think would be most detrimental to he . , as he walk home , remember that be to dine at he house on that evening . during the remainder of the day , after the departure of , he have be unable to take he mind from the consideration of the proposition make to he . he have try the novel , and he have try _v._ the Trustees of the of , a case of undeniable importance in which he be engage on the part of , but neither be sufficiently powerful to divert he thought . throughout the morning he be imagine what he would say to Emily about this lover of hers , -- in what way he would commence the conversation , and how he would express he own opinion should he find that she be in any degree favourable to the man . should she altogether ignore the man 's pretension , there would be no difficulty . but if she hesitate , -- if , as be certainly possible , she should show any partiality for the man , then there would be a knot which would require untying . Hitherto the intercourse between the father and daughter have be simple and pleasant . he have give she everything she ask for , and she have obey he in all the very few matter as to which he have demand obedience . question of discipline , as far as there have be any discipline , have generally be leave to . be to dine in to - day , and perhaps it would be well that he should have a few word with . before he speak to he daughter . have a husband , but have not be ask to dine in the on this occasion . dine in the Square very often , but very seldom , -- not probably above once a year , on some special occasion . he and have marry sister , but they be quite unlike in character and have never become friend . have be nearly twenty year younger than she husband ; . have be six or seven year younger than she sister ; and be a year or two younger than he wife . the two man therefore belong to different period of life , at the present time be a florid youth of forty . he have a moderate fortune , inherit from he mother , of which he be sufficiently careful ; but he love races , and read sport papers ; he be addict to hunt and billiards ; he shoot pigeon , and , -- so have declare calumniously more than once to a intimate friend , -- have not a h in he vocabulary . the poor man do drop a aspirate now and again ; but he know he defect and strove hard , and with fair average success , to overcome it . but do not love he , and they be not friend . perhaps neither do . love he very ardently . she be at any rate almost always willing to leave she own house to come to the , and on such occasion be always willing to dine at the , the club which it delight he to frequent . , on enter he own house , meet he son on the staircase . " do you dine at home to - day , ? " " well , sir ; no , sir . I do not think I do . I think I half promise to dine with a fellow at the club . " " do not you think you would make thing meet more easily about the end of the year if you dine oftener here , where you have nothing to pay , and less frequently at the club , where you pay for everything ? " " but what I should save you would lose , sir . that be the way I look at it . " " then I advise you to look at it the other way , and leave I to take care of myself . come in here , I want to speak to you . " follow he father into a dingy back parlour , which
which be fitte up with book shelf and be generally call the study , but which be gloomy and comfortless because it be seldom use . " I have have you friend with I at my chamber to - day . I do not like you friend . " " I be sorry for that , sir . " " he be a man as to whom I should wish to have a good deal of evidence before I would trust he to be what he seem to be . I dare say he 's clever . " " I think he be more than clever . " " I dare say ; -- and well instruct in some respects . " " I believe he to be a thorough linguist , sir . " " I dare say . I remember a waiter at a hotel in who could speak seven language . it be a accomplishment very necessary for a or a 's . " " you do not mean to say , sir , that you disregard foreign language ? " " I have say nothing of the kind . but in my estimation they do not stand in the place of principle , or a profession , or birth , or country . I fancy there have be some conversation between you about you sister . " " certainly there have . " " a young man should be very chary how he speak to another man , to a stranger , about he sister . a sister 's name should be too sacred for club talk . " " club talk ! good heaven , sir ; you do not think that I have speak of in that way ? there be not a man in have a higher respect for he sister than I have for mine . this man , by no means in a light way but with all seriousness , have tell I that he be attach to ; and I , believe he to be a gentleman and well to do in the world , have refer he to you . can that have be wrong ? " " I do not know how he be 'too do ' , as you call it . I have not ask , and I do not mean to ask . but I doubt he be a gentleman . he be not a english gentleman . what be he father ? " " I have not the least idea . " " or he mother ? " " he have never mention she to I . " " he family ; nor anything of they antecedent ? he be a man fall out of the moon . all that be nothing to we as pass acquaintance . between man such ignorance should I think bar absolute intimacy ; -- but that may be a matter of taste . but it should be hold to be utterly antagonistic to any such alliance as that of marriage . he seem to be a friend of yours . you have better make he understand that it be quite out of the question . I have tell he so , and you have better repeat it . " so say , go upstairs to dress , and , have receive he father 's instruction , go away to the club . when reach the drawing - room , he find . Roby alone , and he at once resolve to discuss the matter with she before he speak to he daughter . " , " he say abruptly , " do you know anything of one ? " " ! oh yes , I know he . " " do you mean that he be a intimate friend ? " " as friend go in , he be . he come to we house , and I think that he hunt with . " be . " that be a recommendation . " " well , , I hardly know what you mean by that , " say , smile . " I do not think , my husband will do any harm ; and I be sure will not do my husband any . " " I dare say not . but that be not the question . can take care of himself . " " quite so . " " and so I dare say can . " at this moment Emily enter the room . " my dear , " say she father , " I be speak to you aunt . would you mind go downstairs and wait for we ? tell they we shall be ready for dinner in ten minute . " then pass out of the room , and . assume a grave demeanour . " the man we be speak of have be to I and have make a offer for . " as he say this he look anxiously into he sister - in - law 's face , in order that he might tell from that how far she favour the idea of such a marriage , -- and he think that he perceive at once that she be not averse to it . " you know it be quite out of the question , " he continue . " I do not know why it should be out of the question . but of course you opinion would have great weight with . " " great weight ! well ;--I should hope so . if not , I do not know whose opinion be to have weight . in the first place the man be a foreigner . " " oh , no ;-- he be English . but if he be a foreigner : many English girl marry foreigner . " " my daughter shall not ; -- not with my permission . you have not
not encourage he , I hope . " " I have not interfere at all , " say . but this be a lie . have interfere . , in discuss the merit and character of the lover with the young lady , have always lent herself to the lover 's aid , -- and have condescende to accept from the lover various present which she could hardly have take have she be hostile to he . " and now tell I about herself . have she see he often ? " " why , , he have dine here , in the house , over and over again . I think that you be encourage he . " " Heavens and earth ! " " of course she have see he . when a man dine at a house he be bound to call . of course he have call , -- I do not know how often . and she have meet he round the corner . " --" Round the corner , " in , mean 's house in .-- " last they be at the together . get they ticket . I think you know all about it . " " do you mean that my daughter go to the alone with this man ? " the father ask in dismay . " be with they . I should have go , only I have a headache . do you not know she go ? " " yes ; -- I hear about the . but I hear nothing of the man . " " I think , , you be all in he favour . " " I be not at all in he favour . I dislike he particularly . for anything I know he may have sell pencil about the street like any other - boy . " " he go to church just as you do , -- that be , if he go anywhere ; which I dare say he do about as often as yourself , . " now , though he be a thorough and perhaps a bigoted member of the of , be not fond of go to church . " do you mean to tell I , " he say , press he hand together , and look very seriously into he sister - in - law 's face ; " do you mean to tell I that she -- like he ? " " yes ;-- I think she do like he . " " you do not mean to say -- she be in love with he ? " " she have never tell I that she be . young lady be shy of make such assertion as to they own feeling before the due time for do so have come . I think she prefer he to anybody else ; and that be he to propose to herself , she would give he she consent to go to you . " " he shall never enter this house again , " say passionately . " you must arrange that with she . if you have so strong a objection to he , I wonder that you should have have he here at all . " " how be I to know ? bless my soul !--just because a man be allow to dine here once or twice ! upon my word , it be too bad ! " " , will not you and aunt come down to dinner ? " say Emily , open the door gently . then they go down to dinner , and during the meal nothing be say about . but they be not very merry together , and poor Emily feel sure that she own affair have be discuss in a troublesome manner . " no one " neither at dinner , on that evening at , nor after dinner , as long as . remain in the house , be a word say about by . he remain longer than usual with he bottle of port wine in the dining - room ; and when he go upstairs , he sit himself down and fall asleep , almost without a sign . he do not ask for a song , nor do Emily offer to s . but as soon as be gone , -- and . go home , round the corner , somewhat earlier than usual , -- then wake up instantly and make inquiry of he daughter . there have , however , be a few word speak on the subject between . and she niece which have serve to prepare Emily for what be come . " have be to you father , " say . , in a voice not specially encourage for such a occasion . then she pause a moment ; but she niece say nothing , and she continue , " yes , -- and you father have be blame I , -- as if I have do anything ! if he do not mean you to choose for yourself , why do not he keep a closer look - out ? " " I have not choose any one , . " " well ; -- to speak fairly , I think you have ; and I have nothing to say against you choice . as young man go , I think be as good as the best of they . I do not know why you should not have he . of course you will have money , but then I suppose he make a large income himself . as to , you do not care a bit about he . " " not in that way , certainly . " " no doubt you papa will have it out with you just now ; so you have better make up you mind what you will say to
to he . if you really like the man , I do not see why you should not say so , and stick to it . he have make a regular offer , and girl in these day be not expect to be they father 's slave . " Emily say nothing further to she aunt on that occasion , but find that she must in truth " have it out " with she father presently , give herself up to reflection . it might probably be the case that the whole condition of she future life would depend on the way in which she might now " have it out " with she father . I would not wish the reader to be prejudice against by the not unnatural feeling which may perhaps be feel in regard to the aunt . be pleased with little intrigue , be addicte to the amusement of foster love affair , be fond of be think to be useful in such matter , and be not averse to have present give to she . she have marry a vulgar man ; and , though she have not become like the man , she have become vulgar . she be not a eligible companion for 's daughter , -- a matter as to which the father have not give himself proper opportunity of learn the fact . a aunt in he close neighbourhood be so great a comfort to he , -- so ready and so natural a assistance to he in he difficulty ! but be not in the least like she aunt , nor have . be at all like . no doubt the contact be dangerous . have perhaps already be done . it may be that some slightest soil have already mar the pure white of the girl 's natural character . but if so , the stain be as yet too impalpable to be visible to ordinary eye . be a tall , fair girl , with grey eye , rather exceed the average proportion as well as height of woman . she feature be regular and handsome , and she form be perfect ; but it be by she manner and she voice that she conquer , rather than by she beauty , -- by those gift and by a clearness of intellect join with that feminine sweetness which have its most frequent foundation in self - denial . those who know she well , and have become attached to she , be apt to endow she with all virtue , and to give she credit for a loveliness which strangers do not find on she face . but as we do not light up we house with we brightest lamps for all comer , so neither do she emit from she eye they brightest spark till special occasion for such shining have arisen . to those who be allow to love she no woman be more lovable . there be innate in she a appreciation of she own position as a woman , and with it a principle of self - denial as a human being , which it be beyond the power of any to destroy or even to defile by small stains . like other girl she have be teach to presume that it be she destiny to be marry , and like other girl she have think much about she destiny . a young man generally regard it as he destiny either to succeed or to fail in the world , and he think about that . to he marriage , when it come , be a accident to which he have hardly as yet give a thought . but to the girl the matrimony which be or be not to be she destiny contain within itself the only success or failure which she anticipate . the young man may become , or at any rate earn he bread comfortably as a county court judge . but the girl can look forward to little else than the chance of have a good man for she husband ; -- a good man , or if she taste lie in that direction , a rich man . have think about these thing , and she sincerely believe that she have find the good man in . the man , certainly , be one strangely endow with the power of create a belief . when go to at he chamber he have not intend to cheat the lawyer into any erroneous idea about he family , but he have resolve that he would so discuss the question of he own condition , which would probably be raise , as to leave upon the old man 's mind a unfounded conviction that in regard to money and income he have no reason to fear question . not a word have be say about he money or he income . and have feel himself bound to abstain from allusion to such matter from a assured feeling that he could not in that direction plant a enduring objection . in this way have carry he point with . he have convince Mrs . Roby that among all the girl 's attraction the greatest attraction for he be the fact that she be 's niece . he have make Emily herself believe that the one strong passion of he life be he love for she , and this he have do without ever have ask for she love . and he have even take the trouble to allure , and have listen to and have talk whole page out of 's . on he own behalf it must be acknowledge that he do love the girl , as well perhaps as he be capable of love any one ; -- but he have find out many particulars as to 's money before he have allow himself to love she . as soon
soon as . have gather up she knitting , and declare , as she always do on such occasion , that she could go round the corner without have any one to look after she , begin . " Emily , my dear , come here . " then she come and sit on a footstool at he foot , and look up into he face . " do you know what I be go to speak to you about , my darl ? " " yes , papa ; I think I do . it be about -- . " " you aunt have tell you , I suppose . yes ; it be about . I have be very much astonish to - day by , -- a man of whom I have see very little and know less . he come to I to - day and ask for my permission -- to address you . " she sit perfectly quiet , still look at he , but she do not say a word . " of course I do not give he permission . " " why of course , papa ? " " because he be a stranger and a foreigner . would you have wish I to tell he that he might come ? " " yes , papa . " he be sit on a sofa and shrank back a little from she as she make this free avowal . " in that case I could have judge for myself . I suppose every girl would like to do that . " " but should you have accept he ? " " I think I should have consult you before I do that . but I should have wish to accept he . , I do love he . I have never say so before to any one . I would not say so to you now , if he have not -- speak to you as he have do . " " Emily , it must not be . " " why not , papa ? if you say it shall not be so , it shall not . I will do as you bid I . " then he put out he hand and caress she , strok down she hair . " but I think you ought to tell I why it must not be , -- as I do love he . " " he be a foreigner . " " but be he ? and why should not a foreigner be as good as a ? he name be foreign , but he talk and live as a . " " he have no relative , no family , no belonging . he be what we call a adventurer . marriage , my dear , be a most serious thing . " " yes , papa , I know that . " " one be bound to be very careful . how can I give you to a man I know nothing about , -- a adventurer ? what would they say in ? " " I do not know why they should say anything , but if they do I should not much care . " " I should , my dear . I should care very much . one be bound to think of one 's family . suppose it should turn out afterwards that he be -- disreputable ! " " you may say that of any man , papa . " " but when a man have connexion , a father and mother , or uncle and aunt , people that everybody know about , then there be some guarantee of security . do you ever hear this man speak of he father ? " " I do not know that I ever do . " " or he mother , -- or he family ? do not you think that be suspicious ? " " I will ask he , papa , if you wish . " " no , I would have you ask he nothing . I would not wish that there should be opportunity for such asking . if there have be intimacy between you , such information should have come naturally , -- as a thing of course . you have make he no promise ? " " oh no , papa . " " nor speak to he -- of you regard for he ? " " never ; -- not a word . nor he to I ,--except in such word as one understand even though they say nothing . " " I wish he have never see you . " " be he a bad man , papa ? " " who know ? I can not tell . he may be ever so bad . how be one to know whether a man be bad or good when one know nothing about he ? " at this point the father get up and walk about the room . " the long and the short of it be that you must not see he any more . " " do you tell he so ? " " yes ; -- well ; I do not know whether I say exactly that , but I tell he that the whole thing must come to a end . and it must . luckily it seem that nothing have be say on either side . " " but , papa --; be there to be no reason ? " " have not I give reason ? I will not have my daughter encourage a adventurer , -- a man of whom nobody know anything . that be reason sufficient . " " he have a business , and he life with gentleman . he be 's friend . he be well educated ; -- oh , so much better than
than most man that one meet . and he be clever . , I wish you know he better than you do . " " I do not want to know he better . " " be not that prejudice , papa ? " " my dear Emily , " say , strive to wax into anger that he might be firm against she , " I do not think that it become you to ask you father such a question as that . you ought to believe that it be the chief object of my life to do the best I can for my child . " " I be sure it be . " " and you ought to feel that , as I have have a long experience in the world , my judgment about a young man might be trust . " that be a statement which be not prepare to admit . she have already profess herself willing to submit to she father 's judgment , and do not now by any means contemplate rebellion against parental authority . but she do feel that on a matter so vital to she she have a right to plead she cause before judgment should be give , and she be not slow to assure herself , even as this interview go on , that she love for the man be strong enough to entitle she to assure she father that she happiness depend on he reversal of the sentence already pronounce . " you know , papa , that I trust you , " she say . " and I have promise you that I will not disobey you . if you tell I that I be never to see again , I will not see he . " " you be a good girl . you be always a good girl . " " but I think that you ought to hear I . " then he stand still with he hand in he trowser pocket look at she . he do not want to hear a word , but he feel that he would be a tyrant if he refuse . " if you tell I that I be not to see he , I shall not see he . but I shall be very unhappy . I do love he , and I shall never love any one else in the same way . " " that be nonsense , Emily . there be . " " I be sure you will never ask I to marry a man I do not love , and I shall never love . if this be to be as you say , it will make I very , very wretched . it be right that you should know the truth . if it be only because have a foreign name -- " " it be not only that ; no one know anything about he , or where to inquire even . " " I think you should inquire , papa , and be quite certain before you pronounce such a sentence against I . it will be a crush blow . " he look at she , and see that there be a fix purpose in she countenance of which he have never before see similar sign . " you claim a right to my obedience , and I acknowledge it . I be sure you believe I when I promise not to see he without you permission . " " I do believe you . of course I believe you . " " but if I do that for you , papa , I think that you ought to be very sure , on my account , that I have not to bear such unhappiness for nothing . you will think about it , papa , -- will you not , before you quite decide ? " she lean against he as she speak , and he kiss she . " good night , now , papa . you will think about it ? " " I will . I will . of course I will . " and he begin the process of think about it immediately , -- before the door be close behind she . but what be there to think about ? Nothe that she have say alte in the least he idea about the man . he be as convinced as ever that unless there be much to conceal there would not be so much concealment . but a feeling begin to grow upon he already that he daughter have a mode of pleading with he which he would not ultimately be able to resist . he have the power , he know , of put a end to the thing altogether . he have only to say resolutely and unchangeably that the thing should not be , and it would not be . if he could steel he heart against he daughter 's sorrow for , say , a twelvemonth , the victory would be win . but he already begin to fear that he lack the power to steel he heart against he daughter . go to " and what be they go to make you now ? " this question be ask of she husband by a lady with whom perhaps the reader of this volume may have already form some acquaintance . Chronicle of she early life have be write , at any rate copiously . the lady be the Duchess of , and she husband be of course the . in order that the nature of the question ask by the duchess may be explain , it must be state that just at this time the political affair of the nation have get themselves tie up into one of those truly desperate knot from which even the wisdom and experience of septuagenarian statesman can see no
no unravelment . the head of party be at a standstill . in the of there be , so to say , no majority on either side . the mind of member be so astray that , accord to the best calculation that could be make , there would be a majority of about ten against any possible cabinet . there would certainly be a majority against either of those well - try but , at this moment , little - trust , and . there be certain man , nominally belong to this or to the other party , who would certainly within a week of the nomination of a cabinet in the house , oppose the cabinet which they ought to support . have be in power , -- nay , be in power , though he have twice resign . have be twice send for to , and have on one occasion undertaken and on another had refuse to undertake to form a . have try two or three combination , and have be at he wit 's end . he be no doubt still in power , -- could appoint bishop , and make peer , and give away ribbon . but he could not pass a law , and certainly continue to hold he present uncomfortable position by no will of he own . but a can not escape till he have succeed in find a successor ; and though the successor be find and consent to make a attempt , the old unfortunate can not be allow to go free when that attempt be show to be a failure . he have not absolutely give up the key of he box , and no one will take they from he . even a sovereign can abdicate ; but the of a constitutional government be in bond . the reader may therefore understand that the Duchess be ask she husband what place among the political rulers of the country have be offer to he by the last aspirant to the leadership of the government . but the reader should understand more than this , and may perhaps do so , if he have ever see those former chronicle to which allusion have be make . the , before he become a duke , have hold very high office , have be of the . when he be transfer , perforce , to the house of Lords , he have , -- as be not uncommon in such case ,-- accept a lower political station . this have displease the Duchess , who be ambitious both on she own behalf and that of she lord , -- and who think that a of should be nothing in the government if not at any rate near the top . but after that , with the simple and single object of do some special piece of work for the nation , -- something which he fancie that nobody else would do if he do not do it ,-- he , of he own motion , at he own solicitation , have encountere further official degradation , very much to the disgust of the Duchess . and it be not the way with she to hide such sorrow in the depth of she bosom . when affront she would speak out , whether to she husband , or to another , -- use irony rather than argument to support she cause and to vindicate she way . the shaft of ridicule hurl by she against she husband in regard to he voluntary abasement have be many and sharp . they sting he , but never for a moment influence he . and though they sting he , they do not even anger he . it be she nature to say such thing , -- and he know that they come rather from she uncontrolled spirit than from any malice . she be he wife too , and he have a idea that of little injury of that sort there should be no end of bearing on the part of a husband . sometimes he would endeaavor to explain to she the motives which actuate he ; but he have come to fear that they be and must ever be unintelligible to she . but he credit she with less than she real intelligence . she do understand the nature of he work and he reason for do it ; and , after she own fashion , do what she conceive to be she own work in endeavouring to create within he bosom a desire for higher thing . " surely , " she say to herself , " if a man of he rank be to be a minister he should be a great minister ; -- at any rate as great as he circumstance will make he . a man never can save he country by degrad himself . " in this he would probably have agree ; but he idea of degradation and hers hardly tally . when therefore she ask he what they be go to make he , it be as though some sarcastic housekeeper in a great establishment should ask the butler , -- some butler too prone to yield in such matter ,-- whether the master have appoint he lately to the cleaning of shoe or the carrying of coal . since these knot have become so very tight , and since the journey to have become so very frequent , she have ask many such question , and have receive but very indifferent reply . the have sometimes declare that the matter be not ripe enough to allow he to make any answer . " of course , " say the Duchess , " you should keep the secret . the editor of the evening papers have not know it for above a hour . " at another time he tell she that
that he have undertake to give he assistance in any way in which it might be ask . " - with , I should say , " answer the Duchess . then he tell she that he believe a attempt would be make at a mixed ministry , but that he do not in the least know to whom the work of do so would be confide . " you will be about the last man who will be tell , " reply the Duchess . now , at this moment , he have , as she know , come direct from the house of , and she ask she question in she usual spirit . " and what be they go to make you now ? " but he do not answer the question in he usual manner . he would customarily smile gently at she badinage , and perhaps say a word intend to show that he be not in the least move by she raillery . but in this instance he be very grave , and stand before she a moment make no answer at all , look at she in a sad and almost solemn manner . " they have tell you that they can do without you , " she say , break out almost into a passion . " I know how it would be . be always value by other as they value themselves . " " I wish it be so , " he reply . " I should sleep easier to - night . " " what be it , ? " she exclaim , jump up from she chair . " I never care for you ridicule hithertoo , ; but now I feel that I want you sympathy . " " if you be go to do anything , -- to do really anything , you shall have it . oh , how you shall have it ! " " I have receive she Majesty 's order to go down to at once . I must start within half - a - hour . " " you be go to be ! " she exclaim . as she speak she throw she arm up , and then rush into he embrace . never since they first union have she be so demonstrative either of love or admiration . " oh , , " she say , " if I can only do anything I will slave for you . " as he put he arm round she waist he already feel the pleasantness of she altered way to he . she have never worship he yet , and therefore she worship when it do come have all the delight to he which it ordinarily have to the newly married hero . " stop a moment , . I do not know how it may be yet . but this I know , that if without cowardice I could avoid this task , I would certainly avoid it . " " oh no ! and there would be cowardice ; of course there would , " say the Duchess , not much care what might be the bond which bound he to the task so long as he should certainly feel himself to be bound . " he have tell I that he think it my duty to make the attempt . " " who be he ? " " . I do not know that I should have feel myself bound by he , but the say so also . " this duke be we duke 's old friend , the of . " be he there ? and who else ? " " no one else . it be no case for exultation , , for the chance be that I shall fail . the have promise to help I , on condition that one or two he have name be include , and that one or two whom he have also name be not . in each case I should myself have do exactly as he propose . " " and ? " " he will retire . that be a matter of course . he will intend to support we ; but all that be veil in the obscurity which be always , I think , darker as to the future of politics than any other future . Cloud arise , one know not why or whence , and create darkness when one expect light . but as yet , you must understand , nothing be settled . I can not even say what answer I may make to she Majesty , till I know what command she Majesty may lay upon I . " " you must keep a hold of it now , , " say the Duchess , clench she own fist . " I will not even close a finger on it with any personal ambition , " say the . " if I could be relieve from the burden this moment it would be a ease to my heart . I remember once , " he say , -- and as he speak he again put he arm around she waist , " when I be debar from take office by a domestic circumstance . " " I remember that too , " she say , speak very gently and look up at he . " it be a grief to I at the time , though it turn out so well , -- because the office then suggest to I be one which I think I could fill with credit to the country . I believe in myself then as far as that work go . but for this attempt I have no belief in myself . I doubt whether I have any gift for governing man . " " it will come . " " it may be that I
I must try ; -- and it may be that I must break my heart because I fail . but I shall make the attempt if I be direct to do so in any manner that shall seem feasible . I must be off now . the be to be here this evening . they have better have dinner ready for I whenever I may be able to eat it . " then he take he departure before she could say another word . when the Duchess be alone she take to think of the whole thing in a manner which they who best know she would have think to be very unusual with she . she already possess all that rank and wealth could give she , and together with those good thing a peculiar position of she own , of which she be proud , and which she have make she own not by she wealth or rank , but by a certain fearless energy and power of raillery which never desert she . many fear she and she be afraid of none , and many also love she , -- whom she also love , for she nature be affectionate . she be happy with she child , happy with she friend , in the enjoyment of perfect health , and capable of take a exaggerated interest in anything that might come uppermost for the moment . one would have be inclin to say that politics be altogether unnecessary to she , and that as Duchess of , lately know as , she have a wider and a pleasanter influence than could belong to any woman as wife of a . and she be essentially one of those woman who be not contente to be know simply as the wife of they husband . she have a celebrity of she own , quite independent of he position , and which could not be enhance by any glory or any power add to he . nevertheless , when he leave she to go down to the with the prospect of be call upon to act as chief of the incoming ministry , she heart throb with excitement . it have come at last , and he would be , to she think , the lead man in the greatest kingdom in the world . but she feel in regard to he somewhat as do towards she lord . " what thou would 'st highly , that would 'st thou holily . " she know he to be full of scruple , unable to bend when atch be to be get by bending , unwilling to domineer when man might be bring to subjection only by domination . the first duty never could be teach to he . to win support by smile when he heart be bitter within he would never be within the power of she husband . he could never be bring to buy a enemy by political gift , -- would never be prone to silence he keenest opponent by make he he right hand supporter . but the other lesson be easier and might she think be learn . power be so pleasant that man quickly learn to be greedy in the enjoyment of it , and to flatter themselves that patriotism require they to be imperious . she would be constant with he day and night to make he understand that he duty to he country require he to be in very truth its chief ruler . and then with some knowledge of thing as they be , -- and also with much ignorance , -- she reflect that he have at he command a means of obtaining popularity and securing power , which have not belong to he immediate predecessor , and have perhaps never to the same extent be at the command of any minister in . he wealth as of have be great ; but hers , as available for immediate purpose , have be greater even than he . after some fashion , of which she be profoundly ignorant , she own property be separate from he and reserve to herself and she child . since she marriage she have never say a word to he about she money ,-- unless it be to ask that something out of the common course might be spend on some , generally absurd , object . but now have come the time for squander money . she be not only rich but she have a popularity that be exclusively she own . the new and the new 's wife should entertain after a fashion that have never yet be know even among the nobility of . both in town and country those great mansion should be keep open which be now rarely much use because she have find they dull , cold , and comfortless . in there should not be a of parliament whom she would not herself know and influence by she flattery and grace , -- or if there be man whom she could not influence , they should live as man taboo and unfortunate . money matter nothing . they income be enormous , and for a series of year , -- for half - a - dozen year if the game could be keep up so long , -- they could spend treble what they call they income without real injury to they child . Vision pass through she brain of wondrous thing which might be do , -- if only she husband would be true to he own greatness . the have leave she about two . she do not stir out of the house that day , but in the course of the afternoon she write a line to a friend who live not very far from she . the Duchess dwelt in , and she friend in . the note be as follow :-- ,
, come to I at once . I be too excited to go to you . yours , . this be address to one . , a lady as to whom chronicle also have be write , and who have be know to the reader of such chronicle as a friend dearly love by the Duchess . as quickly as she could put on she carriage garment and get herself take to , be there . " well , my dear , how do you think it be all settle at last ? " say the Duchess . it will probably be feel that the new 's wife be indiscreet , and hardly worthy of the confidence place in she by she husband . but surely we all have some one friend to whom we tell everything , and with the . be that one friend . " be the to be ? " " how on earth should you have guess that ? " " what else could make you so excit ? besides , it be by no means strange . I understand that they have go on try the two old stager till it be useless to try they any longer ; and if there be to be a fresh man , no one would be more likely than the . " " do you think so ? " " certainly . why not ? " " he have fritter away he political position by such meaningless concession . and then he have never do anything to put himself forward , -- at any rate since he leave the of . perhaps I have not read thing right , -- but I be surprised , very much surprised . " " and gratify ? " " oh yes . I can tell you everything , because you will neither misunderstand I nor tell tale of I . yes ,-- I shall like he to be , though I know that I shall have a bad time of it myself . " " why a bad time ? " " he be so hard to manage . of course I do not mean about politics . of course it must be a mixed kind of thing at first , and I do not care a straw whether it run to or . the country go on its own way , either for better or for worse , whichever of they be in . I do not think it make any difference as to what sort of law be pass . but among ourselves , in we set , it make a deal of difference who get the garter , and the county , who be make baron and then earl , and whose name stand at the head of everything . " " that be you way of look at politics ? " " I own it to you ; -- and I must teach it to he . " " you never will do that , . " " never be a long word . I mean to try . for look back and tell I of any who have become sick of he power . they become sick of the want of power when it be fall away from they , -- and then they affect to disdain and put aside the thing they can no longer enjoy . love of power be a kind of feeling which come to a man as he grow older . " " politics with the have be simple patriotism , " say . " the patriotism may remain , my dear , but not the simplicity . I do not want he to sell he country to , or to turn it into a american republic in order that he may be . but when he get 's the rein in he hand , I want he to keep they there . if he be so much honester than other people , of course he be the best man for the place . we must make he believe that the very existence of the country depend on he firmness . " " to tell you the truth , , I do not think you will ever make the believe anything . what he believe , he believe either from very old habit , or from the working of he own mind . " " you be always singe he praise , . " " I do not know that there be any special praise in what I say ; but as far as I can see , it be the man 's character . " " will come in , of course , " say the Duchess . " will be like the in one thing . he will take he own way as to be in or out quite independently of he wife . " " you would like he to be in office ? " " no , indeed ! why wshould I ? he would be more often at the , and keep later hour , and be always away all the morning into the bargain . but I shall like he to do as he like himself . " " Fancy think of all that . I would sit up all night every night of my life .-- I would listen to every debate in the house myself , -- to have . I like to be busy . well now , if it do come off -- " " it be not settle , then ? " " how can one hope that a single journey will settle it , when those other man have be go backwards and forwards between and , like buckets in a well , for the last three week ? but if it be settled , I mean to have a cabinet of my own , and I mean that
that you shall do the foreign affair . " " you would better let I be at the exchequer . I be very good at account . " " I will do that myself . the account that I intend to set a - go would frighten any one less audacious . and I mean to be my own home secretary , and to keep my own conscience , -- and to be my own master of the ceremony certainly . I think a small cabinet get on best . do you know , -- I should like to put the down . " " what on earth do you mean ? " " no treason ; nothing of that kind . but I should like to make second - rate ; and I be not quite sure but I can . I dare say you do not quite understand I . " " I do not think that I do , . " " you will some of these day . come in to - morrow before lunch . I suppose I shall know all about it then , and shall have find that my basket of crockery have be kick over and every thing smashed . " at about nine the have return , and be eat he very simple dinner in the breakfast - room , -- a beefsteak and a potato , with a glass of sherry and Apollinaris water . no man more easily satisfied as to what he eat and drank live in in those day . as regard the eating and drink he dine alone , but he wife sit with he and wait on he , have send the servant out of the room . " I have tell she Majesty that I would do the best I could , " say the . " then you be . " " not at all . be . I have undertake to form a ministry , if I find it practicable , with the assistance of such friend as I possess . I never feel before that I have to lean so entirely on other as I do now . " " lean on yourself only . be enough for yourself . " " those be empty word , ;--words that be quite empty . in one sense a man should always be enough for himself . he should have enough of principle and enough of conscience to restrain he from do what he know to be wrong . but can a ship - builder build he ship single - hand , or the watchmaker make he watch without assistance ? on former occasion such as this , I could say , with little or no help from without , whether I would or would not undertake the work that be propose to I , because I have only a bit of the ship to build , or a wheel of the watch to make . my own efficacy for my present task depend entirely on the co-operation of other , and unfortunately upon that of some other with whom I have no sympathy , nor have they with I . " " leave they out , " say the boldly . " but they be man who will not be leave out , and whose service the country have a right to expect . " " then bring they in , and think no more about it . it be no good crying for pain that can not be cure . " " Co-operation be difficult without community of feeling . I find myself to be too stubborn - hear for the place . it be nothing to I to sit in the same cabinet with a man I dislike when I have not put he there myself . but now -- . as I have travel up I have almost feel that I could not do it ! I do not know before how much I might dislike a man . " " who be the one man ? " " Nay ; -- whoever he be , he will have to be a friend now , and therefore I will not name he , even to you . but it be not one only . if it be one , absolutely mark and recognise , I might avoid he . but my friend , real friend , be so few ! who be there besides the on whom I can lean with both confidence and love ? " " . " " hardly so , . but go out with . they will always cling together . " " you use to like . " " , -- yes ! if there could be a in the cabinet , this trouble would not come upon my shoulders . " " then I be very glad that there can not be a . why should not there be as good fish in the sea as ever be catch out of it ? " " when you have get a good fish you like to make as much of it as you can . " " I suppose will join you . " " I think we shall ask he . but I be not prepare to discuss man 's name as yet . " " you must discuss they with the immediately . " " probably ; -- but I have better discuss they with he before I fix my own mind by name they even to you . " " you will bring in , ? " " ! " " yes ;-- , -- the man who be try . " " my dear , we have not come down to that yet . we need not at any rate trouble ourselves about the small fishes till we be sure that we can get big fish to join we .
. " " I do not know why he should be a small fish . no man have do better than he have ; and if you want a man to stick to you -- " " I do not want a man to stick to I . I want a man to stick to he country . " " you be talk about sympathy . " " well , yes ;-- I be . but do not name any one else just at present . the will be here soon , and I would be alone till he come . " " there be one thing I want to say , . " " what be it ? " " one favour I want to ask . " " pray do not ask anything for any man just at present . " " it be not anything for any man . " " nor for any woman . " " it be for a woman , -- but one whom I think you would wish to oblige . " " who be it ? " then she curtsey , smile at he drolly , and put she hand upon she breast . " something for you ! what on earth can you want that I can do for you ? " " will you do it , -- if it be reasonable ? " " if I think it reasonable , I certainly will do it . " then she manner change altogether , and she become serious and almost solemn . " if , as I suppose , all the great place about she Majesty be change , I should like to be of the Robe . " " you ! " say he , almost start out of he usual quiet demeanour . " why not I ? be not my rank high enough ? " " you bure yourself with the intricacy and subservience , with the tedium and pomposity of court life ! Cora , you do not know what you be talk about , or what you be propose for yourself . " " if I be willing to try to undertake a duty , why should I be debar from it any more than you ? " " because I have put myself into a groove , and ground myself into a mould , and clip and pa and pinch myself all round ,-- very ineffectually , as I fear , -- to fit myself for this thing . you have liv as free as air . you have disdain , -- and though I may have grumble I have still be proud to see you disdain , -- to wrap yourself in the swaddling bandage of court life . you have ridicule all those who have be near she as lady . " " the individual , , perhaps ; but not the office . I be get older now , and I do not see why I should not begin a new life . " she have be somewhat quell by he unexpected energy , and be at the moment hardly able to answer he with she usual spirit . " do not think of it , my dear . you ask whether you rank be high enough . it must be so , as there be , as it happen , none higher . but you position , should it come to pass that you husband be the head of the government , will be too high . I may say that in no condition should I wish my wife to be subject to other restraint than that which be common to all marry woman . I should not choose that she should have any duty unconnected with we jous not family and home . but as of the I would altogether object to she hold a office believe to be at my disposal . " she look at he with she large eye wide open , and then leave he without a word . she have no other way of show she displeasure , for she know that when he speak as he have speak now all argument be unavailing . the remain a hour alone before he be join by the other , during which he do not for a moment apply he mind to the subject which might be think to be most prominent in he thought , -- the fill up , namely , of a list of he new government . all that he could do in that direction without further assistance have be already do very easily . there be four or five certain name , -- name that be of certain political friend , and three or four almost equally certain of man who have be political enemie , but who would now clearly be ask to join the ministry . , the late attorney - General , would of course be ask to resume he place ; but , who be up to this moment Solicitor- General for the conservatives , would also be invite to retain that which he hold . many detail be know , not only to the two duke who be about to patch up the ministry between they , but to the political world at large , -- and be fact upon which the newspaper be able to display they wonderful foresight and general omniscience with they usual confidence . and as to the point which be in doubt ,-- whether or not , for instance , that consistend old should be ask to put up with the post -office or should be allow to remain at the , -- the do not care to trouble himself till the elder should have come to he assistance . but he own position and he questionable capacity for fill it , -- that occupy all he mind . if nominally
nominally first he would be really first . of so much it seem to he that he honou require he to assure himself . to be a _faineant_ ruler be in direct antagonism both to he conscience and he predilection . to call himself by a great name before the world , and then to be something infinitely less than that name , would be to he a degradation . but though he feel fix as to that , he be by no means assure as to that other point , which to most man firm in they resolve as he be , and back up as he have be by the confidence of other , would be cause of small hesitation . he do doubt he ability to fill that place which it would now be he duty to occupy . he more than doubt . he tell himself again and again that there be want to he a certain noble capacity for commanding support and homage from other man . with thing and facts he could deal , but human being have not open themselves to he . but now it be too late ! and yet , -- as he say to he wife , -- to fail would break he heart ! no ambition have prompt he . he be sure of himself there . one only consideration have force he into this great danger , and that have be the assurance of other that it be he manifest duty to encounter it . and now there be clearly no escape , -- no escape compatible with that clean - hand truth from which it be not possible for he to swerve . he might create difficulty in order that through they a way might still be open to he of restoring to the the commission which have be entrust to he . he might insist on this or that impossible concession . but the memory of escape such as that would break he heart as surely as the failure . when the be announce he rise to greet he old friend almost with fervour . " it be a shame , " he say , " to bring you out so late . I ought to have go to you . " " not at all . it be always the rule in these case that the man who have most to do should fix himself as well as he can where other may be able to find he . " the of be a old man , between seventy and eighty , with hair nearly white , and who on enter the room have to unfold himself out of various coat and comforter . but he be in full possession not only of he intellects but of he bodily power , show , as many politician do show , that the care of the nation may sit upon a man 's shoulders for many year without breaking or even bend they . for the have belong to ministry for nearly the last half century . as the chronicle have also deal with he , no further record of he past life shall now be give . he have say something about the Queen , express gracious wish for the comfort of she in all these matters , something of the inconvenience of these political journey to and fro , something also of the delicacy and difficulty of the operation on hand which be enhance by the necessity of bring man together as cordial ally who have hitherto act with bitter animosity one to another , before the say a word . " we may as well , " say the elder , " make out some small provisional list , and you can ask those you name to be with you early to -morrow . but perhaps you have already make a list . " " no indeed . I have not even have a pencil in my hand . " " we may as well begin then , " say the elder , face the table when he see that he less-experienced companion make no attempt at beginning . " there be something horrible to I in the idea of write down man 's name for such a work as this , just as boy at school use to draw out the eleven for a cricket match . " the old stager turn round and star at the younger politician . " the thing itself be so momentous that one ought to have aid from heaven . " be the last man from whom the of would have expect romance at any time , and , least of all , at such a time as this . " from you may have , " he say , " by say you prayer ; and I do not doubt you ask it for this and all other thing generally . but a angel will not come to tell you who ink to be of the . " " no angel will , and therefore I wish that I could wash my hand of it . " he old friend still star at he . " it be like sacrilege to I , attempt this without feel one 's own fitness for the work . it unman I , -- this necessity of do that which I know I can not do with fitting judgment . " " you mind have be a little too hard at work to - day . " " it have not be at work at all . I have have nothing to do , and have be unable really to think of work . but I feel that chance circumstance have put I into a position for which I be unfit , and which yet I have be unable to avoid . how much better would it be that you
you should do this alone , -- you yourself . " " utterly out of the question . I do know and think that I always have know my own power . neither have my aptitude in debate nor my capacity for work justify I in look to the premiership . but that , forgive I , be now not worthy of consideration . it be because you do work and can work , and because you have fit yourself for that continue course of lucid explanation which we now call debate , that man on both side have call upon you as the best man to come forward in this difficulty . excuse I , my friend , again , if I say that I expect to find you manliness equal to you capacity . " " if I could only escape from it ! " " Psha ;--nonsense ! " say the old , get up . " there be such a thing as a conscience with so fine a edge that it will allow a man to do nothing . you have get to serve you country . on such assistance as I can give you you know that you may depend with absolute assurance . now let we get to work . I suppose you would wish that I should take the chair at the Council . " " certainly ; -- of course , " say the of , turn to the table . the one practical suggestion have fix he , and from that moment he give himself to the work in hand with all he energie . it be not very difficult , nor do it take they a very long time . if the future have not he name at he finger ' end , the future of the have they . eight man be soon name whom it be think well that the of should consult early in the morning as to they willingness to fill certain place . " each one of they may have some other one or some two whom he may insist on bring with he , " say the elder ; " and though of course you can not yield to the pressure in every such case , it will be wise to allow yourself scope for some amount of concession . you will find they will shake down after the usual amount of resistance and compliance . no ;-- do not you leave you house to - morrow to see anybody unless it be or she Majesty . I will come to you at two , and if she will give I luncheon , I will lunch with she . good night , and do not think too much of the bigness of the thing . I remember dear old tell I how much more difficult it be to find a good coachman than a good Secretary of . " the of , as he sit think of thing for the next hour in he chair , succeed only in prove to himself that never ought to have be of after have venture to make so poor a joke on so solemn a subject . the of a by the time that the holiday be over ,-- holiday which have be use so conveniently for the making of a new government , -- the work of get a team together have be accomplish by the united energy of the two duke and other friend . the fill up of the great place have be by no means so difficult or so tedious , -- nor indeed the cause of half so many heartburn , -- as the completion of the list of the subordinate . _Noblesse oblige ._ the secretaries of , and the Chancellor , and the first Lords , select from this or the other party , feel that the eye of mankind be upon they , and that it behove they to assume a virtue if they have it not . they be habitually indifferent to self - exaltation , and allow themselves to be thrust into this or that unfitting role , professe that the 's government and the good of the country be they only consideration . make way for drought at the Admiralty , because it be feel on all side that could not join the new composite party without high place . and the same grace be show in regard to , who remaine at the , keep the office to which he have be lately transfer under . and say not a word , whatever he may have think , when he be tell that 's , , be to keep the seal . do , no doubt , think very much about it ; for legal office have a signification differing much from that which attach itself to place simply political . a become a peer , and on go out of office enjoy a large pension . when the woolsack have be reach there come a end of doubt , and a beginning of ease . be not a young man , and this be a terrible blow . but he bear it manfully , say not a word when the speak to he ; but he become convinced from that moment that no more inefficient lawyer ever sit upon the english bench , or a more presumptuous politician in the british parliament , than . the real struggle , however , lay in the appropriate distribution of the Rattler and the , the Fitzgibbon and the among the subordinate office of State . and , with a host of other who have belong to , be prepare , as they declare from the first , to lend they assistance to the . they have consult on the subject , and tell they that they duty lay in that direction . at the first blush of
of the matter the arrangement take the form of a gracious tender from themselves to a statesman call upon to act in very difficult circumstance , -- and they be thanke accordingly by the , with something of real cordial gratitude . but when the actual adjustment of thing be in hand , the , have but little power of assume a soft countenance and use soft word while he heart be bitter , feel on more than one occasion inclin to withdraw he thanks . he be astounde not so much by the pretension as by the unblushing assertion of these pretension in reference to place which he have be innocent enough to think be always bestow at any rate without direct application . he have measure himself rightly when he tell the older duke in one of those anxious conversation which have be hold before the attempt be make , that long as he have be in office himself he do not know what be the way of bestowing office . " two gentleman have be here this morning , " he say one day to the of , " one on the heel of the other , each assure I not only that the whole stability of the enterprise depend on my give a certain office to he , -- but actually tell I to my face that I have promise it to he ! " the old statesman laugh . " to be tell within the same half - hour by two man that I have make promise to each of they inconsistent with each other ! " " who be the two man ? " " and . " " I be assure that they be inseparable since the work be begin . they always have a leaning to each other , and now I hear they pass they time between the step of the and . " " but what be I to do ? one must be , no doubt . " " they be both good , man in they way , you know . " " but why do they come to I with they mouth open , like dog crave a bone ? it use not to be so . of course man be always anxious for office as they be now . " " well ; yes . we have hear of that before to - day , I think . " " but I do not think any man ever venture to ask . " " time have do much for he in consolidat he authority , and perhaps the present world be less reticent in its eagerness than it be in he younger day . I doubt , however , whether it be more dishonest , and whether struggle be not make quite as disgraceful to the struggler as anything that be do now . you can not alter the man , and you must use they . " the sit down and sigh over the degenerate patriotism of the age . but at last even the and be fix , if not satisfied , and a complete list of the ministry appear in all the newspaper . though the thing have be long a - do , still it have come suddenly , -- so that at the first proposition to form a coalition ministry , the newspaper have hardly known whether to assist or to oppose the scheme . there be no doubt , in the mind of all these editor and contributor , the teaching of a tradition that coalitions of this kind have be generally feeble , sometimes disastrous , and on occasion even disgraceful . when a man , perhaps through a long political life , have bound himself to a certain code of opinion , how can he change that code at a moment ? and when at the same moment , together with the change , he secure power , patronage , and pay , how shall the public voice absolve he ? but then again man , who have by the work of they life grow into a certain position in the country , and have unconsciously but not therefore less actually make themselves indispensable either to this side in politics or to that , can not free themselves altogether from the responsibility of manage they when a period come such as that now reach . this also the newspaper perceive ; and have , since the commencement of the , be very loud in expose the disgraceful collapse of government affair , could hardly refuse they support to any attempt at a feasible arrangement . when it be first know that the of have consent to make the attempt , they have both on one side and the other be loud in he praise , go so far as to say that he be the only man in who could do the work . it be probably this encouragement which have enable the new premier to go on with a undertaking which be personally distasteful to he , and for which from day to day he believe himself to be less and less fit . but when the newspaper tell he that he be the only man for the occasion , how could he be justified in credit himself in preference to they ? the work in parliament begin under the new auspices with great tranquillity . that there would soon come cause of hot blood , -- the , the county suffrage , the income tax , and further education question , -- all man knew who know anything . but for the moment , for the month even , perhaps for the session , there be to be peace , with full latitude for the performance of routine duty . there be so to say no opposition , and at first it seem that one special bench
bench in the house of Commons would remain unoccupied . but after a day or two , -- on one of which have be see sit just below the gangway , -- that return to the place usually hold by the 's rival , say with a smile that it might be for the convenience of the that the seat should be utilise . at this time have , with declared purpose , ask and obtain the speaker 's leave of absence and be abroad . who should lead the house ? that have be a great question , cause by the fact that the be in the of ; -- and what office should the ? have consent to take the Exchequer , but the right to sit opposite to the Treasury box and to consider himself for the time the principal spirit in that chamber be at last assign to . " it will never do , " say to . " I do not mean to say anything against , who have always be a very useful man to you party ; -- but he lack something of the position . " " the fact be , " say , " that we have trust to two man so long that we do not know how to suppose any one else big enough to fill they place . would not have do . the House do not care about . " " I always think it should be , and so I tell the . he have a idea that it should be one of you man . " " I think he be right there , " say . " there ink to be something like a fair division . individual might be content , but the party would be dissatisfied . for myself , I would have sooner stay out as a independent member , but say that he think I be bound to make myself useful . " " I tell the from the beginning , " say , " that I do not think that I could be of any service to he . of course , I would support he , but I have be too thoroughly a party man for a new movement of this kind . but he say just the same !-- that he consider I be bound to join he . I ask , and when say so too , of course I have no help for it . " neither of these excellent public servant have tell a lie in this . some such conversation as those report have pass ; -- but a man do not lie when he exaggerate a emphasis , or even when he give by a tone a meaning to a man 's word exactly opposite to that which another tone would convey . or , if he do lie in do so , he do not know that he lie . have go back to he old office at the and have be force to contend himself with the Secretaryship at the Admiralty . but , as the old have say , they be close friend , and prepare to fight together any battle which might keep they in they present position . many of the care of office the do succeed in shuffling off altogether on to the shoulders of he elder friend . he would not concern himself with the appointment of lady , about whom he say he know nothing , and as to whose fitness and claim he profess himself to be as ignorant as the office messenger . the offer be of course make in the usual form , as though come direct from the , through the ; -- but the selection be in truth effect by the old in council with -- a illustrious personage . the matter affect we , -- only in so far that he could not get out of he mind that strange application from he own wife . " that she should have even dream of it ! " he would say to himself , not yet have acquire sufficient experience of he fellow creature to be aware how wonderfully temptation will affect even those who appear to be least subject to they . the town horse , use to gaudy trapping , no doubt despise the work of he country brother ; but yet , now and again , there come upon he a sudden desire to plough . the desire for ploughing have come upon the Duchess , but the could not understand it . he perceive , however , in spite of the multiplicity of he official work , that he refusal sit heavily on he wife 's breast , and that , though she speak no further word , she brood over she injury . and he heart be sad within he when he think that he have vex she ,-- love she as he do with all he heart , but with a heart that be never demonstrative . when she be unhappy he be miserable , though he would hardly know the cause of he misery . she ridicule and raillery he could bear , though they sting he ; but she sorrow , if ever she be sorrowful , or she sullenness , if ever she be sull , upset he altogether . he be in truth so soft of heart that he could not bear the discomfort of the one person in the world who seem to he to be near to he . he have expressly ask she for she sympathy in the business he have on hand ,-- thereby go much beyond he usual coldness of manner . she , with a eagerness which might have be expect from she , have promise that she would slave for he , if slavery be necessary . then she have make she
she request , have be refuse , and be now moody . " the of ---- be to be of the Robes , " he say to she one day . he have go to she , up to she own room , before he dress for dinner , have devote much more time than as he ought to have do to a resolution that he would make thing straight with she , and to the best way of do it . " so I be tell . she ought to know she way about the place , as I remember she be at the same work when I be a girl of eleven . " " that be not so very long ago , . " " Silverbridge be older now than I be then , and I think that make it a very long time ago . " be the 's eldest son . " but what do it matter ? if she begin she career in the time of the , what be it to you ? " " nothing on earth , -- only that she do in truth begin she career in the time of the . I be sure she be nearer sixty than fifty . " " I be glad to see you remember you date so well . " " it be a pity she should not remember hers in the way she dress , " say the Duchess . this be marvellous to he , -- that he wife , who as have be so conspicuous for a wild disregard of social rule as to be look upon by many as a enemy of she own class , should be so depressed by not be allow to be the 's head servant as to descmend to personal invective ! " I be afraid , " say he , attempt to smile , " that it will not come within the compass of my office to effect or even to propose any radical change in she 's apparel . but do not you think that you and I can afford to ignore all that ? " " I can certainly . she may be a antiquated for I . " " I hope , , you be not still disappoint because I do not agree with you when you speak about the place for yourself . " " not because you do not agree with I , -- but because you do not think I fit to be trust with any judgment of my own . I do not know why I be always to be look upon as different from other woman , -- as though I be half a savage . " " you be what you have make yourself , and I have always rejoice that you be as you be , fresh , untrammelled , without many prejudice which afflict other lady , and free from bond by which they be cramp and confin . of course such a turn of character be subject to certain danger of its own . " " there be no doubt about the dangers . the chance be that when I see she I shall tell she what I think about she . " " you will I be sure say nothing unkind to a lady who be suppose to be in the place she now fill by my authority . but do not let we quarrel about a old woman . " " I will not quarrel with you even about a young one . " " I can not be at ease within myself while I think you be resent my refusal . you do not know how constantly I carry you about with I . " " you carry a very unnecessary burden then , " she say . but he could tell at once from the altered tone of she voice , and from the light of she eye as he glance into she face , that she anger about " the " be appease . " I have do as you ask about a friend of yours , " he say . this occur just before the final and perfect list of the new man have appear in all the newspaper . " what friend ? " " be to go to . " " go to !-- how do you mean ? " " it be look upon as be very great promotion . indeed I be tell that he be consider to be the luckiest man in all the scramble . " " you do not mean as ? " " yes , I do . he certainly could not go as . " " but they say that be go to . " " well ; yes . I do not know that you would be interested by all the in and out of it . but decline . it seem that be after all the one man in parliament modest enough not to consider himself to be fit for any place that can be offer to he . " " poor ! he do not like the idea of cross the channel so often . I quite sympathise with he . and so be to be for ! not in the cabinet ? " " no ;-- not in the cabinet . it be not by any mean usual that he should be . " " that be promotion , and I be glad ! poor Phinea ! I hope they will not murder he , or anything of that kind . they do murder people , you know , sometimes . " " he be a himself . " " that be just the reason why they should . he must put up with that of course . I wonder whether she will like go . they will be able to spend money
money , which they always like , over there . he come backwards and forwards every week , -- do not he ? " " not quite that , I believe . " " I shall miss she , if she have to stay away long . I know you do not like she . " " I do like she . she have always behave well , both to I and to my uncle . " " she be a angel to he , -- and to you too , if you only know it . I dare say you be send he to so as to get she away from I . " this she say with a smile , as though not mean it altogether , but yet half mean it . " I have ask he to undertake the office , " say the solemnly , " because I be tell that he be fit for it . but I do have some pleasure in propose it to he because I think that it would please you . " " it do please I , and I will not be cross any more , and the Duchess of ---- may wear she clothes just as she please , or go without they . and as for . , I do not see why she should be with he always when he go . you can quite understand how necessary she be to I . but she be in truth the only woman in to whom I can say what I think . and it be a comfort , you know , to have some one . " in this way the domestic peace of the be readjust , and that sympathy and co-operation for which he have first ask be accord to he . it may be a question whether on the whole the Duchess do not work harder than he do . she do not at first dare to expound to he those grand idea which she have conceive in regard to magnificence and hospitality . she say nothing of any extraordinary expenditure of money . but she set herself to work after she own fashion , make to he suggestion as to dinner and evening reception , to which he object only on the score of time . " you must eat you dinner somewhere , " she say , " and you need only come in just before we sit down , and go into you own room if you please without come upstairs at all . I can at any rate do that part of it for you . " and she do do that part of it with marvellous energy all through the month of , -- so that by the end of the month , within six week of the time at which she first heard of the , all the world have begin to talk of the 's dinner , and of the reception give by the 's wife . 's .-- no . I we reader must not forget the trouble of poor amidst the gorgeous festivity of the new . throughout and she do not see . it may be remembe that on the night when the matter be discuss between she and she father , she promise he that she would not do so without he permission , -- say , however , at the same time very openly that she happiness depend on such permission be give to she . for two or three week not a word further be say between she and she father on the subject , and he have endeavoure to banish the subject from he mind ,--feel no doubt that if nothing further be ever say it would be so much the better . but then he daughter refer to the matter ,-- very plainly , with a simple question , and without disguise of she own feeling , but still in a manner which he could not bring himself to rebuke . " have ask I once or twice to go there of a evening , when you have be out . I have decline because I think would be there . must I tell she that I be not to meet , ? " " if she have he there on purpose to throw he in you way , I shall think very badly of she . " " but he have be in the habit of be there , papa . of course if you be decide about this , it be better that I should not see he . " " do I not tell you that I be decide ? " " you say you would make some further inquiry and speak to I again . " now have make inquiry , but have learn nothing to reassure himself ; -- neither have he be able to learn any fact , put he finger on which he could point out to he daughter clearly that the marriage would be unsuitable for she . of the man 's ability and position , as certainly also of he manners , the world at large seem to speak well . he have be blackball at two club , but apparently without any define reason . he live as though he possess a handsome income , and yet be in no degree fast or flashy . he be suppose to be a intimate friend of , one of the partner in the world - famous commercial house of and , which deal in million . indeed there have be at one time a rumour that he be go to be take into the house of and as a junior partner . it be evident that many people have be favourably impress by he outward demeanour , by he mode of talk , and by he way of living . but
but no one know anything about he . with regard to he material position could of course ask direct question if he please , and require evidence as to allege property . but he feel that by do so he would abandon he right to object to the man as be a Portuguese stranger , and he do not wish to have as a son - in - law , even though he should be a partner in and , and able to maintain a gorgeous palace at . " I have make inquiry . " " well , papa ? " " I do not know anything about he . nobody know anything about he . " " could you not ask himself anything you want to know ? if I might see he I would ask he . " " that would not do at all . " " it come to this , papa , that I be to sever myself from a man to whom I be attach , and whom you must admit that I have be allow to meet from day to day with no caution that he intimacy be unpleasant to you , because he be call -- . " " it be not that at all . there be English people of that name ; but he be not a . " " of course , if you say so , papa , it must be so . I have tell aunt Harriet that I consider myself to be prohibit from meeting by what you have say ; but I think , papa , you be a little -- cruel to I . " " cruel to you ! " say , almost burst into tear . " I be as ready to obey as a child ; -- but , not be a child , I think I ought to have a reason . " to this make no further immediate answer , but pull he hair , and shuffle he foot about , and then escape out of the room . a few day afterwards he sister - in - law attack he . " be we to understand , , that be not to meet again ? it make it very unpleasant , because he have be intimate at we house . " " I never say a word about she not meet he . of course I do not wish that any meeting should be contrive between they . " " as it stand now it be prejudicial to she . of course it can not but be observ , and it be so odd that a young lady should be forbidden to meet a certain man . it look so unpleasant for she , -- as though she have misbehave herself . " " I have never think so for a moment . " " of course you have not . how could you have thought so , ? " " I say that I never do . " " what must he think when he know , -- as of course he do know , -- that she have be forbidden to meet he ? it must make he fancy that he be make very much off . all that be so very bad for a girl ! indeed it be , . " of course there be absolute dishonesty in all this on the part of . she be true enough to 's lover , -- too true to he ; but she be false to 's father . if would have yield to she she would have arrange meeting at she own house between the lover altogether in opposition to the father . nevertheless there be a show of reason about what she say which be unable to overcome . and at the same time there be a reality about he girl 's sorrow which overcome he . he have never hithertoo consult any one about anything in he family , have always find he own information and intellect sufficient for he own affair . but now he feel grievously in want of some pillar , -- some female pillar , -- on which he could lean . he do not know all 's iniquity ; but still he feel that she be not the pillar of which he be in need . there be no such pillar for he use , and he be drive to acknowledge to himself that in this distressing position he must be guide by he own strength , and he own light . he think it all out as well as he could in he own chamber , allow he book or he brief to lie idle beside he for many a half - hour . but he be much puzzl both as to the extent of he own authority and the manner in which it should be use . he certainly have not desire he daughter not to meet the man . he could understand that unless some affront have be offer such a edict enforce as to the conduct of a young lady would induce all she acquaintance to suppose that she be either very much in love or else very prone to misbehave herself . he fear , indeed , that she be very much in love , but it would not be prudent to tell she secret to all the world . perhaps it would be better that she should meet he , -- always with the understanding that she be not to accept from he any peculiar attention . if she would be obedient in one particular , she would probably be so in the other ; -- and , indeed , he do not at all doubt she obedience . she would obey , but would take care to show he that she be make miserable by obey . he begin to foresee
foresee that he have a bad time before he . and then as he still sit idle , think of it all , he mind wander off to another view of the subject . could he be happy , or even comfortable , if she be unhappy ? of course he endeavoure to convince himself that if he be bold , determined , and dictatorial with she , it would only be in order that she future happiness might be secure . a parent be often bound to disregard the immediate comfort of a child . but then be he sure that he be right ? he of course have he own way of look at life , but be it reasonable that he should force he girl to look at thing with he eye ? the man be distasteful to he as be unlike he idea of a english gentleman , and as be without those far - reach fibre and root by which he think that the solidity and stability of a human tree should be assure . but the world be change around he every day . be marry out of its degree . Per ' son be look only for money . and , more than that , peer ' daughter be bestow themselves on and shopkeeper . have he not better make the usual inquiry about the man 's mean , and , if satisfy on that head , let the girl do as she would ? add to all this there be grow on he a feeling that ultimately youth would as usual triumph over age , and that he would be beat . if that be so , why worry himself , or why worry she ? on the day after 's attack upon he he again see that lady , have on this occasion send round to ask she to come to he . " I want you to understand that I put no embargo on as to meet . I can trust she fully . I do not wish she to encourage he attention , but I by no means wish she to avoid he . " " be I to tell Emily what you say ? " " I will tell she myself . I think it better to say as much to you , as you seem to be embarrasse by the fear that they might happen to see each other in you drawing - room . " " it be rather awkward ; -- be not it ? " " I have speak now because you seem to think so . " he manner to she be not very pleasant , but . have know he for many year , and do not care very much for he manner . she have a object to gain , and could put up with a good deal for the sake of she object . " very well . then I shall know how to act . but , , I must say this , you know Emily have a will of she own , and you must not hold I responsible for anything that may occur . " as soon as he hear this he almost resolve to withdraw the concession he have make ; -- but he do not do so . very soon after this there come a special invitation from and , ask the Wharton , father and daughter , to dine with they round the corner . it be quite a special invitation , because it come in the form of a card , -- which be unusual between the two family . but the dinner be too , in some degree , a special dinner , -- as be enable to explain to she father , the whole speciality have be fully detailed to herself by she aunt . , whose belonging be not generally aristocratic , have one great connexion with whom , after many year of quarrelling , he have lately come into amity . this be he half - brother , considerably older than himself , and be no other than that who be now Secretary to the Admiralty , and who in the last Conservative government have be one of the secretarie to the Treasury . the oldest of all , now long since gather to he father , have have two wife and two son . the elder son have not be leave as well off as friend , or perhaps as he himself , could have wish . but he have risen in the world by he wit , have make he way into parliament , and have become , as all reader of these chronicle know , a staff of great strength to he party . but he have always be a poor man . he period of office have be much shorter than those of he friend , and he other source of income have not be certain . he younger half - brother , who , as far as the great world be concerned , have none of he elder brother 's advantage , have be endow with some fortune from he mother , and , -- in a evil hour for both of they , -- have lent the politician money . as one consequence of this transaction , they have not speak to each other for year . on this quarrel . be always harp with she own husband , -- not take he part . she , she , have indeed the means of support she with a fair comfort , but have , of he own , no power of introduce she to that sort of society for which she soul crave . but be a great man ,-- though unfortunately poor , -- and move in high circle . because they have lent they money , -- which no doubt be lose
lose for ever , -- why should they also lose the advantages of such a connexion ? would it not be wiser rather to take the debt as a basis whereon to find a claim for special fraternal observation and kindr social intercourse ? , who be fond of he money , would not for a long time look at the matter in this light , but harass he brother from time to time by application which be quite useless , and which by the acerbity of they language altogether shut . Roby out from the good thing which might have accrue to she from so distinguished a brother - in - law . but when it come to pass that be confirm in office by the coalition which have be mention , . become very energetic . she go herself to the official hero and tell he how desirous she be of peace . nothing more should be say about the money , -- at any rate for the present . let brothers be brother . and so it come to pass that the Secretary to the Admiralty with he wife be to dine in , and that be ask to meet they . " I do not particularly want to meet , " the old barrister say . " they want you to come , " say Emily , " because there have be some family reconciliation . you usually do go once or twice a year . " " I suppose it may as well be do , " say . " I think , papa , that they mean to ask , " say Emily demurely . " I tell you before that I do not want to have you banish from you aunt 's home by any man , " say the father . so the matter be settle , and the invitation be accept . this be just at the end of , at which time people be begin to say that the coalition be a success , and some wise man to predict that at last fortuitous parliamentary atom have so come together by accidental connexion , that a ministry have be form which might endure for a dozen year . indeed there be no reason why there should be any end to a ministry build on such a foundation . of course this be very comfortable to such man as , so that the when he enter he sister - in - law 's drawing - room be suffuse with that rosy hue of human bliss which a feeling of triumph bestow . " yes , " say he , in answer to some would - be facetious remark from he brother , " I think we have weathere that storm pretty well . it do seem rather odd , my sit cheek by jowl with and gentleman of that kidney ; but they do not bite . I have get one of we own set at the head of we own office , and he lead the House . I think upon the whole we have get a little the best of it . " this be listen to by with great disgust , -- for be a Tory of the old school , who hate compromise , and abhor in he heart the class of politician to whom politics be a profession rather than a creed . senior , have escape from the , be of course the last , and have indeed keep all the other guest wait half - a - hour , -- as become a parliamentary magnate in the heat of the session . , who have be early , see all the other guest arrive , and among they . there be also , -- partner in and , -- with he wife , respecte whom at once conclude that he be there as be the friend of . if so , how much influence must have in that house ! nevertheless , be in he way a great man , and a credit to . and there be and , who be people move quite in the first circle . shot pigeon , and so do also ,-- whence have perhaps arisen a intimacy . but be not at all a person to dine with without other cause than this . but a great official among one 's acquaintance can do so much for one ! it be probable that 's presence be among the first fruit of the happy family reconciliation that have take place . then there be , a pretty widow , rather poor , who be glad to receive civility from , and be 's pet aversion . have say impertinent thing to she about , and she have snub . but be serviceable to , and have now be ask to she great dinner party . but the two most illustrious guest have not yet be mention . have secure a lord , -- a absolute peer of parliament ! this be no less a man than , whose father have be a great judge in the early part of the century , and have be make a peer . the estates be not suppose to be large , nor be the influence at this time extensive . but this nobleman be see about a good deal in society when the dinner give be suppose to be worth eating . he be a fat , silent , red - face , elderly gentleman , who say very little , and who when he do speak see always to be in a ill - humour . he would now and then make ill - natured remark about he friend 's wine , as suggest ' 68 when a man would boast of he ' 48 claret ; and when costly dainty be supply for he use , would remark that such
such and such a dish be very well at some other time of the year . so that lady attentive to they table and host proud of they cellar would almost shake in they shoe before . and it may also be say that never give any chance of retaliation by return dinner . there live not the man or woman who have dine with . but yet the of be glad to entertain he ; and the , when he be come , would urge they cook to superhuman energie by the mention of he name . and there be ! of it be impossible to say whether she beauty , she wit , she wealth , or the remarkable history of she past life , most recommend she to such host and hostess as and . as she history may be already know to some , no detail of it shall be repeat here . at this moment she be free from all marital persecution , and be very much run after by a certain set in society . there be other again who declare that no decent man or woman ought to meet she . on the score of lover there be really little or nothing to be say against she ; but she have implicate herself in a unfortunate second marriage , and then there be that old story about the jewel ! but there be no doubt about she money and she good look , and some consider she to be clever . these complete the list of 's great dinner party . , who have arrive early , could not but take notice that , who soon follow he into the room , have at once fall into conversation with , as though there have never be any difficulty in the matter . the father , stand on the rug and pretend to answer the remark make to he by , could see that say but little . the man , however , be so much at he ease that there be no necessity for she to exert herself . hate he for be at he ease . have he appear to have be rebuff by the circumstance of he position the prejudice of the old man would have be lessen . by degree the guest come . stand also on the rug , dumb , with a look of intense impatience for he food , hardly ever condescende to answer the little attempt at conversation make by . gush into the room , kiss and afterwards kiss she great friend of the moment , , who follow . she then look as though she mean to kiss , whom she playfully and almost familiarly address . but only grunt . then come and , and at once begin about he pigeon . , who be the most good - natured man in the world , interest himself at once and become energetic ; but look round the room carefully , and see , turn up she nose , nor do she care much for meeting . if she have be take in as to the , then would she let the junior know what she think about it . , with he wife , cause the frown on 's brow to loosen itself a little , for , so great be the wealth and power of the house of and , that be no doubt a feature at any dinner party . then come the with he wife , and the order for dinner be give . 's .-- no . walk downstairs with . there have be some doubt whether of right he should not have take , but it be hold by . Dick that she ladyship have somewhat impaired she rights by the eccentricity of she career , and also that she would amiably pardon any little wrong against she of that kind ,-- whereas be a person to be much consider . then follow with . they seem to be pair so well together that there could be no doubt about they . the ministerial , who be really the hero of the night , take , and we friend take the 's wife . all that have be easy , -- so easy that fate have good - naturedly arrange thing which be sometimes difficult of management . but then there come a embarrassment . of course it would in a usual way be right that a marry man as be should be assign to the widow , and that the only two " young " people , -- in the usual sense of the word , -- should go down to dinner together . but be at first afraid of , and plan it otherwise . when , however , the last moment come she pluck up courage , give . to the great commercial man , and with a brave smile ask to give he arm to the lady he love . it be sometimes so hard to manage these " little thing , " say she to as she put she hand upon he arm . he lordship have be keep stand in that odious drawing - room for more than half - a - hour wait for a man whom he regard as a poor Treasury hack , and be by no means in a good humour . Roby's wine be no doubt good , but he be not prepare to purchase it at such a price as this . " thing always get confused when you have wait a hour for any one , " he say . " what can one do , you know , when the house be sitte ? " say the lady apologetically . " of course you lord can get away , but then you have nothing to do . " grunt , meane to imply by he
he grunt that any one would be very much mistaken who suppose that he have any work to do because he be a peer of parliament . and be seat next to each other , and immediately opposite to they be . certainly nothing fraudulent have be intend on this occasion , -- or it would have be arrange that the father should sit on the same side of the table with the lover , so that he should see nothing of what be go on . but it seem to as though he have be positively swindle by he sister - in - law . there they sit opposite to he , talk to each other apparently with thoroughly mutual confidence , the very two person whom he most especially desire to keep apart . he have not a word to say to either of the ladie near he . he endeavoure to keep he eye away from he daughter as much as possible , and to divert he ear from they conversation ; -- but he could not but look and he could not but listen . not that he really hear a sentence . 's voice hardly reach he , and understand the game he be play much too well to allow he voice to travel . and he look as though he position be the most commonplace in the world , and as though he have nothing of more than ordinary interest to say to he neighbour . , as he sit there , almost make up he mind that he would leave he practice , give up he chamber , abandon even he club , and take he daughter at once to -- to ; -- it do not matter where , so that the place should be very distant from . there could be no other remedy for this evil . , though he talk throughout the whole of dinner , -- turn sometimes indeed to who sit at he left hand , -- say very little that all the world might not have hear . but he do say one such word . " it have be so dreary to I , the last month ! " Emily of course have no answer to make to this . she could not tell he that she desolation have be infinitely worse than he , and that she have sometimes feel as though she very heart would break . " I wonder whether it must always be like this with I , " he say , -- and then he go back to the theatre , and other ordinary conversation . " I suppose you have get to the bottom of that champagne you use to have , " say , roar across the table to he host , hold he glass in he hand , and with strong mark of disapprobation on he face . " the very same wine as we be drink when you lordship last do I the honour of dining here , " say . raise he eyebrow , shook he head and put down the glass . " shall we try another bottle ? " ask with solicitude . " oh , no ;-- it would be all the same , I know . I will just take a little dry sherry if you have it . " the man come with the decanter . " no , dry sherry ; -- dry sherry , " say he lordship . the man be confound , . be at she wit ' end , and everything be in confusion . be not the man to be keep wait by a government subordinate without exact some penalty for such ill - treatment . " t'is lordship be a little out of sort , " whisper to . " very much out of sort , it seem . " " and the worst of it be , there be not a better glass of wine in , and t'is lordship know it . " " I suppose that be what he come for , " say , be quite as uncivil in she way as the nobleman . " 'E 's like a good many other . he know where he can get a good dinner . after all , there be no attraction like that . of course , a ' ansome woman will not admit that , . " " I will not admit it , at any rate , . " " but I do not doubt be as careful as any one else to get the best cook he can , and take a good deal of trouble about he wine too . be very unfair about that champagne . it come out of 's cellar before the war , and I give and 110 . for it . " " indeed ! " " I do not think there be a dozen man in can give you such a glass of wine as that . what do you say about that champagne , ? " " very tidy wine , " say . " I should think it be . I give 110 . for it before the war . ' be lordship 's get a fit of the gout come , I suppose . " but be engage with he neighbour , . " of all thing I should so like to see a pigeon match , " say . " I have hear about they all my life . only I suppose it be not quite proper for a lady . " " oh , dear , yes . " " the darling little pigeons ! they do sometimes escape , do not they ? I hope they escape sometimes . I will go any day you will make up a party , -- if will join we . " say that he would arrange it
it , make up he mind , however , at the same time , that this last stipulation , if insist on , would make the thing impracticable . Roby the ministerialist , sit at the end of the table between he sister - in - law and , be very confidential respect the government and parliamentary affair in general . " yes , indeed ; -- of course it be a coalition , but I do not see why we should not go on very well . as to the , I have always have the greatest possible respect for he . the truth be , there be nothing special to be do at the present moment , and there be no reason why we should not agree and divide the good thing between we . the have get some craze of he own about decimal coinage . he will amuse himself with that ; but it will not come to anything , and it will not hurt we . " " be not the Duchess give a great many party ? " ask . " well ; --yes . that kind of thing use to be do in old 's time , and the Duchess be repeat it . there be no end to they money , you know . but it be rather a bore for the person who have to go . " the ministerial know well how he would make he sister - in - law 's mouth water by such a allusion as this to the great privilege of enter the 's mansion in . " I suppose you in the government be always ask . " " we be expect to go too , and be watch pretty close . , as we use to call she , have the eye of Argus . and of course we who use to be on the other side be especially bound to pay she observance . " " do not you like the Duchess ? " ask . " oh , yes ;-- I like she very well . she be mad , you know ,-- mad as a hatter , -- and no one can ever guess what freak may come next . one always feel that she will do something sooner or later that will startle all the world . " " there be a queer story once , -- be not there ? " ask . " I never quite believe that , " say . " it be something about some lover she have before she be marry . she go off to . but the , -- he be then ,-- follow she very soon and it all come right . " " when lady be go to be duchess , thing do come right ; do not they ? " say . on the other side of be , quite unable to talk to he right - hand neighbour , the 's wife . the elder have not , indeed , much to say for herself , and he during the whole dinner be in misery . he have resolve that there should be no intimacy of any kind between he daughter and Ferdinand , -- nothing more than the merest acquaintance ; and there they be , talk together before he very eye , with more evident sign of understanding each other than be exhibit by any other two person at the table . and yet he have no just ground of complaint against either of they . if people dine together at the same house , it may of course happen that they shall sit next to each other . and if people sit next to each other at dinner , it be expect that they shall talk . nobody could accuse of flirt ; but then she be a girl who under no circumstance would condescmend to flirt . but she have declare boldly to she father that she love this man , and there she be in close conversation with he ! would it not be better for he to give up any further trouble , and let she marry the man ? she would certainly do so sooner or later . when the lady go upstairs that misery be over for a time , but be still not happy . come round and take he wife 's chair , so that he sit between the lord and he brother . and fall into city conversation , and try to amuse himself with . but the task be hopeless , -- as it always be when the element of a party have be ill - mix . have not even hear of the new Aldershot coach which have just start with and . and when declare that he drive the coach up and down twice a week himself , at any rate affect to believe that such a thing be impossible . then when give he opinion as to the cause of the failure of a certain horse at , give he no encouragement whatever . " I never be at a racecourse in my life , " say the barrister . after that drank he wine in silence . " you remember that claret , my lord ? " say , think that some little compensation be due to he for what have be say about the champagne . but 's dinner have not yet have the effect of mollify the man sufficiently for 's purpose . " oh , yes , I remember the wine . you call it ' 57 , do not you ? " " and it be ' 57 ;-- '57 , . " " very likely , -- very likely . if it have not be heat before the fire -- " " it have not be near the fire , " say . " or put into a
a hot decanter -- " " nothing of the kind . " " or treat after some other damnable fashion , it would be very good wine , I dare say . " " you be hard to please , my lord , to - day , " say , who be put beyond he bearing . " what be a man to say ? if you will talk about you wine , I can only tell you what I think . any man may get good wine , -- that be if he can afford to pay the price , -- but it be not one out of ten who know how to put it on the table . " feel this to be very hard . when a man pay 110 . a dozen for he champagne , and then give it to guest like who be not even expect to return the favour , then that man ought to be allow to talk about he wine without fear of rebuke . one do not have a agreement to that effect write down on parchment and seal ; but it be as well understand and ink to be as faithfully keep as any legal contract . , who could on occasion be awaken to a touch of manliness , give the bottle a shove and throw himself back in he chair . " if you ask I , I can only tell you , " repeat . " I do not believe you ever have a bottle of wine put before you in better order in all you life , " say . he lordship 's face become very square and very red as he look round at he host . " and as for talk about my wine , of course I talk to a man about what he understand . I talk to about pigeon , to there about politics , to and about the price of consol , and to you about wine . if I ask you what you think of the last new book , you lordship would be a little surprised . " grunt and look redder and squarer than ever ; but he make no attempt at reply , and the victory be evidently leave with , -- very much to the general exaltation of he character . and he be proud of himself . " we have a little tiff , I and , " he say to he wife that night . " 'e be a very good fellow , and of course he be a lord and all that . but he have to be put down occasionally , and , by , I do it to - night . you ask . " there be two draw - room up - stair , open into each other , but still distinct . Emily have escape into the back room , avoid the gushing sentiment and equivocal moral of and , -- and here she be follow by . be in the front room , and though on enter it he do look round furtively for he daughter , he be asham to wander about in order that he might watch she . and there be other in the back room , -- and stand on the rug , and the elder seat in a corner ;-- so that there be nothing peculiar in the position of the two lover . " must I understand , " say he , " that I be banish from ? " " have papa banish you ? " " that be what I want you to tell I . " " I know you have a interview with he , . " " yes . I have . " " and you must know best what he tell you . " " he would explain himself better to you than he do to I . " " I doubt that very much . , when he have anything to say , generally say it plainly . however , I do think that he do intend to banish you . I do not know why I should not tell you the truth . " " I do not know either . " " I think he do -- intend to banish you . " " and you ? " " I shall be guide by he in all thing , -- as far as I can . " " then I be banish by you also ? " " I do not say so . but if papa say that you be not to come there , of course I can not ask you to do so . " " but I may see you here ? " " , I will not be ask some question . I will not indeed . " " you know why I ask they . you know that to I you be more than all the world . " she stand still for a moment after hear this , and then without any reply walk away into the other room . she feel half asham of herself in that she have not rebuk he for speak to she in that fashion after he interview with she father , and yet he word have fill she heart with delight . he have never before plainly declare he love to she ,-- though she have be drive by she father 's question to declare she own love to herself . she be quite sure of herself , -- that the man be and would always be to she the one be whom she would prefer to all other . she fate be in she father 's hand . if he choose to make she wretch he must do so . but on one point she have quite make up she mind . she would make no concealment .
. to the world at large she have nothing to say on the matter . but with she father there should be no attempt on she part to keep back the truth . be he to question she on the subject she would tell he , as far as she memory would serve she , the very word which have speak to she this evening . she would ask nothing from he . he have already tell she that the man be to be reject , and have refuse to give any other reason than he dislike to the absence of any english connexion . she would not again ask even for a reason . but she would make she father understand that though she obey he she regard the exercise of he authority as tyrannical and irrational . they leave the house before any of the other guest and walk round the corner together into the . " what a very vulgar set of people ! " say as soon as they be down the step . " some of they be , " say Emily , make a mental reservation of she own . " upon my word I do not know where to make the exception . why on earth any one should want to know such a person as I can not understand . what do he bring into society ? " " a title . " " but what do that do of itself ? he be a insolent , bloate brute . " " Papa , you be use strong language to - night . " " and that ! and ! be I to be tell that that creature be a lady ? " they have now come to they own door , and while that be be open and as they go up into they own drawing - room , nothing be say , but then Emily begin again . " I wonder why you go to 's at all . you do not like the people ? " " I do not like any of they to - day . " " why do you go there ? you do not like herself . you do not like uncle Dick . you do not like . " " certainly I do not . " " I do not know who it be you do like . " " I like . " " it be no use say that to I , papa . " " you ask I a question , and I choose to answer it . I like , because he be a gentleman , -- because he be a gentleman of the class to which I belong myself ; because he work ; because I know all about he , so that I can be sure of he ; because he have a decent father and mother ; because I be safe with he , be quite sure that he will say to I neither awkward thing nor impertinent thing . he will not talk to I about drive a mail coach like that foolish baronet , nor tell I the price of all he wine like you uncle . " would Ferdinand do so , think Emily to herself . " but in all such matter , my dear , the great thing be like to like . I have speak of a young person , merely because I wish you to understand that I can sympathise with other besides those of my own age . but to - night there be no one there at all like myself , -- or , as I hope , like you . that man be a chattering ass . how such a man can be useful to any government I can not conceive . be the best , but what have he to say for himself ? I have always think that there be very little wit want to make a fortune in the City . " in this frame of mind go off to bed , but not a word more be speak about . certainly the thing be do very well by , -- as many in the political world persist in call she even in these day . she have not as yet quite carry out she plan , -- the doing of which would have require she to reconcile she husband to some excessive abnormal expenditure , and to have obtain from he a deliberate sanction for appropriation and probable sale of property . she never could find the proper moment for do this , have , with all she courage , -- low down in some corner of she heart , -- a wholesome fear of a certain quiet power which she husband possess . she could not bring herself to make she proposition ; -- but she almost act as though it have be make and approve . she house be always gorgeous with flower . of course there would be the bill ; -- and he , when he see the exotic , and the whole place turn into a bower of ever fresh bloom floral glory , must know that there would be the bill . and when he find that there be a archducal dinner - party every week , and a almost imperial reception twice a week ; that at these reception a banquet be always provide ; when he be ask whether she might buy a magnificent pair of bay carriage - horse , as to which she assure he that nothing so lovely have ever as yet be see stepping in the street of , -- of course he must know that the bill would come . it be better , perhaps , to do it in this way , than to make any direct proposition . and then , early in , she speak to he
he as to the guest to be invite to in . " do you want to go to in ? " he ask in surprise . for she hate the place , and have hardly be content to spend ten day there every year at . " I think it should be do , " she say solemnly . " one can not quite consider just now what one likes oneself . " " why not ? " " you would hardly go to a small place like matching in you present position . there be so many people whom you should entertain ! you would probably have two or three of the foreign ministers down for a time . " " we always use to find plenty of room at . " " but you do not always use to be . it be only for such a time as this that such a house as be serviceable . " he be silent for a moment , think about it , and then give way without another word . she be probably right . there be the huge pile of magnificent building ; and somebody , at any rate , have think that it behove a of to live in such a palace . if it ought to be do at any time , it ought to be do now . in that he wife have be right . " very well . then let we go there . " " I will manage it all , " say the Duchess ,-- " I and . " Locock be the house - steward . " I remember once , " say the , and he smile as he speak with a peculiarly sweet expression , which would at time come across he generally inexpressive face ,--" I remember once that some of the give evidence as to the amount of he salary , say that he place entail upon he expense higher than he stipend would defray . I begin to think that my experience will be the same . " " do that fret you ? " " no , ;-- it certainly do not fret I , or I should not allow it . but I think there should be a limit . no man be ever rich enough to squander . " though they be to squander she fortune , -- the money which she have bring , -- for the next ten year at a much greater rate than she contemplate , they might do so without touch the property . of that she be quite sure . and the squandering be to be all for he glory , -- so that he might retain he position as a popular . for a instant it occur to she that she would tell he all this . but she check herself , and the idea of what she have be about to say bring the blood into she face . never yet have she in talk to he allude to she own wealth . " of course we be spend money , " she say . " if you give I a hint to hold my hand , I will hold it . " he have look at she , and read it all in she face . " know , " he say , " you 've a right to do it if it please you . " " for you sake ! " then he stoop down and kiss she twice , and leave she to arrange she party as she please . after that she congratulate herself that she have not make the direct proposition , know that she might now do pretty much what she please . then there be solemn cabinet hold , at which she preside , and and assist . at other cabinet it be suppose that , let a leader be ever so autocratic by disposition and superior by intelligence , still he must not unfrequently yield to the opinion of he colleague . but in this cabinet the always have she own way , though she be very persistent in ask for counsel . Locock be frighten about the money . money have come without a word , out of the common , speak to the . the have always sign certain cheque , but they have be normal cheque ; and the money in its natural course have fly in to meet they ; -- but now he must be ask to sign abnormal cheque . that , indeed , have already be do ; but still the money have be there . a large balance , such as have always stood to he credit , would stand a bigger racket than have yet be make . but be quite sure that the balance ought not to be much further reduce , -- and that step must be take . something must be sell ! the idea of sell anything be dreadful to the mind of ! or else money must be borrow ! now the management of the property have always be conduct on principle antagonistic to borrowe . " but he have never spend he income , " say the Duchess . that be true . but the money , as it show a tendency to heap itself up , have be use for the purchase of other bits of property , or for the amelioration of the estate generally . " you do not mean to say that we can not get money if we want it ! " Locock be profuse in he assurances that any amount of money could be obtain , -- only that something must be do . " then let something be do , " say the Duchess , go on with she general plan . " many people be rich , " say the afterwards to she friend
friend , " and some people be very rich indeed ; but nobody seem to be rich enough to have ready money to do just what he wish . it all go into a grand sum total , which be never to be touch without a feeling of sacrifice . I suppose you have always enough for everything . " it be well know that the present , as , have be a wealthy woman . " indeed , no ;--very far from that . I have not a shilling . " " what have happen ? " ask the Duchess , pretend to be frightene . " you forget that I have get a husband of my own , and that he have to be consult . " " that must be nonsense . but do not you think woman be fool to marry when they have get anything of they own , and could be they own mistress ? I could not have be . I be make to marry before I be old enough to assert myself . " " and how well they do for you ! " " Pas si mal 's , which be a great thing , and I begin to find myself fill to the full with political ambition . I feel myself to be a , prepare for the murder of any or any Daubeny who may stand in my lord 's way . in the meantime , like herself , we must attend to the banqueting . she lord appear and misbehave himself ; my lord will not show himself at all ,-- which I think be worse . " we old friend , who have now reach a higher place in politics than even he political dream have assign to he , though he be a member of parliament , be much away from in these day . new broom sweep clean ; and official new broom , I think , sweep cleaner than any other . who have not watch at the commencement of a some Secretary , some , or some commissioner , who intend by fresh Herculean labour to cleanse the stable just commit to he care ? who do not know the gentleman at the , who mean to reform the police and put a end to malefactor ; or the new at the board of , who be to make beautiful as by a magician 's stroke , -- or , above all , the new , who be resolve that he will really build we a fleet , purge the dock - yard , and save we half a million a year at the same time ? be bend on unriddl the irish sphinx . surely something might be do to prove to he susceptible countryman that at the present moment no curse could be laid upon they so heavy as that of have to rule themselves apart from ; and he think that this might be the easier , as he become from day to day more thoroughly convinced that those home rulers who be all around he in the house be altogether of the same opinion . have some inscrutable decree of fate ordain and make it certain , -- with a certainty not to be disturb , -- that no candidate could be return to parliament who would not assert the earth to be triangular , there would rise immediately a clamorous assertion of triangularity among political aspirant . the test would be innocent . candidates have swallow , and daily do swallow , many a worse one . as might be this doctrine of a great triangle , so be the doctrine of Home rule . why be a gentleman of property to be keep out in the cold by some O'Mullin because he will not mutter a unmeaning shibboleth ? " Triangular ? yes , -- or lozenge - sha , if you please ; but , gentlemen , I be the man for . " , have see , or think that he have see , all this , begin , from the very first moment of he appointment , to consider painfully within himself whether the genuine service of a honest and patriotic man might not compass some remedy for the present ill - boding ferment of the country . what be it that the irish really do want ; -- what that they want , and have not get , and which might with propriety be conced to they ? what be it that the english really would refuse to sanction , even though it might not be want ? he find himself beat about among rock as to education and Papal interference , the passage among which might be make clearer to he in irish atmosphere than in that of . therefore he be away a good deal in these day , travel backward and forward as he might be want for any debate . but as he wife do not accompany he on these fitful journey , she be able to give she time very much to the Duchess . the Duchess be on the whole very successful with she party . there be people who complain that she have everybody ; that there be no selection whatever as to politics , principle , rank , moral , -- or even manners . but in such a work as the Duchess have now take in hand , it be impossible that she should escape censure . they who really know what be be done be aware that nobody be ask to that house without a idea that he or she presence might be desirable , -- in however remote a degree . paragraph in newspaper go for much , and therefore the writer and editor of such paragraph were there , -- sometimes with they wife . , of the " , " be
be to be see there constantly , with he wife , and poor old Booker of the " . " city man can make a budget popular or the reverse , and therefore the of the day be welcome . rise barrister might be want to become - . the pet Orpheus of the hour , the young tragic actor who be think to have a real Hamlet within he , the old painter who be grow rich on he reputation , and the young painter who be still strong with hope , even the little trilling poet , though he trill never so faintly , and the somewhat wooden novelist , all have tongue of they own , and certain mode of expression , which might assist or injure the , -- as the 's be now call . " who be that man ? I have see he here before . the Duchess be talk to he ever so long just now . " the question be ask by Rattler of . about half - a - hour before this time have essay to get a few word with the Duchess , begin with the communication of some small political secret . but the Duchess do not care much for the Rattler attach to she husband 's government . they be man whose service could be have for a certain payment , -- and when pay for were , the Duchess think , at the 's command without further trouble . of course they come to the reception , and be entitle to a smile apiece as they enter . but they be entitle to nothing more , and on this occasion have feel himself to be snub . it do not occur to he to abuse the Duchess . the Duchess be too necessary for abuse , -- just at present . but any friend of the Duchess , -- any favourite for the moment , -- be , of course , open to remark . " he be a man name , " say , " a friend of ; -- a very clever fellow , they say . " " do you ever see he anywhere else ? " " well , yes ;-- I have meet he at dinner . " " he be never in the House . what do he do ? " be distress to think that any drone should have make its way into the hive of work bee . " oh ;-- money , I fancy . " " he be not a partner in 's , be he ? " " I fancy not . I think I should have know if he be . " " she ought to remember that people make a use of come here , " say . she be , of course , the Duchess . " it be not like a private house . and whatever influence outsider get by come , so much she lose . somebody ought to explain that to she . " " I do not think you or I could do that , " reply . " I will tell the in a minute , " say . perhaps he think he could tell the , but we may be allow to doubt whether he prowess would not have fall below the necessary pitch when he meet the 's eye . be there for the third time , about the middle of , and have certainly contrive to make himself personally know to the Duchess . there have be a deputation from the to the ask for a subsidise mail , via , to , and , though he have no interest in , have contrive to be one of the number . he have contrive also , as the deputation be depart , to say a word on he own account to the , and have ingratiate himself . the have remembe he , and have suggest that he should have a card . and now he be among the flowers and the greatness , the beauty , the politics , and the fashion of the Duchess 's gatherings for the third time . " it be very well do , -- very well , indeed , " say to he . have be dine with and , and have now again encounter he late host and hostess . be a gentleman who have belong to the late , but have somewhat out - Heroded Herod in he Conservatism , so as to have be consider to be unfit for the . of course , he be proud of he own staunchness , and a little inclin to criticise the lax principle of man who , for the sake of carry on she Majesty 's government , could be conservative one day and liberals the next . he be a laborious , honest man , -- but hardly of calibre sufficient not to regret he own honesty in such a emergency as the present . it be easy for most of we to keep we hand from picking and steal when pick and steal plainly lead to prison diet and prison garment . but when silks and satin come of it , and with the silk and satin general respect , the net result of honesty do not seem to be so secure . Whence will come the reward , and when ? on whom the punishment , and where ? a man will not , surely , be damn for belong to a ! be a little puzzl as he think on all this , but in the meantime be very proud of he own consistency . " I think it be so lovely ! " say . " you look down through a Elysium of rhododendron into a paradise of mirror . I do not think there be ever anything like it in before
before . " " I do not know that we ever have anybody at the same time rich enough to do this kind of thing as it be do now , " say , " and powerful enough to get such people together . if the country can be rule by flower and look - glass , of course it be very well . " " Flowers and look - glass will not prevent the country be rule well , " say . " I be not so sure of that , " continue . " we all know what bread and the game come to in . " " what do they come to ? " ask . " to a man burn , my dear , for he amusement , dress in a satin petticoat and a wreath of rose . " " I do not think the will dress himself like that , " say . " and I do not think , " say , " that the graceful expenditure of wealth in a rich man 's house have any tendency to demoralise the people . " " the attempt here , " say severely , " be to demoralise the rulers of the people . I be glad to have come once to see how the thing be do ; but as a independent member of the of I should not wish to be know to frequent the saloon of the Duchess . " then take away , much to that lady 's regret . " this be fairy land , " say to the Duchess , as he leave the room . " come and be a fairy then , " she answer , very graciously . " we be always on the wing about this hour on night . " the word contain a general invitation for the season , and be esteem by as a indication of great favour . it must be acknowledge of the Duchess that she be prone to make favourite , perhaps without adequate cause ; though it must be conced to she that she rarely altogether throw off from she any one whom she have once take to she good graces . it must also be confess that when she have allow herself to hate either a man or a woman , she generally hate on to the end . no Paradise could be too charme for she friend ; no Pandemonium too frightful for she enemy . in reference to she would have say , if interrogate , that she have take the man up in obedience to she husband . but in truth she have like the look and the voice of the man . she husband before now have recommend man to she notice and kindness , whom at the first trial she have reject from she good - will , and whom she have continue to reject ever afterwards , let she husband 's urgency be what it might . another old friend , of whom former chronicle be not silent , be at the 's that night , and there come across . this be , a politician of long standing , who be still look upon by many as a young man , because he have always be know as a young man , and because he have never do anything to compromise he position in that respect . he have not marry , or settle himself down in a house of he own , or become subject to gout , or give up be careful about the fitting of he clothes . no doubt the grey hairs be get the better of the black hair , both on he head and face , and mark of come crow ' foot be to be see if you look close at he , and he have become careful about he great - coat and umbrella . he be in truth much nearer fifty than forty ;--nevertheless he be feel in the and among , and among the wife of member and , to be a young man still . and when he be invite to become for it be generally feel that he be too young for the place . he decline it , however ; and when he go to the -office , the gentleman there all feel that they have have a boy put over they . , who have become for , be in truth ten year he junior . but have be twice married , and have go through other phase of life , such as make a man old . " how do Phineas like it ? " ask . and have go through some political struggle together , and have be very intimate . " I hope not very much , " say the lady . " why so ? because he be away so much ? " " no ;-- not that . I should not grudge he absence if the work satisfy he . but I know he so well . the more he take to it now , -- the more sanguine he be as to some special thing to be do , -- the more bitter will be the disappointment when he be disappoint . for there never really be anything special to be do ; -- be there , ? " " I think there be always a little too much zeal about . " " of course there be . and then with zeal there always go a thin skin , -- and unjustifiable expectation , and bite despair , and contempt of other , and all the element of unhappiness . " " that be a sad programme for you husband . " " he have recuperative faculty which bring he round at last :-- but I really doubt whether he be make for a politician in this country .
. you remember ? " " dear old Brock ; -- of course I do . how should I not , if you remember he ? " " young man be boy at college , row in boat , when woman have be ever so long out in the world . he be the very model of a english statesman . he love he country dearly , and wish she to be , as he believe she to be , first among nation . but he have no belief in perpetuat she greatness by any grand improvement . let thing take they way naturally , -- with a slight direction hither or thither as thing might require . that be he method of rule . he believe in man rather than measure . as long as he have loyalty around he , he could be personally happy , and quite confident as to the country . he never break he heart because he could not carry this or that reform . what would have hurt he would have be to be worst in personal conflict . but he could always hold he own , and he be always happy . you man with a thin skin , a vehement ambition , a scrupulous conscience , and a sanguine desire for rapid improveament , be never a happy , and seldom a fortunate politician . " " Mrs . Finn , you understand it all better than any one else that I ever know . " " I have be watch it a long time , and of course very closely since I have be marry . " " but you have a eye train to see it all . what a useful member you would have be in a government ! " " but I should never have have patience to sit all night upon that bench in the house of Commons . how man can do it ! they must not read . they can not think because of the speaking . it do not do for they to talk . I do not believe they ever listen . it be not in human nature to listen hour after hour to such platitude . I believe they fall into a habit of half - wakeful sleeping , which carry they through the hour ; but even that can not be pleasant . I look upon the in as a sort of casual - ward which we know to be necessary , but be almost too horrid to be contemplate . " " man do get bread and skilly there certainly ; but , , we can go into the library and smoking - room . " " oh , yes ; -- and a clerk in a office can read the newspaper instead of do he duty . but there be a certain surveillance exercise , and a certain quantity of work exact . I have meet Lords of the out at dinner on and , but we all regard they as boy who have shirk out of school . I think upon the whole , , we woman have the best of it . " " I do not suppose you will go in for you ' rights ' . " " not by of , or by platform meeting . I have a great idea of a woman 's rights ; but that be the way , I think , to throw they away . what do you think of the Duchess 's evening ? " " be in she way as great a woman as you be ;-- perhaps greater , because nothing ever stop she . " " whereas I have scruple . " " she have none . she have feeling and conviction which keep she straight , but no scruple . look at she now talk to , a man whom she both hate and despise . I be sure she be look forward to some happy time in which the may pitch overboard , and rule supreme , with I or some other subordinate lead the of simply as lieutenant . such a time will never come , but that be she idea . but she be talk to now as if she be pour she full confidence into he ear , and be believe she . be in a seventh heaven , and she be measure he credulity inch by inch . " " she make the place very bright . " " and be spend a enormous deal of money , " say . " what do it matter ? " " well , no ; -- if the like it . I have a idea that the would not like the display of the thing . there he be . do you see he in the corner with he brother duke ? he do not look as if he be happy ; do he ? no one would think he be the master of everything here . he have get himself hide almost behind the screen . I be sure he do not like it . " " he try to like whatever she like , " say . as she husband be away in , . be stay in the house in . the Duchess at present require so much of she time that this be find to be convenient . when , therefore , the guest on the present occasion have all gone , the and . be leave together . " do you ever see anything so hopeless as he be ? " say the Duchess . " who be hopeless ? " " Heavens and earth ! Plantagenet ; -- who else ? be there another man in the world would come into he own house , among he own guest , and speak only to one person ? and , then , think of it
it ! popularity be the staff on which alone ministers can lean in this country with security . " " political but not social popularity . " " you know as well as I do that the two go together . we have see enough of that even in we day . what break up 's ? if he have stay away people might have think that he be read blue - book , or calculate coinage , or prepare a speech . that would have be much better . but he come in and sit for half - a - hour whisper to another duke ! I hate duke ! " " he talk to the of because there be no one he trust be so much . a few year ago it would have be . " " my dear , " say the angrily , " you treat I as though I be a child . of course I know why he choose that old man out of all the crowd . I do not suppose he do it from any stupid pride of rank . I know very well what set of idea govern he . but that be not the point . he have to reflect what other think of it , and to endeavou to do what will please they . there be I tell tarradiddle by the yard to that old oaf , , when a confidential word from would have have ten time more effect . and why can not he speak a word to the people 's wife ? they would not bite he . he have get to say a few word to you sometimes , -- to whom it do not signify , my dear -- " " I do not know about that . " " but he never speak to another woman . he be here this evening for exactly forty minute , and he do not open he lip to a female creature . I watch he . how on earth am I to pull he through if he go on in that way ? yes , , I will go to bed , and I do not think I will get up for a week . " the of throughout and the first week of July the affair of the go on successfully , in spite of the social sins of the and the occasional despair of the Duchess . there have be many politician who have think , or have , at any rate , predict , that the would not live a month . there have be man , such as on one side and on the other , who have find themselves strand disagreeably , -- with no certain position , -- unwill to sit immediately behind a Treasury bench from which they be exclude , and too shy to place themselves immediately opposite . seat beneath the gangway be , of course , open to such of they as be member of the , and those seat have to be use ; but they be not accustom to sit beneath the gangway . these gentleman have expect that the seed of weakness , of which they have perceive the scattering , would grow at once into a enormous crop of blunder , difficulty , and complication ; but , for a while , the be save from these dangers either by the energy of the , or the popularity of he wife , or perhaps by the sagacity of the elder ; -- so that there grow up a idea that the be really the proper thing . in one respect it certainly be successful . the home rulers , or irish party generally , be leave without a inch of standing ground . they support be not need , and therefore they be not court . for the moment there be not even a necessity to pretend that be anything but a absurdity from begin to end ;-- so much so that one or two lead Home rulers , men who have take up the cause not only that they might become member of parliament , but with some further idea of speech - making and popularity , declare that the have be form merely with a view of put down . this capability of dispense with a generally untractable element of support be feel to be a great comfort . then , too , there be a set in the house , -- at the moment not a very numerous set , -- who have be troublesome friends to the old liberal party , and which the be able , if not to ignore , at any rate to disregard . these be the staunch economist , and argumentative philosophical radical , -- man of stand and repute , who be always in doubtful time individually flatter by , who have great privileges accord to they of speak and divide , and who be not unfrequently even thanke for they rod by the very owner of the back which bear the scourge . these man could not be quite set aside by the as be the . it be not even yet , perhaps , wise to count they out , or to leave they to talk to bench absolutely empty ; -- but the tone of flattery with which they have be address become gradually less warm ; and when the scourge be wielded , ministerial back take themselves out of the way . there grow up unconsciously a feeling of security against attack which be distasteful to these gentleman , and be in itself perhaps a little dangerous . gentleman bound to support the government , when they perceive that there be comparatively but little to do , and that that little might be easily do , become careless , and , perhaps , a little contemptuous .
. so that the great popular orator , , find himself compelle to rise in he seat , and ask whether the noble at the head of the government think himself strong enough to rule without attention to Parliamentary detail . the question be ask with a air of inexorable severity , and be intend to have deep signification . have dislike the from the beginning ; but then always dislike everything . he have so accustom himself to wield the constitutional cat - of -nine - tail , that heaven will hardly be happy to he unless he be allow to flog the cherubim . though the party with which he be presume to act have generally be in power since he have be in the house , he have never allow himself to agree with a Minister on any point . and as he have never be satisfied with a Government , it be not probable that he should endure a Coalition in silence . at the end of a rather lengthy speech , he repeat he question , and then sit down , take he place with all that constitutional indignation which become the parliamentary flagellator of the day . the little joke with which answer he be very well in they way . do not care much whether he be answer or not . perhaps the jauntiness of , which imply that the be too strong to regard attack , somewhat irritate outsider . but there certainly grow up from that moment a feeling among such man as and that care be necessary , that the house , take as a whole , be not in a condition to be manipulat with easy freedom , and that must be make to understand that he be not strong enough to depend upon jauntiness . the jaunty statesman must be very sure of he personal follow . there be a general opinion that have not bring the well out of the first real attack which have be make upon it . " well , ; how do you like the ? " have fly back to at the instigation probably of , and be now stand at the window of 's club with . it be near nine one evening , and they be both about to return to the house . " I do not like the Castle , if you mean that . " " Tyrone be not troublesome , surely ? " the of be the of the day , and have in he time be a very strong . " he find I troublesome , I fear . " " I do not wonder at that , . " " how should it be otherwise ? what can he and I have in sympathy with one another ? he have be bring up with all a 's hatred for a Papist . now that he be in high office , he can abandon the display of the feeling , -- perhaps the feeling itself as regard the country at large . he know that it do not become a to be . but how can he put himself into a boat with I ? " " all that kind of thing vanish when a man be in office . " " yes , as a rule ; because man go together into office with the same general predilection . be it too hot to walk down ? " " I will walk a little way , -- till you make I hot by argue . " " I have not a argument leave in I , " say . " of course everything over there seem easy enough now , -- so easy that evidently imagine that the good time be come back in which governor may govern and not be governed . " " you be pretty quiet in now , I suppose ; -- no martial law , suspension of the habea corpus , or anything of that kind , just at present ? " " no ; thank goodness ! " say . " I be not quite sure whether a general suspension of the habea corpus would not upon the whole be the most comfortable state of thing for themselves . but whether good or bad , you have nothing of that kind of thing now . you have no great measure that you wish to pass ? " " but they have a great measure that they wish to pass . " " they know better than that . they do not want to kill they golden goose . " " the people , who be infinitely ignorant of all political work , do want it . there be county in which , if you be to poll the people , would carry nearly every voter ,-- except the member themselves . " " you would not give it they ? " " certainly not ; -- any more than I would allow a son to ruin himself because he ask I . but I would endeaavor to teach they that they can get nothing by Home rule , -- that they tax would be heavier , they property less secure , they life less safe , they general position more debased , and they chance of national success more remote than ever . " " you can never teach they , except by the slow lesson of habit . the do not mould itself into a nation in a day . " " be govern then , and could be and be mould . I feel sure that even in there be a stratum of man , above the work peasant , who would understand , and make those below they understand , the position of the country , if they could only be get to give up fighting about religion . even now rule be regard by the
the multitude as a weapon to be use against Protestantism on behalf of the Pope . " " I suppose the Pope be the great sinner ? " " they get over the in , -- even in early day , before religion have become a farce in the country . they have do so in . " " yes ; -- they have get over the in , certainly . " " and yet , " say , " the bulk of the people be staunch . of course the same attempt to maintain a temporal influence , with the hope of recovere temporal power , be make in other country . but while we see the attempt fail elsewhere , -- so that we know that the power of the Church be go to the wall , -- yet in it be infinitely stronger now than it be fifty , or even twenty year ago . " " because we have be remove restraint on Papal aggression , while other nation have be impos restraint . there be those at who believe all to be Romish at heart , because here in a can say what he will , and print what he will . " " and yet , " say , " all do not return one catholic to the house , while we have in plenty . you have a among you English judge , but at present not a single . what do you suppose be the comparative number of the population here in ? " " and you be go to cure all this ;-- while Tyrone think it ought to be leave as it be ? I rather agree with . " " no , " say , wearily ; " I doubt whether I shall ever cure anything , or even make any real attempt . my patriotism just go far enough to make I unhappy , and Tyrone think that while lady dance at the Castle , and the list of agrarian murder be keep low , the country be admirably manage . I do not quite agree with he ; -- that be all . " then there arise a legal difficulty , which cause much trouble to the . there fall vacant a certain seat on the bench of judge , -- a seat of considerable dignity and importance , but not quite of the highest rank . , who be a rich , energetic man , determine to have a peerage , and convince that , should the fall to piece , the liberal element would be in the ascendant , -- so that the woolsack would then be open to he , -- decline to occupy the place . , the solicitor- , see that it be exactly suit for he , and have no hesitation in express he opinion to that effect . but the place be not give to . it be explain to that the old rule , -- or rather custom , -- of offer certain high position to the law officer of the have be abrogate . some , or , more probably , some collection of , have assert the custom to be a bad one , -- and , as far as right go , be declare not to have a leg to stand upon . he be inform that he service in the house be too valuable to be so lost . some people say that he temper be against he . other be of opinion that he have risen from the rank too quickly , and that , who have come from the same party , think that have not yet win he spur . the Solicitor-General resign in a huff , and then withdraw he resignation . think the withdrawal should not be accept , have find to be a unsympathetic colleague . we consult the old , among whose theory of official life forbearance to all colleague and subordinate be conspicuous . the withdrawal be , therefore , allow , -- but the could not after that be say to be strong in regard to its . but the first concerte attack against the be make in reference to the budget . , who have consent to undertake the duty of of the under the urgent entreaty of the two duke , be of course late with he budget . it be before the have be form . the budget when produce have be very popular . budgets , like baby , be always little love when first bear . but as they infancy pass away , they also become subject to many stripe . the detail be less pleasing than be the whole in the hand of the nurse . there be a certain " interest , " very influential both by general wealth and by the presence of many member in the house , which think that have disregard it be just claim . have refuse to relieve the Brewer from they licence . now the have for some year be agitat about they licence , -- and it be acknowledge in politics that any measure be to be carry , or to be leave out in the cold uncarried and neglect , accord to the number of deputation which may be get to press a on the subject . now the have have deputation after deputation to many Chancellor of the ; and these deputation have be most respectable , -- we may almost say imperative . it be quite usual for a deputation to have four or five County member among its body , all Brewer ; and the average wealth of a deputation of Brewer would buy up half . all the Brewer in the have be among the supporter of the , the number of and conservative Brewers have be about equal . but now there be a fear that
that the " interest " might put itself into opposition . have be firm . more than one of the have wish to yield ; -- but he have discuss the matter with he Chief , and they be both very firm . the have never doubt . have never doubt . from day to day certain organ of the express a opinion , gradually increase in strength , that however strong might be the as a body , it be weak as to finance . this be hard , because not very many year ago the himself have be know as a particularly strong of . a amendment be move in as to the ' Licence , and there be almost a general opinion that the would be break up . would certainly not remain in office if the Brewer be to be relieve from they licence . then it be that be recall from in red - hot haste . the measure be debate for a couple of night , and carry he point . the Brewer ' Licence be allow to remain , as one great gentleman from declare , a " disgrace to the fiscal sagacity of the country . " the be so far victorious ; -- but there arise a general feeling that its strength have be impaire . " I think you have betraye I . " this accusation be brotch by against . in that lady 's drawing - room , and be occasion by a report that have be make to the old lawyer by he daughter . he be very angry and almost violent ;--so much so that by he manner he give a considerable advantage to the lady whom he be accuse . undoubtedly have betraye she brother - in - law . she have be false to the trust repose in she . he have explain he wish to she in regard to he daughter , to whom she have in some sort assume to stand in place of a mother , and she , while pretend to act in accordance with he wish , have directly oppose they . but it be not likely that he would be able to prove she treachery though he might be sure of it . he have desire that he girl should see as little as possible of , but have hesitate to give a positive order that she should not meet he . he have indeed himself take she to a dinner party at which he know that she would meet he . but have betraye he . since the dinner party she have arrange a meeting at she own house on behalf of the lover , -- as to which arrangement have herself be altogether innocent . Emily have meet the man in she aunt 's house , not expect to meet he , and the lover have have a opportunity of speak he mind freely . she also have speak hers freely . she would not engage herself to he without she father 's consent . with that consent she would do so , -- oh , so willingly ! she do not coy she love . he might be certain that she would give herself to no one else . she heart be entirely he . but she have pledge herself to she father , and on no consideration would she break that pledge . she go on to say that after what have pass she think that they have better not meet . in such meeting there could be no satisfaction , and must be much pain . but he have she full permission to use any argument that he could use with she father . on the evening of that day she tell she father all that have pass ,-- omitt no detail either of what she have say or of what have be say to she ,-- add a positive assurance of obedience , but do so with a severe solemnity and apparent consciousness of ill - usage which almost break she father 's heart . " you aunt must have have he there on purpose , " have say . but Emily would neither accuse nor defend she aunt . " I at least know nothing of it , " she say . " I know that , " have ejaculate . " I know that . I do not accuse you of anything , my dear ,-- except of think that you understand the world better than I do . " then Emily have retire and have be leave to pass half the night in a perplexed reverie , feel that he would be force ultimately to give way , and yet certain that by do so he would endanger he child 's happiness . he be very angry with he sister - in - law , and on the next day , early in the morning , he attack she . " I think you have betraye I , " he say . " what do you mean by that , ? " " you have have this man here on purpose that he might make love to . " " I have do no such thing . you tell I yourself that they be not to be keep apart . he come here , and it would be very odd indeed if I be to tell the servants that he be not to be admit . if you want to quarrel with I , of course you can . I have always endeavoure to be a good friend to . " " it be not be a good friend to she , bring she and this adventurer together . " " I do not know why you call he a adventurer . but you be so very odd in you idea ! he be receive everywhere , and be always at
at the Duchess of 's . " " I do not care a fig about the Duchess . " " I dare say not . only the happen to be , and he house be consider to have the very best society that , or indeed , can give . and I think it be something in a young man 's favour when it be know that he associate with such persons as the of . I believe that most fathers would have a regard to the company which a man keep when they think of they daughter 's marry . " " I be not think of she marry . I do not want she to marry ; -- not this man at least . and I fancy the Duchess of be just as likely to have scamp in she drawing - room as any other lady in . " " and do such man as associate with scamp ? " " I do not know anything about , -- and I do not care anything about he . " " he have L20,000 a year out of he business . and do associate with scamp ? " " very likely . " " I never know any one so much prejudiced as you be , . when you have a point to carry there be nothing you will not say . I suppose it come from be in the court . " " the long and the short of it be this , " say the lawyer ; " if I find that be bring here to meet , I must forbid she to come at all . " " you must do as you please about that . but to tell you the truth , , I think the mischief be done . such a girl as , when she have take it into she head to love a man , be not likely to give he up . " " she have promise to have nothing to say to he without my sanction . " " we all know what that mean . you will have to give way . you will find that it will be so . the stern parent who doom he daughter to perpetual seclusion because she will not marry the man he like , do not belong to this age . " " who talk about seclusion ? " " do you suppose that she will give up the man she love because you do not like he ? be that the way girl live now - a - day ? she will not run away with he , because she be not one of that sort ; but unless you be harder - hear than I take you to be , she will make you life a burden to you . and as for betraie you , that be nonsense . you have no right to say it . I be not go to quarrel with you whatever you may say , but you have no right to say it . " , as he go away to 's , bewail himself because he know that he be not hard - hear . what he sister - in - law have say to he in that respect be true enough . if he could only ry himself of a certain internal ague which make he feel that he life be , indeed , a burden to he while he daughter be unhappy , he need only remain passive and simply not give the permission without which he daughter would not ever engage herself to this man . but the ague troublead every hour of he present life . that sister - in - law of he be a silly , vulgar , worldly , and most untrustworthy woman ; -- but she have understood what she be say . and there have be something in that argument about the Duchess of 's party , and , which have its effect . if the man do live with the great and wealthy , it must be because they think well of he and of he position . the fact of he be a " nasty foreigner , " and probably of jewish descent , remain . to he , , the man must always be distasteful . but he could hardly maintain he opposition to one of whom the choice spirit of the world think well . and he try to be fair on the subject . it might be that it be a prejudice . other probably do not find a man to be odious because he be of foreign extraction and know by a foreign name . other would not suspect a man of be of jewish blood because he be swarthy , or even object to he if he be a by descent . but it be wonderful to he that he girl should like such a man , -- should like such a man well enough to choose he as the one companion of she life . she have be bring up to prefer man , and think , and English way , -- and English way , too , somewhat of a past time . he think as do , that it could not be that without magic he daughter who have shunn -- " the wealthy curl darling of we nation , would ever have , to incur a general mock , from she guardage to the sooty bosom of such a thing as " -- this distasteful Portuguese . that evening he say nothing further to he daughter , but sit with she , silent and disconsolate . later in the evening , after she have go to she room , come in while the old man be still walk up and down the draw - room . " where have you be ? "
" ask the father , -- not car a straw as to any reply when he ask the question , but rouse almost to anger by the answer when it come . " I have be dine with at the club . " " I believe you live with that man . " " be there any reason , sir , why I should not ? " " you know that there be a good reason why there should be no peculiar intimacy . but I do not suppose that my wish , or you sister 's welfare , will interest you . " " that be severe , sir . " " I be not such a fool as to suppose that you be to quarrel with a man because I do not approve he address you sister ; but I do think that while this be go on , and while he persevere in opposition to my distinct refusal , you need not associate with he in any special manner . " " I do not understand you objection to he , sir . " " I dare say not . there be a great many thing you do not understand . but I do object . " " he be a very rising man . be say to I just now -- " " who care a straw what a fool like say ? " " I do not mean uncle , but he brother , -- who , I suppose , be somebody in the world . he be say to I just now that he wonder why do not go into the house ; -- that he would be sure to get a seat if he choose , and safe to make a mark when he get there . " " I dare say he could get into the house . I do not know any well - to - do blackguard of whom you might not predict as much . a seat in the of do not make a man a gentleman as far as I can see . " " I think every one allow that be a gentleman . " " who be he father ? " " I do not happen to know he , sir . " " and who be he mother ? I do not suppose you will credit anything because I say it , but as far as my experience go , a man do not often become a gentleman in the first generation . a man may be very worthy , very clever , very rich ,-- very well worth know , if you will ; -- but when one talk of admit a man into close family communion by marriage , one would , I fancy , wish to know something of he father and mother . " then escape , and be again leave to he own meditation . oh , what a peril , what a trouble , what a labyrinth of difficulty be a daughter ! he must either be know as a stern , hard - hear parent , utterly indifferent to he child 's feeling , use with tyranny the power over she which come to he only from she sense of filial duty , -- or else he must give up he own judgment , and yield to she in a matter as to which he believe that such yielding would be most pernicious to she own interest . Hitherto he really know nothing of the man 's mean ;-- nor , if he could have he own way , do he want such information . but , as thing be go now , he begin to feel that if he could hear anything averse to the man he might thus strengthen he hand against he . on the follow day he go into the city , and call on a old friend , a banker , -- one whom he have know for nearly half a century , and of whom , therefore , he be not afraid to ask a question . for be a man not pro , in the ordinary intercourse of life , either to ask or to answer question . " you do not know anything , do you , of a man name ? " " I have hear of he . but why do you ask ? " " well ; I have a reason for ask . I do not know that I quite wish to say what my reason be . " " I have hear of he as connect with 's house , " say the banker , -- " or rather with one of the partner in the house . " " be he a man of mean ? " " I imagine he to be so ; -- but I know nothing . he have rather large dealings , I take it , in foreign stock . be he after my old friend , ? " " well ; -- yes . " " you have better get more information than I can give you . but , of course , before anything of that kind be done you would see that money be settled . " this be all he hear in the city , and this be not satisfactory . he have not like to tell he friend that he wish to hear that the foreigner be a needy adventurer ,-- altogether untrustworthy ; but that have really be he desire . then he think of the L60,000 which he himself destin for he girl . if the man be to he like there would be money enough . though he have be careful to save money , he be not a greedy man , even for he child . should he daughter insist on marry this man he could take care that she should
should never want a sufficient income . as a first step , -- a thing to be do almost at once , -- he must take she away from . it be now , and the custom of the family be that the house in should be leave for two month , and that the flitting should take place about the middle of . usually like to postpone the flitting , as he also like to hasten the return . but now it be a question whether he have not better start at once , -- start somewhither , and probably for a much longer period than the usual vacation . should he take the bull by the horn , and declare he purpose of live for the next twelvemonth at --; well , it do not much matter where ; , he think , be a long way off , and would do as well as any place . then it occur to he that he cousin , , be in town , and that he have better see he cousin before he come to any decision . they be , as usual , expect at this autumn , and that arrangement could not be abandon without explanation . be a baronet , with a handsome old family place on the in , whose forefather have be baronet since baronet be first create , and whose earlier forefather have live at much before that time . it may be imagine , therefore , that be proud of he name , of he estate , and of he rank . but there be drawback to he happiness . as regard he name , it be to descmend to a nephew whom he specially dislike , -- and with good cause . as to he estate , delightful as it be in many respects , it be hardly sufficient to maintain he position with that plentiful hospitality which he would have love ; -- and other property he have none . and as to he rank , he have almost become ashamed of it , since , -- as he be will not to declare be now the case ,-- every prosperous tallow - chandler throughout the country be make a baronet as a matter of course . so he live at home through the year with he wife and daughter , not pretend to the luxury of a season in for which he modest three or four thousand a year do not suffice ; -- and so liive , apart from all the friction of club , parliament , and mix society , he do veritably believe that he dear country be go utterly to the dog . he be so staunch in politics , that during the doings of the last quarter of a century , -- from the repeal of the down to the ballot , -- he have honestly declare one side to be as bad as the other . thus he feel that all he happiness be to be draw from the past . there be nothing of joy or glory to which he could look forward either on behalf of he country or he family . he nephew , -- and ala , he heir , -- be a needy spendthrift , with whom he would hold no communication . the family settlement for he wife and daughter would leave they but poorly off ; and though he do struggle to save something , the duty of live as of should live make those struggle very ineffective . he be a melancholy , proud , ignorant man , who could not endure a personal liberty , and who think the assertion of social equality on the part of man of lower rank to amount to the taking of personal liberty ; -- who read little or nothing , and think that he know the history of he country because he be aware that charle I have have he head cut off , and that the have come from . if Charle I have never have he head cut off , and if the have never come from , the Wharton would now probably be great people and a great nation . but the one have be allow to prevail , and everything have go astray , and now have nothing of this world to conseal he but a hazy retrospect of past glory , and a delight in the beauty of he own river , he own park , and he own house . , with all he foible and with all he fault , be a pure -minded , simple gentleman , who could not tell a lie , who could not do a wrong , and who be earnest in he desire to make those who be dependent on he comfortable , and , if possible , happy . once a year he come up to for a week , to see he lawyer , and get measure for a coat , and go to the dentist . these be the excuse which he give , but it be fancie by some that he wig be the great move cause . and be second cousins , and close friend . trust he cousin altogether in all thing , believe he to be the great legal luminary of , and return he cousin 's affection , entertain something akin to reverence for the man who be the head of he family . he dearly love , -- and love 's wife and two daughter . nevertheless , the second week at become always tedious to he , and the fourth , fifth , and sixth week frightful with ennui . perhaps it be with some unconscious dread of this tedium that he make a sudden suggestion to in reference to . have come to he at he chamber , and the two old man be
be sit together near the open window . delighte in the privilege of sit there , which seem to confer upon he something of a insight into the inner way of life beyond what he could get at he hotel or he wigmaker 's . " go to ; -- for the winter ! " he exclaim . " not only for the winter . we should go at once . " " not before you come to ! " say the amazed baronet . reply in a low , sad voice , " in that case we should not go down to Herefordshire at all . " the baronet look hurt as well as unhappy . " yes , I know what you will say , and how kind you be . " " it be not kindness at all . you always come . it would be break up everything . " " everything have to be break up sooner or later . one feel that as one grow older . " " you and I , , be just of a age . why should you talk to I like this ? you be strong enough , whatever I be . why should not you come ? ! I never hear of such a thing . I suppose it be some nonsense of 's . " then tell he whole story . " Nonsense of 's ! " he begin . " yes , it be nonsense ,-- worse than you think . but she do not want to go abroad . " the father 's plaint need not be repeat to the reader as it be tell to the baronet . though it be necessary that he should explain himself , yet he try to be reticent . listen in silence . he love he cousin Emily , and , know that she would be rich , knowe she advantage of birth , and recognize she beauty , have expect that she would make a match creditable to the family . but a Portuguese ! a man who have never be even know to allude to he own father ! for by degree have be drive to confess all the sins of the lover , though he have endeavoure to conceal the extent of he daughter 's love . " do you mean that -- favour he ? " " I be afraid so . " " and would she --would she -- do anything without you sanction ? " he be always think of the disgrace attach to himself by reason of he nephew 's vileness , and now , if a daughter of the family should also go astray , so as to be exil from the bosom of the Wharton , how manifest would it be that all the glory be depart from they house ! " no ! she will do nothing without my sanction . she have give she word , -- which be gospel . " as he speak the old lawyer strike he hand upon the table . " then why should you run away to ? " " because she be unhappy . she will not marry he , -- or even see he , if I forbid it . but she be near he . " " Herefordshire be a long way off , " say the baronet , pleading . " change of scene be what she should have , " say the father . " there can not be more of a change than she would get at . she always do like . it be there that she meet . " the father only shook he head as 's name be mention . " well , -- that be sad . I always think she would give way about at last . " " it be impossible to understand a young woman , " say the lawyer . with such a english gentleman as on one side , and with this Portuguese on the other , it be to he to a . a darkness have fall over he girl 's eye , and for a time she power of judgment have leave she . " but I do not see why should not do just as well as , " continue the baronet . find himself quite unable to make he cousin understand that the greater disruption cause by a residence abroad , the feeling that a new kind of life have be consider necessary for she , and that she must submit to the new kind of life , might be gradually effective , while the journeying and scene which have be common to she year after year would have no effect . nevertheless he give way . they could hardly start to at once , but the visit to might be accelerate ; and the detail of the residence abroad might be there arrange . it be fix , therefore , that and should go down to at any rate before the end of . " why do you go earlier than usual , papa ? " Emily ask he afterwards . " because I think it best , " he reply angrily . she ought at any rate to understand the reason . " of course I shall be ready , papa . you know that I always like . there be no place on earth I like so much , and this year it will be especially pleasant to I to go out of town . but --" " but what ? " " I can not bear to think that I shall be take you away . " " I have get to bear worse thing than that , my dear . " " oh , papa , do not speak to I like that ! of course I know what you mean . there be no real reason
reason for you go . if you wish it I will promise you that I will not see he . " he only shook he head , -- mean to imply that a promise which could go no farther than that would not make he happy . " it will be just the same , papa ,-- either here , or at , or elsewhere . you need not be afraid of I . " " I be not afraid of you ; -- but I be afraid for you . I fear for you happiness , -- and for my own . " " so do I , papa . but what can be do ? I suppose sometimes people must be unhappy . I can not change myself , and I can not change you . I find myself to be as much bound to as though I be he wife . " " no , no ! you should not say so . you have no right to say so . " " but I have give you a promise , and I certainly will keep it . if we must be unhappy , still we need not , -- need not quarrel ; need we , papa ? " then she come up to he and kiss he ,-- whereupon he go out of the room wip he eye . that eve he again speak to she , say merely a word . " I think , my dear , we will have it fix that we go on the 30th . seem to wish it . " " very well , papa ;-- I shall be quite ready . " 's learn immediately through . Roby that the early departure for have be fix . " I should go to he and speak to he very plainly , " say . " he can not bite you . " " I be not in the least afraid of he bite I . " " you can talk so well ! I should tell he everything , especially about money , -- which I be sure be all right . " " yes , -- that be all right , " say , smile . " and about you people . " " which I have no doubt you think be all wrong . " " I do not know anything about it , " say , " and I do not much care . he have old - world notion . at any rate you should say something , so that he should not be able to complain to she that you have keep he in the dark . if there be anything to be know , it be much better to have it know . " " but there be nothing to be know . " " then tell he nothing ; -- but still tell it to he . after that you must trust to she . I do not suppose she would go off with you . " " I be sure she would not . " " but she be as obstinate as a mule . she will get the better of he if you really mean it . " he assure she that he really do mean it , and determine that he would take she advice as to see , or endeavour to see , once again . but before do so he think it to be expedient to put he house into order , so that he might be able to make a statement of he affair if ask to do so . whether they be flourish or the reverse , it might be necessary that he should have to speak of they , -- with , at any rate , apparent candour . the reader may , perhaps , remember that in the month of have manage to extract a certain signature from he unfortunate city friend , , which make that gentleman responsible for the payment of a considerable sum of money before the end of . the transaction have be one of a unmixed painful nature to . as soon as he come to think of it , after have leave he , he could not prevail upon himself to forgive himself for he folly . that he , -- he , ,-- should have be induce by a few empty word to give he name for seven hundred and fifty pound without any consideration or possibility of benefit ! and the more he think of it the more sure he be that the money be lose . the next day he confirm he own fear , and before a week be go he have write down the sum as go . he tell nobody . he do not like to confess he folly . but he make some inquiry about he friend , -- which be absolutely futile . no one that he know seem to know anything of the man 's affair . but he see he friend from time to time in the city , shining as only successful man do shine , and he hear of he as one whose name be become known in the city . still he suffer grievously . he money be surely gone . a man do not fly a kite in that fashion till thing with he have reach a bad pass . so it be with all through and to the end of , -- the load ever grow heavier and heavier as the time become nearer . then , while he be still afflict with a heaviness of spirit which have never leave he since that fatal day , who but should walk into he office , wear the gayest smile and with a hat splendid as hat be splendid only in the city . and nothing could be more " jolly " than
than he friend 's manner , -- so much so that be almost lift up into temporary jollity himself . Lopez , seat himself , almost at once begin to describe a certain speculation into which he be go rather deeply , and as to which he invite he friend 's co-operation . he be intend , evidently , not to ask , but to confer , a favour . " I rather think that steady business be best , " say . " I hope it be all right about that L750 . " " ah ; yes ;-- I mean to have tell you . I do not want the money , as it turn out , for much above a fortnight , and as there be no use in let the bill run out , I settle it . " so say he take out a pocket - book , extracte the bill , and show it to . 's heart flutter in he bosom . there be he name still on the bit of paper , and it might still be use . have it show to he after this fashion in its mid career , of course he have strong ground for hope . but he could not bring himself to put out he hand for it . " as to what you say about steady business , of course that be very well , " say . " it depend upon whether a man want to make a small income or a large fortune . " he still hold the bill as though he be go to fold it up again , and the importance of it be so present to 's mind that he could hardly digest the argument about the steady business . " I own that I be not satisfy with the former , " continue , " and that I go in for the fortune . " as he speak he tore the bill into three or four bits , apparently without think of it , and let the fragment 's fall upon the floor . it be as though a mountain have be take off 's bosom . he feel almost inclined to send out for a bottle of champagne on the moment , and the argument of he friend ring in he ear with quite a different sound . the allurement of a steady income pal before he eye , and he too begin to tell himself , as he have often tell himself before , that if he would only keep he eye open and he heart high there be no reason why he too should not become a city millionaire . but on that occasion leave he soon , without say very much about he favourite speculation . in a few day , however , the same matter be brotch before 's eye from another direction . he learn from a side wind that the house of and be concerned largely in this business , -- or at any rate he think that he have so learn . the ease with which have destroy that bill six week before it be due have have great effect upon he . those argument about a large fortune or a small income still cling to he . have come to he about the business in the first instance , but it be now necessary that he should go to . he be , however , very cautious . he manage to happen to meet in the street , and introduce the subject in he own slap - dash , aery manner , -- the result of which be , that he have go rather deep into two or three american mine before the end of . but he have already make some money out of they , and , though he would find himself sometimes trembl before he have take he daily allowance of port wine and brandy - and - water , still he be buoyant , and hopeful of live in a park , with a palace at the , and a seat in parliament . know also , as he do , that he friend be intimate with the Duchess of , he have much immediate satisfaction in the intimacy which these relation create . he be get in the thin edge of the wedge , and would calculate as he go home to 's how long it must be before he could ask he friend to propose he at some West end club . on one halcyon summer evening have dine with he at 's , have smile on , and play with the hopeful little Parker . on that occasion Sexty have assure he wife that he regard he friendship with as the most fortunate circumstance of he life . " do be careful , , " the poor woman have say . but have simply tell she that she understand nothing about business . on that evening have thoroughly imbue he with the conviction that if you will only set you mind that way , it be quite as easy to amass a large fortune as to earn a small income . about a week before the departure of the Whartons for , , in compliance with 's counsel , call at the chamber in . it be difficult to say that you will not see a man , when the man be stand just on the other side of a open door ;-- nor , in this case , be quite clear that he have better decline to see the man . but while he be doubt , -- at any rate before he have resolve upon deny he presence , -- the man be there , inside he room . get up from he chair , hesitate a moment , and then give he hand to the intruder in that half -
- unwilling , unsatisfactory manner which most of we have experience when shaking hand with some cold - blooded , ungenial acquaintance . " well , , -- what can I do for you ? " he say , as he reseate himself . he look as though he be at he ease and master of the situation . he have control over himself sufficient for assume such a manner . but he heart be not high within he bosom . the more he look at the man the less he like he . " there be one thing , and one thing only , you can do for I , " say . he voice be peculiarly sweet , and when he speak he word seem to mean more than when they come from other mouth . but do not like sweet voice and mellow , soft word , -- at least not from man 's mouth . " I do not think that I can do anything for you , , " he say . there be a slight pause , during which the visitor put down he hat and seem to hesitate . " I think you come here can be of no avail . do I not explain myself when I see you before ? " " but , I fear , I do not explain myself . I hardly tell my story . " " you can tell it , of course , -- if you think the telling will do you any good . " " I be not able to say then , as I can say now , that you daughter have accept my love . " " you ought not to have speak to my daughter on the subject after what pass between we . I tell you my mind frankly . " " ah , , how be obedience in such a matter possible ? what would you yourself think of a man who in such a position would be obedient ? I do not seek she secretly . I do nothing underhand . before I have once directely ask she for she love , I come to you . " " what be the use of that , if you go to she immediately afterwards in manifest opposition to my wish ? you find yourself bound , as would any gentleman , to ask a father 's leave , and when it be refuse , you go on just as though it have be grant ! do not you call that a mockery ? " " I can say now , sir , what I could not say then . we love each other . and I be as sure of she as I be of myself when I assert that we shall be true to each other . you must know she well enough to be sure of that also . " " I be sure of nothing but of this ; -- that I will not give she my consent to become you wife . " " what be you objection , ? " " I explain it before as far as I find myself call upon to explain it . " " be we both to be sacrifice for some reason that we neither of we understand ? " " how dare you take upon yourself to say that she do not understand ! because I refuse to be more explicit to you , a stranger , do you suppose that I be equally silent to my own child ? " " in regard to money and social rank I be able to place you daughter as my wife in a position as good as she now hold as . " " I care nothing about money , , and we idea of social rank be perhaps different . I have nothing further to say to you , and I do not think that you can have anything further to say to I that can be of any avail . " then , have finish he speech , he get up from he chair and stood upright , thereby demand of he visitor that he should depart . " I think it no more than honest , , to declare this one thing . I regard myself as irrevocably engage to you daughter ; and she , although she have refuse to bind herself to I by that special word , be , I be certain , as firmly fix in she choice as I be in mine . my happiness , as a matter of course , can be nothing to you . " " not much , " say the lawyer , with angry impatience . smile , but he put down the word in he memory and determine that he would treasure it there . " not much , at any rate as yet , " he say . " but she happiness must be much to you . " " it be everything . but in think of she happiness I must look beyond what might be the satisfaction of the present day . you must excuse I , , if I say that I would rather not discuss the matter with you any further . " then he ring the bell and pass quickly into a inner room . when the clerk come of course march out of the chamber and go he way . have be very firm , and yet he be shaken . it be by degree become a fix idea in he mind that the man 's material prosperity be assure . he be afraid even to allude to the subject when talk to the man himself , lest he should be overwhelm by evidence on that subject . then the man 's manner , though it be distasteful to himself , would , he well know ,
, recommend he to other . he be good - look , he live with people who be highly regard , he could speak up for himself , and he be a favour guest at . so great have be the fame of the and she hospitality during the last two month , that the fact of the man 's success in this respect have come home even to . he fear that the world would be against he , and he already begin to dread the joint opposition of the world and he own child . the world of this day do not , he think , care whether its daughter 's husband have or have not any fathers or mother . the world as it be now do not care whether its son - in - law be Christian or jewish ; -- whether they have the fair skin and bold eye and uncertain word of a english gentleman , or the swarthy colour and false grimace and glib tongue of some inferior latin race . but he care for these thing ; -- and it be dreadful to he to think that he daughter should not care for they . " I suppose I have better die and leave they to look after themselves , " he say , as he return to he arm -chair . himself be not altogether ill - satisfied with the interview , not have expect that would have give way at once , and bestow upon he then and there the kind father - in - law 's " bless you , -- bless you ! " something yet have to be do before the blessing would come , or the girl , -- or the money . he have to - day assert he own material success , speak of himself as of a moneyed man , -- and the statement have be receive with no contradiction ,-- even without the suggestion of a doubt . he do not therefore suppose that the difficulty be over ; but he be clever enough to perceive that the aversion to he on another score might help to tide he over that difficulty . and if once he could call the girl he wife , he do not doubt but that he could build himself up with the old barrister 's money . after leave 's he go at once to , and be soon close with . " you can get she here before they go ? " he say . " she would not come ; -- and if we arrange it without let she know that you be to be here , she would tell she father . she have not a particle of female intrigue in she . " " so much the better , " say the lover . " that be all very well for you to say , but when a man make such a tyrant of himself as be do , a girl be bound to look after herself . if it be I I would go off with my young man before I would stand such treatment . " " you could give she a letter . " " she would only show it she father . she be so perverse that I sometimes feel inclined to say that I will have nothing further to do with she . " " you will give she a message at any rate ? " " yes , -- I can do that ; -- because I can do it in a way that will not seem to make it important . " " but I want my message to be very important . tell she that I have see she father , and have offer to explain all my affair to he , -- so that he may know that there be nothing to fear on she behalf . " " it be not any thought of money that be troubl he . " " but tell she what I say . he , however , would listen to nothing . then I assure he that no consideration on earth would induce I to surrender she , and that I be as sure of she as I be of myself . tell she that ; -- and tell she that I think she owe it to I to say one word to I before she go into the country . " it may , I think , be a question whether the two old man act wisely in have at when arrive there . the story of he love for , as far as it have as yet go , must be shortly tell . he have be the second son , as he be now the second brother , of a squire endow with much larger property than that belong to . , , of Longbarns , some twelve mile from , be a considerable man in . this present squire have marry 's eldest daughter , and the younger brother have , almost since they be child together , be know to be in love with . all the Fletcher and everything belong to they be almost worship at . there have be marriage between the two family certainly as far back as the time of , and they be accustom to speak , if not of alliances , at any rate of friendship , much anterior to that . as regards family , therefore , the pretension of a would always be hold to be good by a . but this Fletcher be the very pearl of the tribe . though a younger brother , he have a very pleasant little fortune of he own . though bear to comfortable circumstance , he have work so hard in he young day as to have already make for himself a name at the bar .
. he be a fair - haire , handsome fellow , with sharp , eager eye , with a aquiline nose , and just that shape of mouth and ching which such man as regard as characteristic of good blood . he be rather thin , about five foot ten in height , and have the character of be one of the best horseman in the county . he be one of the most popular man in , and at be almost as much thought of as the squire himself . he certainly be not the man to be take , from he appearance , for a forlorn lover . he look like one of those happy son of the gods who be bear to success . no young man of he age be more courted both by man and woman . there be no one who in he youth have suffer fewer trouble from those cause of trouble which visit young men,--occasional impecuniosity , sternness of parent , native shyness , fear of ridicule , inability of speech , and a general pervading sense of inferiority combine with a ardent desire to rise to a feeling of conscious superiority . so much have be do for he by nature that he be never call upon to pretend to anything . throughout the county those be the lucky man , -- and those too be the happy girl , -- who be allow to call he . and yet this paragon be vainly in love with , who , in the way of love , would have nothing to say to he , prefer , -- as she father once say in he extremest wrath ,-- a greasy adventurer out of the gutter ! and now it have be think expedient to have he down to , although the lawyer ' regular summer vacation have not yet commence . but there be some excuse make for this , over and above the emergency of he own love , in the fact that he brother , with , be also to be at the , -- so that there be gather there a great family party of the Wharton and Fletcher ; for there be present there also old , a magnificently aristocratic and high - minded old lady , with snow - white hair , and lace worth fifty guinea a yard , who be as anxious as everybody else that she younger son should marry . something of the truth as to 's be , of course , know to the people . not that I would have it infer that they want they darling to sell himself for money . the Fletcher be great people , with great spirit , too good in every way for such baseness . but when love , old friendship , good birth , together with every other propriety as to age , manners , and conduct , can be join to money , such a combination will always be think pleasant . when yoArthu reach the it be feel to be necessary that a word should be say to he as to that wretch interloper , . yoArthu have not of late be often in . though always most cordially welcome there by old , and treat with every kindness by short of that love which he desire , he have during the last three or four month abstain from frequent the house . during the past winter , and early in the spring , he have press he suit , -- but have be reject , with warmest assurance of all friendship short of love . it have then be arrange between he and the elder Wharton that they should all meet down at the hall , and there have be sympathetic expression of hope that all might yet be well . but at that time little or nothing have be know of . but now the old baronet speak to he , the father have depute the loathsome task to he friend , -- be unwilling himself even to hind he daughter 's disgrace . " oh , yes , I have hear of he , " say . " I meet he with , and I do not think I ever take a stronger dislike to a man . seem very fond of he . " the baronet mournfully shook he head . it be sad to find that Whartons could go so far astray . " he go to , -- to the Duchess 's , " continue the young man . " I do not think that that be very much in he favour , " say the baronet . " I do not know that it be , sir ; -- only they try to catch all fish in that net that be of any use . " " do you go there , ? " " I should if I be ask , I suppose . I do not know who would not . you see it be a affair , so that everybody be able to feel that he be support he party by go to the 's . " " I hate Coalitions , " say the baronet . " I think they be disgraceful . " " well ; -- yes ; I do not know . the coach have to be drive somehow . you must not stick in the mud , you know . and after all , sir , the of be a respectable man , though he be a . a of can not want to send the country to the dog . " the old man shook he head . he do not understand much about it , but he feel convinced that the and he colleague be send the country to the dog , whatever might be they wish . " I sha not think of politics
politics for the next ten year , and so I do not trouble myself about the Duchess 's party , but I suppose I should go if I be ask . " feel that he have not as yet begin even to approach the difficult subject . " I be glad you do not like that man , " he say . " I do not like he at all . tell I , ; -- why be he always go to ? " " ah ; -- that be it . " " he have be there constantly ; -- have he not ? " " no ;-- no . I do not think that . do not love he a bit better than you do . my cousin think he a most objectionable young man . " " but ? " " ah -- . that be where it be . " " you do not mean to say she -- care about that man ! " " he have be encourage by that aunt of hers , who , as far as I can make out , be a very unfit sort of person to be much with such a girl as we dear Emily . I never see she but once , and then I do not like she at all . " " a vulgar , good - natured woman . but what can she have do ? she can not have twiste Emily round she finger . " " I do not suppose there be very much in it , but I think it better to tell you . girls take fancie into they head , -- just for a time . " " he be a handsome fellow , too , " say , muse in he sorrow . " my cousin say he be a nasty Jew-looking man . " " he be not that , . he be a handsome man , with a fine voice ; -- dark , and not just like a ; but still I can fancy -- . that be bad news for I , . " " I think she will forget all about he down here . " " she never forget anything . I shall ask she , straight away . she know my feeling about she , and I have not a doubt but she will tell I . she be too honest to be able to lie . have he get any money ? " " my cousin seem to think that he be rich . " " I suppose he be . oh , ! that be a blow . I wish I could have the pleasure of shoot he as a man might a few year ago . but what would be the good ? the girl would only hate I the more after it . the best thing to do would be to shoot myself . " " do not talk like that , . " " I sha not throw up the sponge as long as there be a chance leave , . but it will go badly with I if I be beat at last . I should not have think it possible that I should have feel anything so much . " then he pull he hair , and thrust he hand into he waistcoat ; and turn away , so that he old friend might not see the tear in he eye . he old friend also be much move . it be dreadful to he that the happiness of a , and the comfort of the Wharton generally , should be mar by a man with such a name as . " she will never marry he without she father 's consent , " say . " if she mean it , of course he will consent . " " that I be sure he will not . he do not like the man a bit better than you do . " shook he head . " and he be as fond of you as though you be already he son . " " what do it matter ? if a girl set she heart on marry a man , of course she will marry he . if he have no money it might be different . but if he be well off , of course he will succeed . well -- ; I suppose other man have borne the same sort of thing before and it have not kill they . " " let we hope , my boy . I think of she quite as much as of you . " " yes , -- we can hope . I sha not give it up . as for she , I dare say she know what will suit she best . I have nothing to say against the man ,-- except that I should like to cut he into four quarter . " " but a foreigner ! " " girl do not think about that , -- not as you do and . and I think they like dark , greasy man with slippery voice , who be up to dodge and full of secret . well , sir , I shall go to she at once and have it out . " " you will speak to my cousin ? " " certainly I will . he have always be one of the best friend I ever have in my life . I know it have not be he fault . but what can a man do ? girls will not marry this man or that because they be tell . " do speak to 's father , and learn more from he than have be tell he by . indeed he learn the whole truth . have be twice with the father press he suit and have be twice
twice repulse , with as absolute denial as word could convey . Emily , however , have declare she own feeling openly , express she wish to marry the odious man , promise not to do so without she father 's consent , but evidently feel that that consent ought not to be withheld from she . all this tell very plainly , walk with a little before dinner along a shade , lonly path , which for half a mile run along the very marge of the at the bottom of the park . and then he go on to speak other word which seem to rob he young friend of all hope . the old man be walk slowly , with he hand clasp behind he back and with he eye fix on the path as he go ; -- and he speak slowly , evidently weigh he word as he utter they , bring home to he hearer a conviction that the matter discuss be one of supreme importance to the speaker , -- as to which he have think much , so as to be able to express he settled resolution . " I have tell you all now , ; -- only this . I do not know how long I may be able to resist this man 's claim if it be back by 's entreaty . I be think very much about it . I do not know that I have really be able to think of anything else for the last two month . it be all the world to I , -- what she and do with themselves ; and what she may do in this matter of marriage be of infinitely greater importance than anything that can befall he . if he make a mistake , it may be put right . but with a woman 's marry --, vestigia nulla retrorsum . she have put off all she old bond and take new one , which must be she bond for life . feel this very strongly , and dislik this man greatly , -- dislik he , that be to say , in the view of this close relation ,-- I have feel myself to be justifi in so far oppos my child by the use of a high hand . I have refuse my sanction to the marriage both to he and to she ,-- though in truth I have be hard set to find any adequate reason for do so . I have no right to fashion my girl 's life by my prejudice . my life have be live . hers be to come . in this matter I should be cruel and unnatural be I to allow myself to be govern by any selfish inclination . though I be to know that she would be lose to I for ever , I must give way , -- if once bring to a conviction that by not give way I should sacrifice she young happiness . in this matter , , I must not even think of you , though I love you well . I must consider only my child 's welfare ; -- and in do so I must try to sift my own feeling and my own judgment , and ascertain , if it be possible , whether my distaste to the man be reasonable or irrational ; -- whether I should serve she or sacrifice she by obstinacy of refusal . I can speak to you more plainly than to she . indeed I have laid bare to you my whole heart and my whole mind . you have all my wish , but you will understand that I do not promise you my continue assistance . " when he have so spoken he put out he hand and press he companion 's arm . then he turn slowly into a little by - path which lead across the park up to the house , and leave Fletcher stand alone by the river 's bank . and so by degree the blow have come full home to he . he have be twice refuse . then rumours have reach he , -- not at first that he have a rival , but that there be a man who might possibly become so . and now this rivalry , and its success , be declare to he plainly . he tell himself from this moment that he have not a chance . look forward he could see it all . he understand the girl 's character sufficiently to be sure that she would not be waft about , from one lover to another , by change of scene . take she to , -- or to , -- would only confirm in she passion such a girl as . nothing could shake she but the ascertain unworthiness of the man , -- and not that unless it be ascertain beneath she own eye . and then year must pass by before she would yield to another lover . there be a further question , too , which he do not fail to ask himself . be the man necessarily unworthy because he name be , and because he have not come of English blood ? as he strove to think of this , if not coolly yet rationally , he sit himself down on the river 's side and begin to pitch stone off the path in among the rock , among which at that spot the water make its way rapidly . there have be moment in which he have be almost asham of he love , -- and now he do not know whether to be most asham or most proud of it . but he recognise the fact that it be crucify he , and that it would continue to crucify he . he know himself in to be a
a popular man , -- one of those for whom , accord to general opinion , girl should sigh , rather than one who should break he heart sigh for a girl . he have often tell himself that it be beneath he manliness to be despondent ; that he should let such a trouble run from he like water from a duck 's back , consol himself with the reflection that if the girl have such bad taste she could hardly be worthy of he . he have almost try to belong to that school which throw the heart away and rule by the head alone . he know that other , -- perhaps not those who know he best , but who nevertheless be the companion of many of he hour , -- give he the credit for such power . why should a man afflict himself by the inward burden of a unsatisfied craving , and allow he heart to sink into he very foot because a girl would not smile when he woo she ? " if she be not fair for I , what care I how fair she be ! " he have repeat the line to himself a score of time , and have be asham of himself because he could not make they come true to himself . they have not come true in the least . there he be , , whom all the world court , with he heart in he very boot ! there be a miserable load within he , absolutely palpable to he outward feel , -- a very physical pain ,-- which he could not shake off . as he throw the stone into the water he tell himself that it must be so with he always . though the world do pet he , though he be like at he club , and court in the hunting - field , and love at ball and archery meeting , and repute by old man to be a rise star , he tell himself that he be so maim and mutilate as to be only half a man . he could not reason about it . have afflict he with a certain weakness . one man have a hump ;-- another can hardly see out of he imperfect eye ;-- a third can barely utter a few disjointed word . it be he fate to be construct with some weak arrangement of the blood - vessel which leave he in this plight . " the whole damned thing be nothing to I , " he say burste out into absolute tear , after vainly try to reassure himself by a recollection of the good thing which the world still have in store for he . then he strove to conseal himself by think that he might take a pride in he love even though it be so intolerable a burden to he . be it not something to be able to love as he love ? be it not something at any rate that she to whom he have condescende to stoop be worthy of all love ? but even here he could get no comfort , -- be in truth unable to see very clearly into the condition of the thing . it be a disgrace to he , -- to he within he own bosom , -- that she should have prefer to he such a one as , and this disgrace he exaggerate , ignore the fact that the girl herself might be deficient in judgment , or lead away in she love by falsehood and counterfeit attraction . to he she be such a goddess that she must be right , -- and therefore he own inferiority to such a one as be prove . he could take no pride in he reject love . he would ry himself of it at a moment 's notice if he know the way . he would throw himself at the foot of some second - rate , tawdry , well - born , well - know beauty of the day , -- only that there be not now leave to he strength to pretend the feeling that would be necessary . then he hear step , and jump up from he seat , stand just in the way of and she cousin . " be not you go to dress for dinner , young man ? " say the latter . " I shall have time if you have , any way , " say , endeavour to pluck up he spirit . " that be nice of he ; -- be not it ? " say . " why , we be dress . what more do you want ? we come out to look for you , though we do not mean to come as far as this . it be past seven now , and we be suppose to dine at a quarter past . " " five minute will do for I . " " but you have get to get to the house . you need not be in a tremendous hurry , because papa have only just come in from haymaking . they have get up the last load , and there have be the usual ceremony . Emily and I have be look at they . " " I wish I have be here all the time , " say Emily . " I do so hate in . " " so do I , " say , -- " in and all other time . " " you hate ! " say . " yes , -- and , -- and other place generally . if I have get to dress I would better get across the park as quick as I can go , " and so he leave they . turn round and look at she
she cousin , but at the moment say nothing . 's passion be well know to , but have as yet hear nothing of . ! during the whole of that evening there be a force attempt on the part of all the party at to be merry , -- which , however , as be the case whenever such attempt be force , be a failure . there have be a hay - make harvest - home which be suppose to give the special occasion for mirth , as far the land around the park himself , and be great in hay . " I do not think it pay very well , " he say with a gentle smile , " but I like to employ some of the people myself . I think the old people find it easier with I than with the tenant . " " I should not wonder , " say he cousin ; --" but that be charity ; not employment . " " no , no , " exclaim the baronet . " they work for they wage and do they best . see to that . " Powell be the bailiff , who know the length of he master 's foot to a quarter of a inch , and be quite aware that the haymaker be not to be overtask . " Powell do not keep any cat about the place , but what catch mouse . but I be not quite sure that haymak do pay . " " how do the tenant manage ? " " of course they look to thing closer . you would not wish I to let the land up to the house door . " " I think , " say old , " that a landlord should consent to lose a little by he own farming . it do good in the long run . " both and feel that this might be very well at , though it could hardly be afforde at . " I do not think I lose much by my farming , " say the squire of Longbarns . " I have about four hundred acre on hand , and I keep my account pretty regularly . " " be a very good man , I dare say , " say the baronet . " like most of the other , " continue the squire , " he be very well as long as he be look after . I think I know as much about it as . of course , I do not expect a farmer 's profit ; but I do expect my rent , and I get it . " " I do not think I manage it quite that way , " say the baronet in a melancholy tone . " I be afraid not , " say the barrister . " be as hard upon the man as any one of the tenant , " say 's wife , of . " I be not hard at all , " say , " and you understand nothing about it . I be pay three shilling a week more to every man , and eighteen pence a week more to every woman , than I do three year ago . " " that be because of the Unions , " say the barrister . " I do not care a straw for the Unions . if the Unions interfere with my comfort I would let the land and leave the place . " " oh , ! " ejaculate 's mother . " I would not consent to be make a slave even for the sake of the country . but the wage have to be raise , -- and have raise they I expect to get proper value for my money . if anything have to be give away , let it be give away , -- so that the people should know what it be that they receive . " " that be just what we do not want to do here , " say , who do not often join in any of these argument . " you be wrong , my lady , " say she stepson . " you be only breed idleness when you teach people to think that they be earn wage without work for they money . whatever you do with th'ey let them know and feel the truth . it will be the best in the long run . " " I be sometimes happy when I think that I sha not live to see the long run , " say the baronet . this be the manner in which they try to be merry that even after dinner at . the two girl sit listen to they senior in contented silence ,--listen or perhaps think of they own peculiar trouble , while hold some book in he hand which he strove to read with all he might . there be not one there in the room who do not know that it be the wish of the family that should marry , and also that Emily have refuse he . to of course the feel that it be so could not but be a additional vexation ; but the knowledge have grow up and have become common in the two family without any power on he part to prevent so disagreeable a condition of affair . there be not one in that room , unless it be , who be not more or less angry with Emily , think she to be perverse and unreasonable . even to she cousin 's strange obstinacy be matter of surprise and sorrow , -- for to she be one of those demigod , who should never be refuse , who be not expect to do more than express a wish and be accept . she own
own heart have not stray that way because she think but little of herself , knowe herself to be portionless , and believe from long thought on the subject that it be not she destiny to be the wife of any man . she regard as be of all man the most lovable , -- though , know she own condition , she do not dream of love he . it do not become she to be angry with another girl on such a cause ; -- but she be amaze that should sigh in vain . the girl 's folly and perverseness on this head be know to they all , -- but as yet she greater folly and worse perverseness , she vitiate taste and dreadful partiality for the Portuguese adventurer , be know but to the two old man and to poor himself . when that sternly magnificend old lady , . , -- whose ancestor have be Welsh king in the time of the , -- when she should hear this story , the roof of the old hall would hardly be able to hold she wrath and she dismay ! the old king have die away , but the Fletcher , and the , -- of whom she have be one , -- and the Wharton remain , a peculiar people in a age that be then surrendere itself to quick perdition , and with peculiar duty . among these duty , the chiefest of they incumbend on female be that of so restrain they affections that they should never damage the good cause by leave it . they might marry within the pale , -- or remain single , as might be they lot . she would not take upon herself to say that be bound to accept , merely because such a marriage be fitte ,-- although she do think that there be much perverseness in the girl , who might have teach herself , have she not be stubborn , to comply with the wish of the family . but to love one below herself , a man without a father , a foreigner , a black Portuguese nameless , merely because he have a bright eye , and a hook nose , and a glib tongue , -- that a girl from the Whartons should do this -- ! it be so unnatural to . Fletcher that it would be hardly possible to she to be civil to the girl after she have hear that she mind and taste be so astray . all this know and the barrister know it , -- and they fear she indignation the more because they sympathise with the old lady 's feeling . " do not seem to I to be a bit more gracious than she use to be , " say to Lady Wharton that night . the two old lady be sit together upstairs , and be with they . in such conference Mr . Fletcher always domineered , -- to the perfect contentment of old , but not equally so to that of she daughter - in - law . " I be afraid she be not very happy , " say . " she have everything that ought to make a girl happy , and I do not know what it be she want . it make I quite angry to see she so discontent . she do not say a word , but sit there as glum as death . if I be I would leave she for six month , and never speak to she during the time . " " I suppose , mother , " say the , -- who call she husband 's mother , mother , and she own mother , mamma , -- " a girl need not marry a man unless she like he . " " but she should try to like he if it be suitable in other respects . I do not mean to take any trouble about it . yoArthu need not beg for any favour . only I would not have come here if I have think that she have intend to sit silent like that always . " " it make she unhappy , I suppose , " say , " because she can not do what we all want . " " fall , lall ! she would have want it herself if nobody else have wish it . I be surprise that Arthur should be so much take with she . " " you would better say nothing more about it , mother . " " I do not mean to say anything more about it . it be nothing to I . yoArthu can do very well in the world without . only a girl like that will sometimes make a disgraceful match ; and we should all feel that . " " I do not think Emily will do anything disgraceful , " say . and so they parte . in the meantime the two brother be smoke they pipe in the housekeeper 's room , which , at , when the or be there , be freely use for that purpose . " be not it rather quaint of you , " say the elder brother , " come down here in the middle of term time ? " " it do not matter much . " " I should have think it would matter ; -- that be , if you mean to go on with it . " " I be not go to make a slave of myself about it , if you mean that . I do not suppose I shall ever marry , -- and as for rise to be a swell in the profession , I do not care about it . " " you use to care about it ,-- very much . you
you use to say that if you do not get to the top it should not be you own fault . " " and I have work ; -- and I do work . but thing get change somehow . I have half a mind to give it all up , -- to raise a lot of money , and to start off with a resolution to see every corner of the world . I suppose a man could do it in about thirty year if he liv so long . it be the kind of thing would suit I . " " exactly . I do not know any fellow who have be more into society , and therefore you be exactly the man to live alone for the rest of you life . you have always work hard , I will say that for you ; -- and therefore you be just the man to be contente with idleness . you have always be ambitious and self - confident , and therefore it will suit you to a , to be nobody and to do nothing . " yoArthu sit silent , smoke he pipe with all he might , and he brother continue , -- " , -- you read sometimes , I fancy . " " I should read all the more . " " very likely . but what you have read , in the old play , for instance , must have teach you that when a man be cut up about a woman , -- which I suppose be you case just at present , -- he never do get over it . he never get all right after a time , -- do he ? such a one have better go and turn monk at once , as the world be over for he altogether ; -- be not it ? men do not recover after a month or two , and go on just the same . you have never see that kind of thing yourself ? " " I be not go to cut my throat or turn monk either . " " no . there be so many steamboat and railways now that travel seem easier . suppose you go as far as . , and see if that do you any good . if it do not , you need not go on , because it will be hopeless . if it do , -- why , you can come back , because the second journey will do the rest . " " there never be anything , , that be not matter for chaff with you . " " and I hope there never will be . people understand it when logic would be throw away . I suppose the truth be the girl care for somebody else . " yoArthu nod he head . " who be it ? any one I know ? " " I think not . " " any one you know ? " " I have meet the man . " " ? " " disgustingly indecent , I should say . " look very black , for even with he the feeling about the and the and the be very strong . " he be a man I should say you would not let into Longbarns . " " there might be various reason for that . it might be that you would not care to meet he . " " well ; -- no ,--I do not suppose I should . but without that you would not like he . I do not think he be a . " " a foreigner ! " " he have get a foreign name . " " a italian nobleman ? " " I do not think he be noble in any country . " " who the ---- be he ? " " he name be -- . " " 's friend ? " " yes ;-- 's friend . I be not very much oblige to master Everett for what he have do . " " I have see the man . indeed , I may say I know he , -- for I dine with he once in . himself must have ask he there . " " he be there as 's friend . I only hear all this to - day , you know ;-- though I have hear about it before . " " and therefore you want to set out on you travels . as far as I see I should say he be a clever fellow . " " I do not doubt that . " " and a gentleman . " " I do not know that he be not , " say . " I have no right to say a word against he . from what say I suppose he be rich . " " he be good look too ;--at least he be the sort of man that woman like to look at . " " just so . I have no cause of quarrel with he , -- nor with she . but --. " " yes , my friend , I see it all , " say the elder brother . " I think I know all about it . but run away be not the thing . one may be pretty nearly sure that one be right when one say that a man should not run away from anything . " " the thing be to be happy if you can , " say . " no ; -- that be not the thing . I be not much of a philosopher , but as far as I can see there be two philosophy in the world . the one be to make one 's self happy , and the other be to make other people happy .
. the latter answer the best . " " I can not add to she happiness by hang about . " " that be a quibble . it be not she happiness we be talk about , -- nor yet you hang about . Gird yourself up and go on with what you have get to do . put you work before you feeling . what do a poor man do , who go out hedge and ditch with a dead child lie in he house ? if you get a blow in the face , return it if it ought to be return , but never complain of the pain . if you must have you vitals eat into , -- have they eat into like a man . but , mind you ,-- these be not you vital . " " it go pretty near . " " these be not you vitals . a man get cured of it ,-- almost always . I believe always ; though some man get hit so hard they can never bring themselves to try it again . but tell I this . have old give he consent ? " " no . he have refuse , " say with strong emphasis . " how be it to be , then ? " " he have deal very fairly by I . he have do all he could to get rid of the man , -- both with he and with she . he have tell Emily that he will have nothing to do with the man . and she will do nothing without he sanction . " " then it will remain just as it be . " " no , ; it will not . he have go on to say that though he have refuse , -- and have refuse roughly enough , -- he must give way if he see that she have really set she heart upon he . and she have . " " have she tell you so ? " " no ; -- but he have tell I . I shall have it out with she to - morrow , if I can . and then I shall be off . " " you will be here for shoot on the 1st ? " " no . I dare say you be right in what you say about stick to my work . it do seem unmanly to run away because of a girl . " " because of anything ! stop and face it , whatever it be . " " just so ; -- but I can not stop and face she . it would do no good . for all we sake I should be better away . I can get shoot with and in . I dare say I shall go there , and take a share with they . " " that be better than go into all the quarter of the globe . " " I do not mean that I be to surrender and start at once . you take a fellow up so short . I shall do very well , I have no doubt , and shall be hunt here as jolly as ever at . but a fellow must say it all to somebody . " the elder brother put he hand out and lay it affectionately upon the younger one 's arm . " I be not go to whimper about the world like a whipped dog . the worst of it be so many people have know of this . " " you mean down here . " " oh ;--everywhere . I have never tell they . it have be a kind of family affair and think to be fit for general discussion . " " that will wear away . " " in the meantime it be a bore . but that shall be the end of it . do not you say another word to I about it , and I will not to you . and tell mother not to , or . " be 's wife . " it have get to be drop , and let we drop it as quickly as we can . if she do marry this man I do not suppose she will be much at or . " " not at certainly , I should say , " reply . " Fancy mother have to curtsey to she as ! and I doubt whether would like he . he be not of we sort . he be too clever , too cosmopolitan , -- a sort of man white - washed of all prejudice , who would not mind whether he eat horseflesh or beef if horseflesh be as good as beef , and never have a association in he life . I be not sure that he be not on the safest side . good night , old fellow . Pluck up , and send we plenty of grouse if you do go to . " , as I hope may have be already see , be by no means a weak man or a indifferent brother . he be warm - hear , sharp - wit , and , though perhaps a little self - opinionate , consider throughout the county to be one of the most prudent in it . indeed no one ever venture to doubt he wisdom on all practical matter , -- save he mother , who see he almost every day , have a stronger bia towards she younger son . " yoArthu have be hit hard about that girl , " he say to he wife that night . " ? " " yes ; -- you cousin Emily . do not say anything to he , but be as good to he as you know how . " " good to !
! be I not always good to he ? " " be a little more than usually tender with he . it make one almost cry to see such a fellow hurt like that . I can understand it , though I never have anything of it myself . " " you never have , , " say the wife lean close upon the husband 's breast as she speak . " it all come very easily to you ; -- too easily perhaps . " " if any girl have ever refuse I , I should have take she at she word , I can tell you . there would have be no second ' hop ' to that ball . " " then I suppose I be right to catch it the first time ? " " I do not say how that may be . " " I be right . oh , dear I !-- suppose I have doubt , just for once , and you have go off . you would have try once more ;-- would not you ? " " you would have go about like a broken - win old hen , and have soften I that way . " " and now poor have have he wing break . " " you must not let on to know that it be break , and the wing will be heale in due time . but what fool girls be ! " " indeed they be , ;--particularly I . " " Fancy a girl like , " say he , not condescende to notice she little joke , " throw over a fellow like for a greasy , black foreigner . " " a foreigner ! " " yes ; -- a man name . do not say anything about it at present . will not she live to find out the difference , and to know what she have do ! I can tell she of one that will not pity she . " - receive he brother 's teaching as true , and take he brother 's advice in good part ;--so that , before the morning follow , he have resolve that however deep the wound might be , he would so live before the world , that the world should not see he wound . what people already know they must know , -- but they should learn nothing further either by word or sign from he . he would , as he have say to he brother , " have it out with " ; and then , if she tell he plainly that she love the man , he would bid she adieu , simply express regret that they course for life should be divide . he be confident that she would tell he the entire truth . she would be restrain neither by false modesty , nor by any assume unwillingness to discuss she own affair with a friend so true to she as he have be . he know she well enough to be sure that she recognise the value of he love though she could not bring herself to accept it . there be reject lover who , merely because they be lover , become subject to the scorn and even to the disgust of the girl they love . but again there be man who , even when they be reject , be almost love , who be consider to be worthy of all reverence , almost of worship ; -- and yet the worshipper will not love they . not analyse all this , but somewhat conscious of the light in which this girl regard he , he know that what he might say would be treat with deference . as to shak she , -- as to talk she out of one purpose and into another , -- that to he do not for a moment seem to be practicable . there be no hope of that . he hardly know why he should endeaavor to say a word to she before he leave . and yet he feel that it must be say . be he to allow she to be marry to this man , without any further previous word between they , it would appear that he have resolve to quarrel with she for ever . but now , at this very moment of time , as he lay in he bed , as he dress himself in the morning , as he saunter about among the new hay - stack with he pipe in he mouth after breakfast , he come to some conclusion in he mind very much averse to such quarrelling . he have love she with all he heart . it have not be a mere drawing - room love beget between a couple of waltze , and foster by five minute in a crush . he know himself to be a man of the world , and he do not wish to be other than he be . he could talk among man as man talk , and act as man act ; -- and he could do the same with woman . but there be one person who have be to he above all , and round everything , and under everything . there have be a private nook within he into which there have be no entrance but for the one image . there have be a holy of holy , which he have guard within himself , keep it free from all outer contamination for he own use . he have cherish the idea of a clear fountain of ever - run water which would at last be he , always ready for the comfort of he own lip . now all he hope be shatte , he trust be gone , and he longing disappoint . but the person
person be the same person , though she could not be he . the nook be there , though she would not fill it . the holy of holy be not less holy , though he himself might not dare to lift the curtain . the fountain would still run ,-- still the clearest fountain of all , -- though he might not put he lip to it . he would never allow himself to think of it with lessened reverence , or with change idea as to she nature . and then , as he stand lean against a ladder which still keep its place against one of the hay - rick , and fill he second pipe unconsciously , he have to realise to himself the probable condition of he future life . of course she would marry this man with very little further delay . she father have already declare himself to be too weak to interfere much longer with she wish . of course would give way . he have himself declare that he would give way . and then , -- what sort of life would be she life ? no one know anything about the man . there be a idea that he be rich , -- but wealth such as he , wealth that be subject to speculation , will fly away at a moment 's notice . he might be cruel , a mere adventurer , or a thorough ruffian for all that be know of he . there should , think to himself , be more stability in the giving and take of wife than could be reckon upon here . he become old in that half - hour , take home to himself and appreciate many saws of wisdom and finger -direction of experience which hitherto have be to he matter almost of ridicule . but he could only come to this conclusion , -- that as she be still to be to he he holy of holy though he might not lay he hand upon the altar , he fountain though he might not drink of it , the one image which alone could have fill that nook , he would not cease to regard she happiness when she should have become the wife of this stranger . with the stranger himself he never could be on friendly term ; -- but for the stranger 's wife there should always be a friend , if the friend be need . about a hour before lunch , , who have be hang about the house all the morning in a manner very unusual to he , catch as she be pass through the hall , and tell she that be in a certain part of the grounds and wish to speak to she . " ? " she ask . " yes , certainly alone . " " ought I to go to he , ? " she ask again . " certainly I think you ought . " then he have do he commission and be able to apply himself to whatever business he have on hand . Emily at once put on she hat , take she parasol , and leave the house . there be something distasteful to she in the idea of this go out at a lover 's bidding , to meet he ; but like all Whartons and all Fletcher , she trust . and then she be aware that there be circumstance which might make such a meeting as this serviceable . she know nothing of what have take place during the last four - and - twenty hour . she have no idea that in consequence of word speak to he by she father and he brother , be about to abandon he suit . there would have be no doubt about she go to meet he have she think this . she suppose that she would have to hear again the old story . if so , she would hear it , and would then have a opportunity of tell he that she heart have be give entirely to another . she know all that she owe to he . after a fashion she do love he . he be entitle to all kindest consideration from she hand . but he should be tell the truth . as she enter the shrubbery he come out to meet she , give she he hand with a frank , easy air and a pleasant smile . he smile be as bright as the ripple of the sea , and he eye would then gleam , and the slightest sparkle of he white tooth would be see between he lip , and the dimple of he ching would show itself deeper than at other time . " it be very good of you . I think you would come . ask you , I suppose . " " yes ; -- he tell I you be here , and he say I ought to come . " " I do not know about ought , but I think it better . will you mind walk on , as I have get something that I want to say ? " then he turn and she turn with he into the little wood . " I be not go to bother you any more , my darling , " he say . " you be still my darling , though I will not call you so after this . " she heart sank almost in she bosom as she hear this , -- though it be exactly what she would have wish to hear . but now there must be some close understanding between they and some tenderness . she know how much she have owed he , how good he have be to she , how true have be he love ; and she feel that
that word would fail she to say that which ought to be say . " so you have give yourself to -- one ! " " yes , " she say , in a hard , dry voice . " yes ; I have . I do not know who tell you ; but I have . " " you father tell I . it be better , -- be it not ?-- that I should know . you be not sorry that I should know ? " " it be better . " " I be not go to say a word against he . " " no ; -- do not do that . " " against you . I be simply here now to let you know that -- I retire . " " you will not quarrel with I , ? " " Quarrel with you ! I could not quarrel with you , if I would . no ;--there shall be no quarrel . but I do not suppose we shall see each other very often . " " I hope we may . " " sometimes , perhaps . a man should not , I think , affect to be friend with a successful rival . I dare say he be a excellent fellow , but how be it possible that he and I should get on together ? but you will always have one , -- one besides he , -- who will love you best in this world . " " no ; -- no ;--no . " " it must be so . there will be nothing wrong in that . every one have some dearest friend , and you will always be mine . if anything of evil should ever happen to you , -- which of course there wo not , -- there would be some one who would -- . but I do not want to talk buncum ; I only want you to believe I . good - bye , and bless you . " then he put out he right hand , hold he hat under he left arm . " you be not go away ? " " to - morrow , perhaps . but I will say my real good - bye to you here , now , to - day . I hope you may be happy . I hope it with all my heart . good - bye . bless you ! " " oh , ! " then she put she hand in he . " oh , I have love you so dearly . it have be with my whole heart . you have never quite understand I , but it have be as true as heaven . I have think sometimes that have I be a little less earnest about it , I should have be a little less stupid . a man should not let it get the better of he , as I have do . say good - bye to I , Emily . " " good - bye , " she say , still leave she hand in he . " I suppose that be about all . do not let they quarrel with you here if you can help it . of course at they will not like it for a time . oh , -- if it could have be different ! " then he drop she hand , and turn he back quickly upon she , go away along the path . she have expect and have almost wished that he should kiss she . a girl 's cheek be never so holy to herself as it be to she lover , -- if he do love she . there would have be something of reconciliation , something of a promise of future kindness in a kiss , which even would not have grudge . it would , for she , have rob the parting of that bitterness of pain which he word have give to it . as to all that , he have make no calculation ; but the bitterness be there for he , and he could have do nothing that would have expel it . she weep bitterly as she return to the house . there might have be cause for joy . it be clear enough that she father , though he have show no sign to she of yielding , be nevertheless prepared to yield . it be she father who have cause to take himself off , as a lover really dismisse . but , at this moment , she could not bring herself to look at that aspect of the affair . she mind would revert to all those choicest moment in she early year in which she have be happy with ; in which she have first learn to love he , and have then teach herself to understand by some confused and perplex lesson that she do not love he as man and woman love . but why should she not so have love he ? would she not have do so could she then have understand how true and firm he be ? and then , independently of herself , throw herself aside for the time as she be bound to do when think of one so good to she as , she find that no personal joy could dry the grief which she share with he . for a moment the idea of a comparison between the two man force itself upon she , -- but she drive it from she as she hurrie back to the house . the of of himself the blaze make by the Duchess of during the three month of the season up in have be very great , but it be little in comparison with the social coruscation expect to be achieve at ,-- little
little at least as far as public report go , and the general opinion of the day . no doubt the house in have be thrown open as the house of no , perhaps of no duke , have be open before in this country ; but it have be do by degree , and have not be accompany by such a blowing of trumpet as be sound with reference to the entertainment at . I would not have it suppose that the trumpet be blow by the direct order of the Duchess . the trumpet be blow by the customary trumpeter as it become kny that great thing be to be do , -- all newspaper and very many tongue lend they assistance , till the sound of the instrument almost frighten the Duchess herself . " be not it od , " she say to she friend , , " that one can not have a few friend down in the country without such a fuss about it as the people be make ? " . do not think that it be odd , and so she say . thousand of pound be be spend in a very conspicuous way . invitation to the place even for a couple of day , -- for twenty - four hour , -- have be begge for abjectly . it be understand everywhere that the be bid for greatness and popularity . of course the trumpet be blow very loudly . " if people do not take care , " say the Duchess , " I will put everybody off and have the whole place shut up . I would do it for sixpence , now . " perhaps of all the person , much or little concerned , the one who hear the least of the trumpet , -- or rather who be the last to hear they , -- be the himself . he could not fail to see something in the newspaper , but what he do see do not attract he so frequently or so strongly as it do other . it be a pity , he think , that a man 's social and private life should be make subject to so many remark , but this misfortune be one of those to which wealth and rank be liable . he have long recognise that fact , and for a time endeavoure to believe that he intend sojourn at be not more public than be the autumn doings of other duke and other prime minister . but gradually the trumpet do reach even he ear . blind as he be to many thing himself , he always have near to he that other duke who be never blind to anything . " you be go to do great thing at this year , " say the . " nothing particular , I hope , " say the , with a inward trepidation , -- for gradually there have crept upon he a fear that he wife be make a mistake . " I think it be go to be very particular . " " it be 's do . " " I do not doubt but that she be right . do not suppose that I be criticize you hospitality . we be to be at ourselves about the end of the month . it will be the first time I shall have see the place since you uncle 's time . " the at this moment be sit in he own particular room at the , and before the entrance of he friend have be conscientiously endeavour to define for himself , not a future policy , but the past policy of the last month or two . it have not be for he a very happy occupation . he have become the head of the government , -- and have not fail , for there he be , still the head of the government , with a majority at he back , and the six month ' vacation before he . they who be entitle to speak to he confidentially as to he position , be almost vehement in declare he success . , about a week ago , have not see any reason why the should not endure at least for the next four year . , from the other side , be equally confident . but , on look back at what he have do , and indeed on look forward into he future intention , he could not see why he , of all man , should be . he have once be of the , fill that office through two halcyon session , and he have know the reason why he have hold it . he have venture to assure himself at the time that he be the best man whom he party could then have find for that office , and he have be satisfied . but he have none of that satisfaction now . there be man under he who be really at work . the have legal reform on foot . be busy , heart and soul , in regard to income tax and brewer ' licence , -- make we poor 's mouth water . be active among the coloney . have at any rate he idea about . but with the , -- so at least the tell himself , -- it be all a blank . the policy confide to he and expect at he hand be that of keep together a . that be a task that do not satisfy he . and now , gradually , -- very slowly indeed at first , but still with a sure step , -- there be creeping upon he the idea that he power of cohesion be seek for , and perhaps find , not in he political capacity , but in he rank and wealth
wealth . it might , in fact , be the case that it be he wife the Duchess ,-- that of whose wild impulse and general impracticability he have always be in dread , -- that she with she dinner party and reception , with she crowded saloon , she music , she picnic , and social temptation , be rather than he himself . it might be that this have be understand by the coalesce party , -- by everybody , in fact , except himself . it have , perhaps , be find that in the state of thing then exist , a ministry could be best keep together , not by parliamentary capacity , but by social arrangement , such as he Duchess , and he Duchess alone , could carry out . she and she only would have the spirit and the money and the sort of cleverness require . in such a state of thing he of course , as she husband , must be the nominal . there be no anger in he bosom as he think of this . it would be hardly just to say that there be jealousy . he nature be essentially free from jealousy . but there be shame , -- and self - accusation at have accept so great a office with so little fix purpose as to great work . it might be he duty to subordinate even he pride to the service of he country , and to consent to be a faineant minister , a gild Treasury log , because by remain in that position he would enable the government to be carry on . but how base the position , how mean , how repugnant to that grand idea of public work which have hitherto be the motive power of all he life ! how would he continue to live if this thing be to go on from year to year , -- he pretend to govern while other govern , -- stalk about from one public hall to another in a blue ribbon , take the highest place at all table , receive mock reverence , and know to all man as faineant of the ? now , as he have be think of all this , the most trust of he friend have come to he , and have at once allude to the very circumstance which have be press so heavily on he mind . " I be delighted , " continue the elder , " when I hear that you have determined to go to this year . " " if a man have a big house I suppose he ought to live in it , sometimes . " " certainly . it be for such purpose as this now intend that you uncle build it . he never become a public man , and therefore , though he go there , every year I believe , he never really use it . " " he hate it , -- in he heart . and so do I . and so do . I do not see why any man should have he private life interrupt by be make to keep a huge caravansary open for person he do not care a straw about . " " you would not like to live alone . " " , -- with my wife and child , -- I would certainly , during a portion of the year at least . " " I doubt whether such a life , even for a month , even for a week , be compatible with you duty . you would hardly find it possible . could you do without you private secretary ? would you know enough of what be go on , if you do not discuss matter with other ? a man can not be both private and public at the same time . " " and therefore one have to be chop up , like 'a ree out of the river , ' as the poet say , ' and yet not give sweet music afterwards . ' " the of say nothing in answer to this , as he do not understand the chopping of the reed . " I be afraid I have be wrong about this collection of people down at , " continue the . " be impulsive , and have overdo the thing . just look at that . " and he hand a letter to he friend . the old put on he spectacle and read the letter through , -- which run as follow : private . my Lord Duke ,-- I do not doubt but that you be aware of my position in regard to the public press of the country , and I beg to assure you Grace that my present proposition be make , not on account of the great honour and pleasure which would be confer upon myself should you accede to it , but because I feel assure that I might so be best enable to discharge a important duty for the benefit of the public generally . you Grace be about to receive the whole fashionable world of and many distinguished foreign ambassador at you ancestral hall , not solely for social delight , -- for a man in you 's high position be not able to think only of a pleasant life , -- but in order that the prestige of you combine may be so best maintain . that you be thereby do a duty to you country no man who understand the country can doubt . but it must be the case that the country at large should interest itself in you festivity , and should demand to have account of the gala doings of you ducal palace . you will probably agree with I that these record could be better give by one empower by
by yourself to give they , by one who have be present , and who would write in you 's interest , than by some interloper who would receive he tale only at second hand . it be my purport now to inform you that should I be honoure by a invitation to you 's party at , I should obey such a call with the greatest alacrity , and would devote my pen and the public organ which be at my disposal to you 's service with the readiest good - will . I have the honour to be , my , you 's most obedient and very humble servant , . the old , when he have read the letter , laugh heartily . " be not that a terribly bad sign of the time ? " say the younger . " well ;--hardly that , I think . the man be both a fool and a blackguard ; but I do not think we be therefore to suppose that there be many fools and blackguard like he . I wonder what he really have want . " " he have want I to ask he to . " " he can hardly have expect that . I do not think he can have be such a fool . he may have think that there be a possible off chance , and that he would not lose even that for want of ask . of course you will not notice it . " " I have ask to write to he , say that he can not be receive at my house . I have all letter answer unless they seem to have come from insane persons . would it not shock you if you private arrangement be invade in that way ? " " he can not invade you . " " yes he can . he do . that be a invasion . and whether he be there or not , he can and will write about my house . and though no one else will make himself such a fool as he have do by he letter , nevertheless even that be a sign of what other be do . you yourself be say just now that we be go to do something , -- something particular , you say . " " it be you word , and I echo it . I suppose you be go to have a great many people ? " " I be afraid have overdo it . I do not know why I should trouble you by say so , but it make I uneasy . " " I can not see why . " " I fear she have get some idea into she head of astounde the world by display . " " I think she have get a idea of conquer the world by graciousness and hospitality . " " it be as bad . it be , indeed , the same thing . why should she want to conquer what we call the world ? she ought to want to entertain my friend because they be my friend ; and if from my public position I have more so - call friend than would trouble I in a happier condition of private life , why , then , she must entertain more people . there should be nothing beyond that . the idea of conquer people , as you call it , by feed they , be to I abominable . if it go on it will drive I mad . I shall have to give up everything , because I can not bear the burden . " this he say with more excitement , with stronger passion , than he friend have ever see in he before ; so much so that the old be frightene . " I ought never to have be where I be , " say the , get up from he chair and walk about the room . " allow I to assure you that in that you be decidedly mistaken , " say he of . " I can not make even you see the inside of my heart in such a matter as this , " say he of . " I think I do . it may be that in say so I claim for myself greater power than I possess , but I think I do . but let you heart say what it may on the subject , I be sure of this , -- that when the Sovereign , by the advice of two outgoing ministers , and with the unequivocally express assent of the house of Commons , call on a man to serve she and the country , that man can not be justified in refusing , merely by doubt about he own fitness . if you health be fail you , you may know it , and say so . or it may be that you honour , -- you faith to other , -- should forbid you to accept the position . but of you own general fitness you must take the verdict give by such general consent . they have see clearer than you have do what be require , and know better than you can know how that which be want be to be secure . " " if I be to be here and do nothing , must I remain ? " " a man can not keep together the government of a country and do nothing . do not trouble yourself about this crowd at . the Duchess , easily , almost without exertion , will do that which to you , or to I either , would be impossible . let she have she way , and take no notice of the . " the smile , as though this repeat allusion to 's
's letter have bring back he good humour , and say nothing further then as to he difficulty . there be a few word to be speak as to some future cabinet meeting , something perhaps to be settle as to some man 's work or position , a hint to be give , and a lesson to be learn , -- for of these inner cabinet Council between these two statesman there be frequent use ; and then the of take he leave . we , as soon as he friend have leave he , ring for he private secretary , and go to work diligently , as though nothing have disturb he . I do not know that he labour on that occasion be of a very high order . unless there be some special effort of lawmaking before the country , some reform bill to be pass , some attempt at education to be make , some fetter to be for or to be relaxed , a be not drive hard by the work of he portfolio , -- as be he colleague . but many man be in want of many thing , and contrive by many means to make they want know to the . a dean would afain be a bishop , or a judge a chief justice , or a commissioner a chairman , or a secretary a commissioner . knights would fain be baronet , baronet baron , and baron earl . in one guise or another the wants of gentleman be may know , and there be work to be do . a ribbon can not be give away without break the heart of , perhaps , three gentleman and of they wife and daughter . and then he go down to the of , -- for the last time this session as far as work be concerned . on the morrow legislative work would be over , and the gentleman of parliament would be send to they country house , and to they pleasant country joy . it have be arrange that on the day after the prorogation of parliament the Duchess of should go down to to prepare for the coming of the people , which be to commence about three day later , take she ministers , and , with she ; and that she husband with he private secretary and dispatch box be to go for those three day to , a smaller place than , but one to which they be much better accustom . if , as the think to be not unlikely , the should prolong he stay for a few day at , she feel confident that she would be able to bear the burden of the Castle on she own shoulders . she have think it to be very probable that he would prolong he stay at , and if the absence be not too long , this might be well explain to the assembled company . in the Duchess 's estimation a would lose nothing by plead the nature of he business as a excuse for such absence , -- or by have such a plea make for he . of course he must appear at last . but as to that she have no fear . he timidity , and he conscience also , would both be too potent to allow he to shirk the nuisance of altogether . he would come , she be sure ; but she do not much care how long he defer he come . she be , therefore , not a little surprised when he announce to she a alteration in he plan . this he do not many hour after the of have leave he at the . " I think I shall go down with you at once to , " he say . " what be the meaning of that ? " the Duchess be not skillead in hide she feeling , at any rate from he , and declare to he at once by she voice and eye that the propose change be not gratify to she . " it will be better . I have think that I would get a quiet day or two at . but as the thing have to be do , it may as well be do at first . a man ought to receive he own guest . I can not say that I look forward to any great pleasure in do so on this occasion ; -- but I shall do it . " it be very easy to understand also the tone of he voice . there be in it something of offended dignity , something of future marital intention ,-- something also of the weakness of distress . she do not want he to come at once to . a great deal of money be be spend , and the absolute spending be not yet quite perfecte . there might still be possibility of interference . the tent be not all pitche . the lamp be not as yet all hang in the conservatory . Waggon would still be come in and workman still be go out . he would think less of what have be do if he could be keep from see it while it be be done . and the greater crowd which would be gather there by the end of the first week would carry off the vastness of the preparation . as to money , he have give she almost carte blanco , have at one vacillatory period of he be talk by she into some agreement with she own plan . and in regard to money he would say to himself that he ought not to interfere with any whim of hers on that score , unless he think it right to crush the whim on some other score . half what he possess have
have be hers , and even if during this year he be to spend more than he income , -- if he be to double or even treble the expenditure of past year , -- he could not consume the additions to he wealth which have accrue and heape themselves up since he marriage . he have therefore write a line to he banker , and a line to he lawyer , and he have himself see , and he wife 's hand have be loose . " I do not think , you , " say , " that he would be so very -- very -- very --" " very what , ? " " so very free , you . " the Duchess , as she think of it , declare to herself that she husband be the truest nobleman in all . she rever , admire , and almost love he . she know he to be infinitely better than herself . but she could hardly sympathise with he , and be quite sure that he do not sympathise with she . he be so good about the money ! but yet it be necessary that he should be keep in the dark as to the spending of a good deal of it . now he be go to upset a portion of she plan by come to before he be want . she know he to be obstinate , but it might be possible to turn he back to he old purpose by clever manipulation . " of course it would be much nicer for I , " she say . " that alone would be sufficient . " " thanks , dear . but we have arrange for people to come at first whom I think you would not specially care to meet . and will be there with they wife . " " I have become quite used to and . " " no doubt , and therefore I want to spare you something of they company . the , whom you really do like , be not come yet . I think , too , you would have you work to finish off . " " I fear it be of a kind that will not bear finish off . however , I have make up my mind , and have already tell Locock to send word to the people at matching to say that I shall not be there yet . how long will all this last at ? " " who can say ? " " I should have think you could . people be not come , I suppose , for a indefinite time . " " as one set leave , one ask other . " " have not you ask enough as yet ? I should like to know when we may expect to get away from the place . " " you need not stay till the end , you know . " " but you must . " " certainly . " " and I should wish you to go with I , when we do go to . " " oh , , " say the wife , " what a and kind of thing you like to have it ! " " yes , I do . the and kind of thing be what I like . " " only be to be in a office all day , and in parliament all night , -- and be to stay at home . " " would you wish I not to be in a office , and not to be in parliament ? but do not let we misunderstand each other . you be do the best you can to further what you think to be my interest . " " I be , " say the Duchess . " I love you the better for it , day by day . " this so surprise she , that as she take he by the arm , she eye be fill with tear . " I know that you be work for I quite as hard as I work myself , and that you be do so with the pure ambition of see you husband a great man . " " and myself a great man 's wife . " " it be the same thing . but I would not have you overdue you work . I would not have you make yourself conspicuous by anything like display . there be ill - natured people who will say thing that you do not expect , and to which I should be more sensitive than I ought to be . spare I such pain as this , if you can . " he still hold she hand as he speak , and she answer he only by nodd she head . " I will go down with you to on . " then he leave she . the and with they child and personal servant reach the day before the first crowd of visitor be expect . it be on a lovely autumn afternoon , and the , who have endeavoure to make himself pleasant during the journey , have suggest that as soon as the heat would allow they they would saunter about the grounds and see what be be done . they could dine late , at half - past eight or nine , so that they might be walk from seven to eight . but the Duchess when she reach the Castle decline to fall into this arrangement . the journey have be hot and dusty and she be a little cross . they reach the place about five , and then she declare that she would have a cup of tea and lie down ; she be too tired to walk ; and the sun , she say , be
be still scorchingly hot . he then ask that the child might go with he ; but the two little girl be weary and travel - worn , and the two boy , the elder of whom be home from and the younger from some minor , be already out about the place after they own pleasur . so the start for he walk alone . the Duchess certainly do not wish to have to inspect the work in conjunction with she husband . she know how much there be that she ought still to do herself , how many thing that she herself ought to see . but she could neither do anything nor see anything to any purpose under he wing . as to lie down , that she know to be quite out of the question . she have already find out that the life which she have adopt be one of incessant work . but she be neither weak nor idle . she be quite prepared to work , -- if only she might work after she own fashion and with companion chosen by herself . have not she husband be so perverse , she would have travel down with , whose come be now postpone for two day , and would have be with she . the have give direction which make it necessary that 's coming should be postpone for a day , and this be another grievance . she be put out a good deal , and begin to speculate whether she husband be do it on purpose to torment she . nevertheless , as soon as she know that he be out of the way , she go to she work . she could not go out among the tent and lawn and conservatory , as she would probably meet he . but she give order as to bedchamber , see to the adornment of the reception - room , have a eye to the banners and martial trophy suspend in the vast hall , and the bust and statue which adorn the corner , look in on the plate which be be prepare for the great dining - room , and superintend the move about of chair , sofa , and table generally . " you may take it as certain , , " she say to the housekeeper , " that there will never be less than forty for the next two month . " " Forty to sleep , my lady ? " to the have for many year be , and she perhaps understand that she mistress like the old appellation . " yes , forty to sleep , and forty to eat , and forty to drink . but that be nothing . Forty to push through twenty - four hour every day ! do you think you have get everything that you want ? " " it depend , my lady , how long each of th'ey stay . " " one night ! no ,--say two night on a average . " " that make shift the bed very often ; -- do not it , my lady ? " " send up to 's for sheet to - morrow . why be not that thing off before ? " " it be , my lady , -- and I think we shall do . we have get the steam - washery put up . " " towel ! " suggest the Duchess . " oh yes , my lady . 's do send a great many thing ;-- a whole waggon load there be come from the station . but the tablecloth be not , none of 'em , long enough for the big table . " the Duchess 's face fell . " of course there must be two . on they very long table , my lady , there always be two . " " why do not you tell I , so that I could have have they make ? it be impossible ,-- impossible that one brain should think of it all . be you sure you have get enough hand in the kitchen ? " " well , my lady ; -- we could not do with more ; and they be not a atom of use , -- only just in the way , -- if you do not know something about th'ey . I suppose will be down soon . " this name , which call , indicate a french cook who be as yet unknown at the Castle . " he will be here to - night . " " I wish he could have be here a day or two sooner , my lady , so as just to see about he . " " and how should we have get we dinner in town ? he will not make any difficulty . the confectioner do come ? " " yes , my lady ; and to tell the truth out at once , he be that drunk last night that --; oh , dear , we do not know what to do with he . " " I do not mind that before the affair begin . I do not suppose he will get tipsy while he have to work for all these people . you have plenty of egg ? " these question go on so rapidly that in addition to the asking of they the Duchess be able to go through all the room before she dress for dinner , and in every room she see something to speak of , note either perfection or imperfection . in the meantime the have go out alone . it be still hot , but he have make up he mind that he would enjoy he first holiday out of town by walk about he own grounds , and he would not allow the heat to
to interrupt he . he go out through the vast hall , and the huge front door , which be so huge and so grand that it be very seldom use . but it be now open by chance , owe to some incident of this festival time , and he pass through it and stand upon the grand terrace , with the well - know and much - laud portico over head . up to the terrace , though it be very high , there run a road , construct upon arch , so that grand guest could drive almost into the house . the , who be never grand himself , as he stand there look at the far - stretch view before he , could not remember that he have ever but once before place himself on that spot . of what use have be the portico , and the marble , and the huge pile of stone , -- of what use the enormous hall just behind he , cut the house in two , declare aloud by its own aspect and proportions that it have be build altogether for show and in no degree for use or comfort ? and now as he stand there he could already see that man be at work about the place , that ground have be move here , and grass laid down there , and a new gravel road construct in another place . be it not possible that he friend should be entertain without all these change in the garden ? then he perceive the tent , and descende from the terrace and turn to the left towards the end of the house he come upon a new conservatory . the exotic with which it be to be fill be at this moment be bring in on great barrow . he stand for a moment and look , but say not a word to the man . they gaze at he but evidently do not know he . how should they know he , -- he , who be so seldom there , and who when there never show himself about the place ? then he go farther afield from the house and come across more and more man . a great ha - ha fence have be make , enclose on three side a large flat and turf parallelogram of ground , take out of the park and open at one end to the garden , containing , as he think , about a acre . " what be you do this for ? " he say to one of the labourer . the man star at he , and at first seem hardly inclined to make he a answer . " it be for the quality to shoot they bow and harrow , " he say at last , as he continue the easy task of patting with he spade the complete work . he evidently regard this stranger as a intruder who be not entitle to ask question , even if he be permit to wander about the grounds . from one place he go on to another and find change , and new erection , and some device for throw away money everywhere . it anger he to think that there be so little of simplicity leave in the world that a man could not entertain he friend without such a fuss as this . he mind apply itself frequently to the consideration of the money , not that he grudge the loss of it , but the spending of it in such a cause . and then perhaps there occur to he a idea that all this should not have be do without a word of consent from himself . have she come to he with some scheme for change everything about the place , make he think that the alteration be a matter of taste or of mere personal pleasure , he would probably have give he assent at once , think nothing of the money . but all this be sheer display . then he walk up and see the flag waive over the Castle , indicate that he , the of the , be present there on he own soil . that be right . that be as it should be , because the flag be waive in compliance with a acknowledged ordinance . of all that properly belong to he rank and station he could be very proud , and would allow no diminution of that outward respect to which they be entitle . be they to be trench on by he fault in he person , the rights of other to they enjoyment would be endanger , and the benefit accrue to he country from establish mark of reverence would be imperil . but here be a assume and preposterous grandeur that be as much within the reach of some rich swindler or of some prosperous haberdasher as of himself , -- have , too , a look of raw newness about it which be very distasteful to he . and then , too , he know that nothing of all this would have be do unless he have become . why on earth should a man 's grounds be knock about because he become ? he walk on argue this within he own bosom , till he have work himself almost up to anger . it be clear that he must henceforth take thing more into he own hand , or he would be make to be absurd before the world . Indifference he know he could bear . harsh criticism he think he could endure . but to ridicule he be aware that he be pervious . suppose the papers be to say of he that he build a new conservatory and make a archery ground for the sake of maintain the ! when he get
get back to the house he find he wife alone in the small room in which they intend to dine . after all she labour she be now recline for the few minute she husband 's absence might allow she , know that after dinner there be a score of letter for she to write . " I do not think , " say she , " I be ever so tired in my life . " " it be not such a very long journey after all . " " but it be a very big house , and I have be , I think , into every room since I have be here , and I have move most of the furniture in the drawing - room with my own hand , and I have count the pound of butter , and inspect the sheet and tablecloth . " " be that necessary , ? " " if I have go to bed instead , the world , I suppose , would have go on , and would still have lead the of ; -- but thing should be look after , I suppose . " " there be people to do it . you be like , troubl yourself with many thing . " " I always feel that be very ill - use . if there be no there would never be anything fit to eat . but it be odd how sure a wife be to be scold . if I do nothing at all , that would not please a busy , hard - work man like you . " " I do not know that I have scold , -- not as yet . " " be you go to begin ? " " not to scold , my dear . look back , can you remember that I ever scold you ? " " I can remember a great many time when you ought . " " but to tell you the truth , I do not like all that you have do here . I can not see that it be necessary . " " people make change in they garden without necessity sometimes . " " but these change be make because of you guest . have they be make to gratify you own taste I would have say nothing ,-- although even in that case I think you might have tell I what you propose to do . " " what ; -- when you be so burdene with work that you do not know how to turn ? " " I be never so burden that I can not turn to you . but , as you know , that be not what I complain of . if it be do for yourself , though it be the wildest vagary , I would learn to like it . but it distress I to think that what might have be good enough for we friend before should be think to be insufficient because of the office I hold . there be a -- a --a -- I be almost go to say vulgarity about it which distress I . " " Vulgarity ! " she exclaim , jump up from she sofa . " I retract the word . I would not for the world say anything that should annoy you ; -- but pray , pray do not go on with it . " then again he leave she . Vulgarity ! there be no other word in the language so hard to bear as that . he have , indeed , be careful to say that he do not accuse she of vulgarity , -- but nevertheless the accusation have be make . could you call you friend a liar more plainly than by say to he that you would not say that he lie ? they dine together , the two boy , also , dine with they , but very little be say at dinner . the horrid word be cling to the lady 's ears , and the remembrance of have utter the word be heavy on the man 's conscience . he have tell himself very plainly that the thing be vulgar , but he have not mean to use the word . when utter it come even upon himself as a surprise . but it have be utter ; and , let what apology there may be make , a word utter can not be retract . as he look across the table at he wife , he see that the word have be take in deep dudgeon . she escape , to the writing of she letter she say , almost before the meal be done . " Vulgarity ! " she utter the word aloud to herself , as she sit herself down in the little room up - stair which she have assign to herself for she own use . but though she be very angry with he , she do not , even in she own mind , contradict he . perhaps it be vulgar . but why should not she be vulgar , if she could most surely get what she want by vulgarity ? what be the meaning of the word vulgarity ? of course she be prepared to do thing , -- be dailly do thing , -- which would have be odious to she have not she husband be a public man . she submit , without unwillingness , to constant contact with disagreeable people . she lavish she smile , -- so she now say to herself , -- on butchers and tinker . what she say , what she read , what she write , what she do , whither she go , to whom she be kind and to whom unkind , -- be it not all say and do and arrange
arrange with reference to he and she own popularity ? when a man want to be he have to submit to vulgarity , and must give up he ambition if the task be too disagreeable to he . the think that that have be understood , at any rate ever since the day of . " the old keep out of it , " she say to herself , " and choose to live in the other way . he have he choice . he want it to be do . and when I do it for he because he can not do it for himself , he call it by a ugly name ! " then it occur to she that the world tell lie every day , -- tell on the whole much more lie than truth , -- but that the world have wisely agree that the world shall not be accuse of lying . one do not venture to express open disbelief even of one 's wife ; and with the world at large a word spoken , whether lie or not , be presume to be true of course , -- because speak . have say it , and therefore , -- who have know the lie to be a lie , -- have assert he assure belief , lie again . but in this way the world be able to live pleasantly . how be she to live pleasantly if she husband accuse she of vulgarity ? of course it be all vulgar , but why should he tell she so ? she do not do it from any pleasure that she get from it . the letter remain long unwritten , and then there come a moment in which she resolve that they should not be write . the work be very hard , and what good would come from it ? why should she make she hand dirty , so that even she husband accuse she of vulgarity ? would it not be better to give it all up , and be a great woman , une grande dame , of another kind , -- difficult of access , sparing of she favour , aristocratic to the backbone , -- a very Duchess of duchess ? the role would be one very easy to play . it require rank , money , and a little manner , -- and these she possess . the old have do it with ease , without the slightest trouble to himself , and have be treat almost like a god because he have seclude himself . she could make the change even yet , -- and as she husband tell she that she be vulgar , she think she would make it . but at last , before she have abandon she desk and paper , there have come to she another thought . nothing to she be so distasteful as failure . she have know that there would be difficulty , and have assure herself that she would be firm and brave in overcom they . be not this accusation of vulgarity simply one of the difficulty which she have to overcome ? be she courage already go from she ? be she so weak that a single word should knock she over , -- and a word evidently repent of as soon as utter ? ! well ; --let she be vulgar as long as she gain she object . there have be no penalty of everlasting punishment denounce against vulgarity . and then a higher idea touche she , not without effect , -- a idea which she could not analyse , but which be hardly on that account the less effective . she do believe thoroughly in she husband , to the extent of think he the fittest man in all the country to be its . he fame be dear to she . she nature be loyal ; and though she might , perhaps , in she younger day have be able to lean upon he with a more loving heart have he be other than he be , brighter , more gay , give to pleasur , and fond of trifle , still , she could recognise merit with which she sympathy be imperfect . it be good that he should be 's , and therefore she would do all she could to keep he in that place . the vulgarity be a necessary essential . he might not acknowledge this , -- might even , if the choice be leave to he , refuse to be on such term . but she need not , therefore , give way . have in this way think it all out , she take up she pen and complete the batch of letter before she allow herself to go to bed . 's policy when the guest begin to arrive we friend the Duchess have apparently get through she little difficulty , for she receive they with that open , genial hospitality which be so delightful as come evidently from the heart . there have not be another word between she and she husband as to the manner in which the thing be to be do , and she have determine that the offensive word should pass altogether out of she memory . the first comer be . , -- who come indeed rather as a assistant hostess than as a mere guest , and to she the utter a few half - playful hint as to she trouble . " consider the time , have not we do marvel ? because it do look nice , -- do not it ? there be no dirt heap about , and it be all as green as though it have be there since the . he do not like it because it look new . and we have get forty - five bedrooms make
make up . the servant be all turn out over the stable somewhere , -- quite comfortable , I assure you . indeed they like it . and by knock down the end of two passage we have bring everything together . and the room be all number just like a inn . it be the only way . and I keep one book myself , and have another . I have everybody 's room , and where it be , and how long the tenant be to be allow to occupy it . and here be the way everybody be to take everybody down to dinner for the next fortnight . of course that must be alter , but it be easier when we have a sort of settled basis . and I have some private note as to who should flirt with whom . " " you would better not let that lie about . " " nobody could understand a word of it if they have it . a . always mean . . Z . and this be the code of the . I never draw a bow in my life , -- not a real bow in the flesh , that be , my dear , -- and yet I have make th'ey all out , and have they print . the way to make a thing go down be to give it some special importance . and I have go through the bill of fare for the first week with , who be a perfect gentleman ,-- perfect . " then she give a little sigh as she remember that word from she husband , which have so wounded she . " I use to think that work hard when he be do he decimal coinage ; but I do not think he ever stick to it as I have do . " " what do the say to it all ? " " ah ; well , upon the whole he behave like a angel . he behave so well that half my time I think I will shut it all up and have do with it , -- for he sake . and then , the other half , I be determined to go on with it ,-- also for he sake . " " he have not be displease ? " " ask no question , my dear , and you will hear no story . you have not be marry twice without know that woman can not have everything smooth . he only say one word . it be rather hard to bear , but it have pass away . " that afternoon there be quite a crowd . among the first comer be and , and and . and there be and , , and . these gentleman with they wife represent , for the time , the of which the be the head , and have be ask in order that they fealty and submission might be thus rivet . there be also there and , with and he daughter , who have belong to former , -- one on the and the other on the Conservative side , -- and who be now among the 's guest , in order that they and other might see how wide the wish to open he hand . and there be we friend , who have certainly make the best use of he opportunity in securing for himself so great a social advantage as a invitation to . how could any father , who be simply a barrister , refuse to receive as he son - in - law a man who have be a guest at the of 's country house ? and then there be certain people from the neighbourhood ;-- of , with he wife and daughter , the master of the hound in those part , a rich squire of old blood , and head of the family to which one of the aspirant of the day belong . and , another master of fox hound , two countie off , -- and also a old friend of ours , -- have be ask to meet he , and have bring he wife . and there be , a old maid , the sister of the present , who liv not far off and have be accustom to come to on state occasion for the last thirty year , -- the only relic in those part of a family which have liv there for many year in great pride of place ; for she elder brother , the , be a ruin man , and she younger brothers be live with they wife abroad , and she sister have marry , rather lowly in the world , and she mother now be dead , and live alone in a little cottage outside the old park paling , and still hold fast within she bosom all the old pride of the . and then there be and , two middle - aged young man , presumably belong to the army , whom the Duchess have lately enlist among she follower as be useful in they way . they could eat they dinner without be shy , dance on occasion , though very unwillingly , talk a little , and run on message ; -- and they know the peerage by heart , and could tell the detail of every unfortunate marriage for the last twenty year . each think himself , especially since this last promotion , to be indispensably necessary to the formation of society , and be comfortable in a conviction that he have thoroughly succeed in life by acquire the privilege of sit down to dinner three time a week with peer and peeress . the list of guest have by no means be make as complete here as it be to be find in
in the county newspaper , and in the " " of the time ; but enough of name have be give to show of what nature be the party . " the have get rather a rough lot to begin with , " say the major to the . " oh , yes . I know that . she want I to be useful , so of course I come . I shall stay here this week , and then be back in . " up to this moment have not receive any invitation for , but then there be no reason why he should not do so . " I have be get up that archery code with she , " say , " and I be pledge to come down and set it go . that little Gresham girl be not a bad look thing . " " rather flabby , " say . " very nice colour . she will have a lot of money , you know . " " there be a brother , " say the . " oh , yes ; there be a brother , who will have the property , but she be to have she mother 's money . there be a very odd story about all that , you know . " then the major tell the story , and tell every particular of it wrongly . " a man might do worse than look there , " say the major . a man might have do worse , because be a very nice girl ; but of course the major be all wrong about the money . " well ; -- now you have try it , what do you think about it ? " this question be put by to as they sit in a corner of the archery ground , under the shelter of a tent , look on while teach how to fix a arrow to she bowstring . it be quite understand that be inimical to the though he still belong to it , and that he would assist in break it up if only there be a fair chance of he belong to the party which would remain in power . have be badly treat , and do not forget it . now have also of late show some symptom of a disturbed ambition . he be the leader of the of , and it have become a almost recognise law of the constitution that the leader of the of should be the of the . it be at least understand by many that such be 's reading of the law of the constitution . " we have get along , you know , " say . " yes ; -- yes . we have get along . can you imagine any possible concatenation of circumstance in which we should not get along ? there be always too much good sense in the House for a absolute collapse . but be you contente ? " " I will not say I be not , " say the cautious baronet . " I do not look for very great thing from a , and I do not look for very great thing from the . " " it seem to I that the one achievement to which we have all look have be the reach the end of the session in safety . we have do that certainly . " " it be a great thing to do , . of course the main work of parliament be to raise supplies ; -- and , when that have be do with ease , when all the money want have be vote without a break - down , of course be very glad to get rid of the parliament . it be as much a matter of course that a should dislike parliament now as that a should have do so two hundred and fifty year ago . to get a session over and do with be a achievement and a delight . " " no can go on long on that far nient principle , and no minister who accede to it will remain long in any ministry . " in say this might be allud to the , or the reference might be to himself . " of course , I be not in the cabinet , and be not entitle to say a word ; but I think that if I be in the cabinet , and if I be anxious ,-- which I confess I be not , -- for a continuation of the present state of thing , I should endeaavor to obtain from the some idea of he policy for the next session . " be a man of certain part . he could speak volubly , -- and yet slowly , -- so that reporter and other could hear he . he be patient , both in the and in he office , and have the great gift of do what he be tell by man who understand thing better than he do himself . he never go very far astray in he official business , because he always obey the clerk and follow precedent . he have be a useful man , -- and would still have remain so have he not be lift a little too high . have he be only one in the ruck on the he would have be useful to the end ; but special honour and special place have be assign to he , and therefore he desire still bigger thing . the 's mediocrity of talent and of energy and of general governing power have be so often mention of late in 's hearing , that have gradually come to think that he be the 's equal in the cabinet , and that perhaps it behove he to lead the .
. at the commencement of they joint operation he have hold the in some awe , and perhaps something of that feeling in reference to the personally still restrain he . the Dukes of have always be big people . but still it might be he duty to say a word to the . assure himself that if ever convince of the propriety of do so , he could say a word even to the of . " I be confident that we should not go on quite as we be at present , " say as he close the conversation . " where do they pick he up ? " say the major to the captain , point with he head to , who be shoot with and and one of the 's private secretary . " the find he somewhere . he be one of those fabulously rich fellow out of the who make a hundred thousand pound at a blow . they say he people be grandee of . " " do anybody know he ? " ask the major . " everybody soon will know he , " answer the captain . " I think I hear that he be go to stand for some place in the 's interest . he do not look the sort of fellow I like ; but he be get money and he come here , and he be good look , -- and therefore he will be a success . " in answer to this the major only grunt . the major be a year or two older than the , and therefore less willing even than he friend to admit the claim of new comer to social honour . just at this moment the walk across the ground up to the shooter , accompany by and . she have not be see in the garden before that day , and of course a little concourse be make round she . the major and the , who have be drive away by the success of , return with they sweetest smile . put down he treatise on the nature of , which he be study in order that he might lead a opposition against the next , and even , who have do he work with , join the throng . " now I do hope , " say the Duchess , " that you be all shoot by the new code . that be , and be to be , the code , and I shall break my heart if anybody rebel . " " there be one or two man , " say major very gravely , " who will not take the trouble to understand it . " " , " say the Duchess , point with she finger at we friend , " be you that rebel ? " " I fear I do suggest -- " begin . " I will have no suggestion ,-- nothing but obedience . here be and , and be not far off ; and here be , than whom no authority on such a subject can be better . ask they whether in other matter suggestion be want . " " of course not , " say major . " now , , will you or will you not be guide by a strict and close interpretation of the ? because , if not , I be afraid we shall feel constrained to accept you resignation . " " I will not resign , and I will obey , " say . " a good ministerial reply , " say the Duchess . " I do not doubt but that in time you will ascend to high office and become a pillar of the constitution . how do he shoot , ? " " he will shoot very well indeed , , if he go on and practise , " say , whose life for the last seven year have be devote to archery . major Pountney retir far away into the park , a full quarter of a mile off , and smoke a cigar under a tree . be it for this that he have absolutely give up a month to draw out this code of rule , go backwards and forward two or three time to the printer in he desire to carry out the Duchess 's wish ? " woman be so d ---- ungrateful ! " he say aloud in he solitude , as he turn himself on the hard ground . " and some man be so d ---- lucky ! " this fellow , , have absolutely be allow to make a good score off he own intractable disobedience . the Duchess 's little joke about the generally , and the advantage of submission on they part to they chief , be think by some who hear it not to have be make in good taste . the joke be just such a joke as the would be sure to make , -- mean very little but still not altogether pointless . it be levell rather at she husband than at she husband 's colleague who be present , and be so understand by those who really know she , -- as do , and , the private secretary . but and and , who be all within hearing , think that the Duchess have intend to allude to the servile nature of they position ; and , who hear it , rejoice within himself , comfort himself with the reflection that he wither be unwrung , and think with what pleasure he might carry the anecdote into the farthest corner of the club . poor Duchess ! ' tTis pitiful to think that after such Herculean labour she should injure the cause by one slight unconsidered word , more , perhaps , than she have advance it by all she energy
energy . during this time the be at the Castle , but he show himself seldom to he guest , -- so acting , as the reader will I hope understand , from no sense of the importance of he own personal presence , but influence by a conviction that a public man should not waste he time . he breakfaste in he own room , because he could thus eat he breakfast in ten minute . he read all the papers in solitude , because he be thus enable to give he mind to they contents . life have always be too serious to he to be waste . every afternoon he walk for the sake of exercise , and would have accept any companion if any companion have especially offer himself . but he go off by some side - door , find the side - door to be convenient , and therefore when see by other be suppose to desire to remain unseen . " I have no idea there be so much pride about the , " say to he old colleague , . " be it pride ? " ask . " it may be shyness , " say the wise . " the two thing be so alike you can never tell the difference . but the man who be curse by either should hardly be a . " it be on the day after this that think that the moment have come in which it be he duty to say that salutary word to the which it be clearly necessary that some colleague should say , and which no colleague could have so good a right to say as he who be the leader of the of . he understand clearly that though they be gather together then at for festive purpose , yet that no time be unfit for the discussion of state matter . do not all the world know that when in autumn the of the world , or they who be bigger than , meet at this or that delicious haunt of salubrity , the affair of the world be then settle in little conclave , with greater ease , rapidity , and certainty than in large parliament or the dull chamber of public office ? meet , and meet , and as they wander among rural glade in fraternal intimacy , war be arrange , and swell territory be enjoy in anticipation . hithertoo have know all this , but have hardly as yet enjoy it . he have be long in office , but these sweet confidences can of they very nature belong only to a very few . but now the time have manifestly come . it be afternoon , and catch the in the very act of leave the house for he walk . there be no archery , and many of the inmate of the Castle be asleep . there have be a question as to the propriety of archery , in discuss which reference have be make to 's book of sport , and the grow idea that the should be open on the 's - day . but the Duchess would not have the archery . " we be just the people who should not prejudge the question , " say the Duchess . the Duchess with various lady , with the Pountney and Gunner , and other obedient male follower , have be to church . none of the have of course be able to leave the swollen pouch which be always send out from on night , probably , -- we can not but think , -- as arrange excuse for such defalcation , and have pass they morning comfortably do over new novel . the , always right in he purpose but generally wrong in he practice , have stay at home work all the morning , thereby scandalise the strict , and have go to church alone in the afternoon , thereby offend the social . the church be close to the house , and he have go back to change he coat and hat , and to get he stick . but as he be steal out of the little side - gate , be down upon he . " if you be go for a walk , and will admit of company , I shall be delighted to attend you , " say . the profess himself to be well pleased , and in truth be pleased . he would be glad to increase he personal intimacy with he colleague if it might be do pleasantly . they have go nearly a mile across the park , watch the stately movement of the herd of deer , and talk of this and that trifle , before could bring about a opportunity for uttere he word . at last he do it somewhat abruptly . " I think upon the whole we do pretty well last session , " he say , stand still under a old oak - tree . " pretty well , " re-echo the . " and I suppose we have not much to be afraid of next session ? " " I be afraid of nothing , " say the . " but -- ; " then hesitate . the , however , say not a word to help he on . think that the look more ducal than he have ever see he look before . remembe the old , and suddenly find that the uncle and nephew be very like each other . but it do not become the leader of the house of Commons to be afraid of any one . " do not you think , " continue , " we should try and arrange among ourselves something of a policy ? I be not quite sure that a ministry without a distinct course of action before it can
can long enjoy the confidence of the country . take the last half century . there have be various policy , command more or less of general assent ; free trade --. " here give a kindly wave of he hand , show that on behalf of he companion he be willing to place at the head of the list a policy which have not always command he own assent ; --" continue reform in parliament , to which I have , with my whole heart , give my poor assistance . " the remembe how the bather 's clothes be steal , and that have be one of the most nimble - finger of the thief . " no popery , irish grievance , the ballot , retrenchment , efficiency of the public service , all have have they time . " " thing to be do offer themselves , I suppose , because they be in themselves desirable ; not because it be desirable to have something to do . " " just so ; -- no doubt . but still , if you will think of it , no ministry can endure without a policy . during the latter part of the last session it be understand that we have to get ourselves in harness together , and nothing more be expect from we ; but I think we should be prepare with a distinct policy for the coming year . I fear that nothing can be do in . " " have idea --. " " ah , yes ;-- well , you . be a very clever young man certainly ; but I do not think we can support ourselves by he plan of irish reform . " have be a little carry away by he own eloquence and the 's tameness , and have interrupt the . the again look ducal , but on this occasion do not observe he countenance . " for myself , I think , I be in favour of increase armament . I have be apply my mind to the subject , and I think I see that the people of this country do not object to a slightly rise scale of estimate in that direction . of course there be the county suffrage -- " " I will think of what you have be say , " say the . " as to the county suffrage -- " " I will think it over , " say the . " you see that oak . that be the largest tree we have here at ; and I doubt whether there be a larger one in this part of . " the 's voice and word be not uncourteous , but there be something in they which hinder from refer again on that occasion to county suffrage or increase armament . the 's when the party have be about a week collect at , have manifestly become the favourite of the Duchess for the time , and have , at she instance , promise to remain there for some further day . he have hardly speak to the since he have be in the house , -- but then but few of that motley assembly do talk much with the . and have go away , -- the have declare he dislike of the upstart Portuguese to be so strong that he could not stay in the same house with he any longer , and the major , who be of stronger mind , have resolve that he would put the intruder down . " it be horrible to think what power money have in these day , " say the . the have shake the dust of altogether from he foot , but the major have so arrange that a bed be to be find for he again in , -- for another happy week ; but he be not to return till bidden by the Duchess . " you will not forget ; -- now will you , ? " he say , implor she to remember he as he take he leave . " I do take a deal of trouble about the code ;-- do not I ? " " they do not seem to I to care for the code , " say the Duchess , " but , nevertheless , I will remember . " " who , in the name of all that be wonderful , be that I see you with in the garden ? " the Duchess say to she husband one afternoon . " it be , I suppose . " " and !-- what a companion for you to choose . " " why not ?--why should not I talk to ? " " I be not jealous a bit , if you mean that . I do not think will steal you heart from I . but why you should pick she out of all the people here , when there be so many would think they fortune make if you would only take a turn with they , I can not imagine . " " but I do not want to make any one 's fortune , " say the ; " and certainly not in that way . " " what could you be say to she ? " " she be talk about she family . I rather like . she be live all alone , it seem , and almost in poverty . perhaps there be nothing so sad in the world as the female scion of a noble but impoverished stock . " " nothing so dull , certainly . " " people be not dull to I , if they be real . I pity that poor lady . she be proud of she blood and yet not asham of she poverty . " " whatever might come of she blood ,
, she have be all she life willing enough to get rid of she poverty . it be not above three year since she be try she best to marry that brewer at . I wish you could give you time a little to some of the other people . " " to go and shoot arrow ? " " no ;-- I do not want you to shoot arrow . you might act the part of host without shoot . can not you walk about with anybody except ? " " I be walk about with drought last , and I very much prefer . " " there have be no quarrel ? " ask the Duchess sharply . " oh dear , no . " " of course he be a empty - head idiot . everybody have always know that . and he be put above he place in the house . but it would not do to quarrel with he now . " " I do not think I be a quarrelsome man , . I do not remember at this moment that I have ever quarrell with anybody to you knowledge . but I may perhaps be permit to -- " " a man , you mean . well , I would not even snub very much , if I be you ; though I can understand that it might be both pleasant and easy . " " I wish you would not put slang phrase into my mouth , . if I think that a man intrude upon I , I be of course bound to let he know my opinion . " " have -- intrude ! " " by no means . he be in a position which justify he say many thing to I which another might not say . but then , again , he be a man whose opinion do not go far with I , and I have not the knack of seem to agree with a man while I let he word pass idly by I . " " that be quite true , . " " and , therefore , I be uncomfortable with , while I be able to sympathise with . " " what do you think of ? " ask the Duchess , with study abruptness . " think of ! I have not think of he at all . why should I think of he ? " " I want you to think of he . I think he be a very pleasant fellow , and I be sure he be a rise man . " " you might think the latter , and perhaps feel sure of the former . " " very well . then , to oblige you , I will think the latter and feel sure of the former . I suppose it be true that be go on this mission to ? " be the 's intimate friend , and be at this time member for the neighbour borough of . " I think he will go . I have no doubt about it . he be to go after . " " and will give up he seat ? " the do not answer she immediately . it have only just be decided , -- decide by he friend himself , -- that the seat should be give up when the journey to be undertaken . , somewhat in opposition to the 's advice , have resolve that he could not be in and do he duty in the house of Commons at the same time . but this resolution have only now be make know to the , and he be rather puzzl to think how the Duchess have be able to be so quick upon he . he have , indeed , keep the matter back from the Duchess , feel that she would have something to say about it , which might possibly be unpleasant , as soon as the tiding should reach she . " yes , " he say , " I think he will give up he seat . that be he purpose , though I think it be unnecessary . " " let have it . " " ! " " yes ; -- he be a clever man , a rise man , a man that be sure to do well , and who will be of use to you . just take the trouble to talk to he . it be assistance of that kind that you want . you ministers go on shuffl the old card till they be so wear out and dirty that one can hardly tell the pip on they . " " I be one of the dirty old card myself , " say the . " that be nonsense , you know . a man who be at the head of affair as you be can not be include among the pack I be speak of . what you want be new blood , or new wood , or new metal , or whatever you may choose to call it . take my advice and try this man . he be not a pauper . it be not money that he want . " " , you geese be all swan . " " that be not fair . I have never bring to you a goose yet . my swan have be swan . who be it bring you and you pet swan of all , , together ? I will not name any name , but it be you swan have be gese . " " it be not for I to return a member for . " when he say this , she give he a look which almost upset even he gravity , a look which be almost the same as ask he whether he would not --
-- " tell that to the marine . " " you do not quite understand these thing , , " he continue . " the influence which owner of property may have in borough be decrease every day , and there arise the question whether a conscientious man will any longer use such influence . " " I do not think you would like to see a man from oppose you in the . " " I may have to bear worse even than that . " " well ; -- there it be . the man be here and you have the opportunity of know he . of course I have not hinte at the matter to he . if there be any Palliser want the borough I would not say a word . what more patriotic thing can a patron do with he borough than to select a man who be unknown to he , not related to he , a perfect stranger , merely for he worth ? " " but I do not know what may be the worth of . " " I will guarantee that , " say the Duchess . Whereupon the laugh , and then leave she . the Duchess have speak with absolute truth when she tell she husband that she have not say a word to about , but it be not long before she do say a word . on that same day she find herself alone with he in the garden , -- or so much alone as to be able to speak with he privately . he have certainly make the best use of he time since he have be at the Castle , have secure the good - will of many of the ladie , and the displeasure of most of the man . " you have never be in parliament , I think , " say the Duchess . " I have never even try to get there . " " perhaps you dislike the idea of that kind of life . " " no , indeed , " he say . " so far from it , that I regard it as the highest kind of life there be in . a seat in parliament give a man a status in this country which it have never do elsewhere . " " then why do not you try it ? " " because I have get into another groove . I have become essentially a city man , -- one of those who take up the trade of make money generally . " " and do that contend you ? " " no , Duchess ; -- certainly not . instead of contente I it disgust I . not but that I like the money , -- only it be so insufficient a use of one 's life . I suppose I shall try to get into parliament some day . seat in parliament do not grow like blackberry on bushes . " " pretty nearly , " say the Duchess . " not in my part of the country . these good thing seem to be appoint to fall in the way of some man , and not of other . if there be a general election go on to -morrow , I should not know how to look for a seat . " " they be to be find sometimes even without a general election , " say the Duchess . " be you allud to anything now ? " " well ; -- yes , I be . but I be very discreet , and do not like to do more than allude . I fancy that , the member for , be go to . be a member of parliament . member of parliament ought to be in and not in . it be generally suppose that no man in be more prone to do what he ought to do than . therefore , will cease to be for . that be logic ; be not it ? " " have you any logic equally strong to prove that I can follow he in the borough ? " " no ; -- or if I have , the logic that I should use in that matter must for the present be keep to myself . " she certainly have a little syllogism in she head as to the rule the borough , the 's wife rule the , and therefore the 's wife rule the borough ; but she do not think it prudent to utter this on the present occasion . " I think it much better that man in parliament should be unmarried , " say the Duchess . " but I be go to be marry , " say he . " go to be marry , be you ? " " I have no right to say so , because the lady 's father have reject I . " then he tell she the whole story , and so tell it as to secure she entire sympathy . in tell it he never say that he be a rich man , he never boast that that search after wealth of which he have speak , have be successful ; but he give she to understand that there be no objection to he at all on the score of money . " you may have hear of the family , " he say . " I have hear of the Wharton of course , and know that there be a baronet , -- but I know nothing more of they . he be not a man of large property , I think . " " my , -- the one I would fain call mine , -- be the daughter of a barrister . he , I believe , be rich . " " then she will be
be a heiress . " " I suppose so ; -- but that consideration have have no weight with I . I have always regard myself as the architect of my own fortune , and have no wish to owe my material comfort to a wife . " " sheer love ! " suggest the Duchess . " yes , I think so . it be very ridiculous ; be it not ? " " and why do the rich barrister object ? " " the rich barrister , , be a out and out old , who think that he daughter ought to marry no one but a english Tory . I be not exactly that . " " a man do not hamper he daughter in these day by politics , when she be fall in love . " " there be other cognate reason . he do not like a foreigner . now I be a , but I have a foreign name . he do not think that a name so grandly as should be change to one so meanly latin as . " " the lady do not object to the Latinity ? " " I fancy not . " " or to the bearer of it ? " " ah ;-- there I must not boast . but in simple truth there be only the father 's ill - will between we . " " with plenty of money on both side ? " ask the Duchess . shrug he shoulders . a shrug at such a time may mean anything , but the take this shrug as signify that the question be so surely settled as to admit of no difficulty . " then , " say the Duchess , " the old gentleman may as well give way at once . of course he daughter will be too many for he . " in this way the of become the fast friend of . 's the end of and be in town together , and as no one else be in town , -- so at least they both profess to say , -- they see a good deal of each other . , as we know , have spend a portion of the preceding month at , and have make good use of he time , but have be less fortunate . he have be a little cross with he father , and perhaps a little cross with all the Wharton generally , who do not , he think , make quite enough of he . in the event of " anything happen " to that ne 'er - do - well nephew , he himself would be the heir ; and he reflect not unfrequently that something very probably might happen to the nephew . he do not often see this particular cousin , but he always hear of he as be drink , overwhelm with debt and difficulty , and altogether in that position of life in which it be probable that something will " happen . " there be always of course the danger that the young man might marry and have a child ; -- but in the meantime surly he , , should have be as much thought of on the bank of the as . he have be ask down to , -- but he have be ask in a way which he have not think to be flatter and have decline to go . then there have be a plan for join Fletcher in a certain shooting , but that have fail in consequence of a few word between himself and respect . yoArthu have want he to say that be a unpardonable intruder , -- but he have take the part of , and therefore , when the time come round , he have nothing to do with the shooting . he have stay in town till the middle of , and have then start by himself across the continent with some keen intention of study german politics ; but he have find perhaps that german politics do not manifest themselves in the autumn , or that a foreign country can not be well study in solitude , -- and he have return . late in the summer , just before he father and sister have leave town , he have have some word with the old barrister . there have be a few bill to be pay , and 's allowance have be insufficient . it often be insufficient , and then ready money for he german tour be absolutely necessary . might probably have say less about the money have not he son accompany he petition by a further allusion to parliament . " there be some fellow at last really get themselves together at the progress , and of course it will be necessary to know who will be ready to come forward at the next general election . " " I think I know one who will not , " say the father , " judge from the manner in which he seem at present to manage he own money affair . " there be more severity in this than the old man have intend , for he have often think within he own bosom whether it would not be well that he should encourage he son to stand for some seat . and the money that he have now be ask to advance have not be very much , -- not more , in truth , than he expect to be call upon to pay in addition to the modest sum which he profess to allow he son . he be a rich man , who be not in truth make unhappy by part with he money . but there have been , he think , a impudence in the conjoint attack which it be he duty to punish
punish . therefore he have give he son very little encouragement . " of course , sir , if you tell I that you be not inclin to pay anything beyond the allowance you make I , there be a end of it . " " I rather think that you have just ask I to pay a considerable sum beyond you allowance , and that I have consent . " argue the matter no further , but he permit he mind to entertain a idea that he be ill - use by he father . the time would come when he would probably be here not only to he father 's money , but also to the title and the property , -- when he position in the country would really be , as he frequently tell himself , quite considerable . be it possible that he should refrain from blame he father for not allow he to obtain , early in life , that parliamentary education which would fit he to be a ornament to the house of Commons , and a safeguard to he country in future year ? now he and be at the together , and they be almost the only man in the club . be quite contente with he own present sojourn in . he have not only be at but be go there again . and then he have brilliant hope before he , -- so brilliant that they begin , he think , to assume the shape of certainty . he have correspond with the Duchess , and he have gather from she somewhat dubious word that the would probably accede to she wish in the matter of . the vacancy have not yet be declare . be deter , no doubt by certain high State purpose , from apply for the stewardship of the , and thereby release himself from he seat in parliament , and enable himself to perform , with a clear conscience , duty in a distant part of the world which he do not feel to be compatible with that seat . the seeker after seat were , no doubt , already on the track ; but the Duchess have think that as far as the 's good word go , it might possibly be give in favour of . the happy aspirant have take this to be almost as good as a promise . there be also certain pecuniary speculation on foot , which could not be keep quite quiet even in , as to which he do not like to trust entirely to the unaided energy of , or to the boast alliance of . 's whole heart and soul be now in the matter , but , a undoubted partner in and , have blow a little coldly on the affair . but in spite of this be happy . be it probable that should continue he opposition to a marriage which would make he daughter the wife of a member of parliament and of a special friend of the Duchess of ? he have say a word about he own prospects in reference to the marriage , but have be at first too full of he own affair to attend much to a matter which be comparatively so trifling . " upon my word , " he say , " I be begin to feel angry with the governor , which be a kind of thing I do not like at all . " " I can understand that when he be angry with you , you should not like it . " " I do not mind that half so much . he will come round . however unjust he may be now , at the moment , he be the last man in the world to do a injustice in he will . I have thorough confidence in he . but I find myself drive into hostility to he by a conviction that he will not let I take any real step in life , till my life have be half fritter away . " " you be think of parliament . " " of course I be . I do not say you be not a , but you be not quite enough of a to understand what parliament be to we . " " I hope to be , -- some of these day , " say . " perhaps you may . I will not say but what you may get yourself educated to it when you have be marri a dozen year to a wife , and have half - a - dozen English child of you own . but , in the meantime , look at my position . I be twenty - eight year old . " " I be four year you senior . " " it do not matter a straw to you , " continue . " but a few year be everything with I . I have a right to suppose that I may be able to represent the county , -- say in twenty year . I shall probably then be the head of the family and a rich man . consider what a parliamentary education would be to I ! and then it be just the life for which I have lay myself out , and in which i could make myself useful . you do not sympathise with I , but you might understand I . " " I do both . I think of go into the house myself . " " you ! " " yes ; I do . " " you must have change you idea very much then within the last month or two . " " I have change my idea . my one chief object in life be , as you know , to marry you sister ; and if I
I be a member of parliament I think that some difficulty would be clear away . " " but there will not be a election for the next three year at any rate , " say , star at he friend . " you do not mean to keep Emily wait for a dissolution ? " " there be occasional vacancy , " say . " be there a chance of anything of that kind fall in you way ? " " I think there be . I can not quite tell you all the particular because other people be concerned , but I do not think it improbable that I may be in the before -- ; well , say in three month ' time . " " in three month ' time ! " exclaim , whose mouth be water at the prospect of he friend . " that be what come from go to stay with the , I suppose . " shrug he shoulders . " upon my word I can not understand you , " continue the other . " it be only the other day you be argue in this very room as to the absurdity of a parliamentary career , -- pitch into I , by , like the very mischief , because I have say something in its favour , -- and now you be go in for it yourself in some sort of mysterious way that a fellow can not understand . " it be quite clear that think himself ill - use by he friend 's success . " there be no mystery ; -- only I can not tell people 's name . " " what be the borough ? " " I can not tell you that at present . " " be you sure there will be a vacancy ? " " I think I be sure . " " and that you will be invite to stand ? " " I be not sure of that . " " of course anybody can stand whether invite or not . " " if I come forward for this place I shall do so on the very best interest . do not mention it . I tell you because I already regard my connection with you as be so close as to call upon I to tell you anything of that kind . " " and yet you do not tell I the detail . " " I tell you all that I can in honour tell . " certainly feel aggrieve by he friend 's news , and plainly show that he do so . it be so hard that if a stray seat in parliament be go a - begge , it should be throw in the way of this man who do not care for it , and could not use it to any good purpose , instead of in he own way ! why should any one want to be in parliament ? have pay no attention to the great political question of the Commonwealth . he know nothing of and , of Unions , Strikes , and lock - out . but because he be rich , and , by be rich , have make he way among great people , he be to have a seat in parliament ! as for the wealth , it might be at he own command also , -- if only he father could be get to see the matter in a proper light . and as for the friendship of great people ,-- , , and such like ,-- be quite confident that he be at any rate as well qualifie to shine among they as . he be of too good a nature to be stir to injustice against he friend by the soreness of this feeling . he do not wish to rob he friend of he wealth , of he Duchess , or of he embryo seat in parliament . but for the moment there come upon he a doubt whether be so very clever , or so peculiarly gentlemanlike or in any way very remarkable , and almost a conviction that he be very far from be good - look . they dine together , and quite late in the evening they stroll out into 's . there be nobody in , and there be nothing for either of they to do , and therefore they agree to walk round the park , dark and gloomy as they know the park would be . have see and have quite understood the bitterness of spirit by which have be oppress , and with that peculiarly imperturbable good humour which make a part of he character bear it all , even with tenderness . he be a man , as be many of he race , who could bear contradiction , unjust suspicion , and social ill - treatment without a shadow of resentment , but who , if he have a purpose , could carry it out without a shadow of a scruple . have on this occasion make himself very unpleasant , and have borne with he as a angel would hardly have do ; but should ever stand in he friend 's way , he friend would sacrifice he without compunction . as it be , bear with he , simply note in he own mind that be a greater ass than he have take he to be . it be 's idea that they should walk round the park , and for a time have discourage the suggestion . " it be a wretchedly dark place at night , and you do not know whom you may meet there . " " you do not mean to say that you be afraid to walk round 's with I , because it be dark ! " say . " I certainly should
should be afraid by myself , but I do not know that I be afraid with you . but what be the good ? " " it be better than sit here do nothing , without a soul to speak to . I have already smoke half - a - dozen cigar , till I be so muddled I do not know what i be about . it be so hot one can not walk in the day , and this be just the time for exercise . " yield , be willing to yield in almost anything at present to the brother of ; and , though the thing seem to he to be very foolish , they enter the park by 's , and start to walk round it , turn to the right and go in front of . as they go on still continue he accusation against he father and say also some sharp thing against himself , till he companion begin to think that the wine he have drink have be as bad as the cigar . " I can not understand you want to go into parliament , " he say . " what do you know about it ? " " if I get there , I can learn like anybody else , I suppose . " " half of those who go there do not learn . they be , as it be , bear to it , and they do very well to support this party or that . " " and why should not I support this party , -- or that ? " " I do not suppose you know which party you would support,--except that you would vote for the , if , as I suppose , you be to get in under the 's influence . if I go into the I should go with a fix and settle purpose of my own . " " I be not there yet , " say , willing to drop the subject . " it will be a great expense to you , and will stand altogether in the way of you profession . as far as be concerned , I should think my father would be dead against it . " " then he would be unreasonable . " " not at all , if he think you would injure you professional prospect . it be a d ---- piece of folly ; that be the long and the short of it . " this certainly be very uncivil , and it almost make . but he have make up he mind that he friend be a little the worse for the wine he have drunk , and therefore he do not resent even this . " never mind politics and parliament now , " he say , " but let we get home . I be begin to be sick of this . it be so awfully dark , and whenever I do hear a step , I think somebody be come to rob we . let we get on a bit . " " what the deuce be you afraid of ? " say . they have then come up the greater part of the length of the , and the light at 's gate be just visible , but the road on which they be then walk be very dark . the tree be black over they head , and not a step be hear near they . at this time it be just midnight . now , certainly , among the fault which might be justly attribute to , personal cowardice could not be reckon . on this evening he have twice spoken of be afraid , but the fear have simply be that which ordinary caution indicate ; and he object have be that of hinder in the first place from come into the park , and then of get he out of it as quickly as possible . " come along , " say . " by , you be in a blue funk , " say the other . " I can hear you tooth chatter . " , who be begin to be angry , walk on and say nothing . it be too absurd , he think , for real anger , but he keep a little in front of , intend to show that he be displease . " you have better run away at once , " say . " upon my word , I shall begin to think that you be tipsy , " say . " ! " say the other . " how dare you say such a thing to I ? you never in you life see I in the least alte by any thing I have drink . " know that at any rate this be untrue . " I have see you as drink as before now , " say he . " that be a lie , " say . " come , , " say the other , " do not disgrace yourself by conduct such as that . something have put you out , and you do not know what you be say . I can hardly imagine that you should wish to insult I . " " it be you who insult I . you say I be drink . when you say it you know it be untrue . " walk on a little way in silence , think over this most absurd quarrel . then he turn round and spoke . " this be all the greatest nonsense I ever hear in the world . I will go on and go to bed , and to - morrow morning you will think better of it . but pray remember that under no circumstance should you call a man a liar , unless on cool consideration you
you be determined to quarrel with he for lying , and determine also to see the quarrel out . " " I be quite ready to see this quarrel out . " " good night , " say , start off at a quick pace . they be then close to the turn in the park , and go on till he have nearly reach the park front of the new office . as he have walk he have listen to the footfall of he friend , and after a while have perceive , or have think that he have perceive , that the sound be discontinue . it seem to he that have altogether lose he sense ; -- the insult to himself have be so determined and so absolutely groundless ! he have strive he best to conquer the man 's ill - humour by good - natured forbearance , and have only suggest that be perhaps tipsy in order to give he some excuse . but if he companion be really drink , as he now begin to think , could it be right to leave he unprotect in the park ? the man 's manner have be strange the whole evening , but there have be no sign of the effect of wine till after they have leave the club . but have hear of man who have be apparently sober , become drunk as soon as they get out into the air . it might have be so in this case , though 's voice and gait have not be those of a drunken man . at any rate , he would turn back and look after he ; and as he do turn back , he resolve that whatever might say to he on this night he would not notice . he be too wise to raise a further impediment to he marriage by quarrell with 's brother . as soon as he pause he be sure that he hear footstep behind he which be not those of . indeed , he be sure that he hear the footstep of more than one person . he stand still for a moment to listen , and then he distinctly hear a rush and a scuffle . he run back to the spot at which he have leave he friend , and at first think that he perceive a mob of people in the dusk . but as he get nearer , he see that there be a man and two woman . be on the ground , on he back , and the man be apparently knee on he neck and head while the woman be rifl he pocket . Lopez , hardly know how he be act , be upon they in a moment , fly in the first place at the man , who have jump up to meet he as he come . he receive at once a heavy blow on he head from some weapon , which , however , he hat so far stop as to save he from be felle or stun , and then he feel another blow from behind on the ear , which he afterwards conceive to have be give he by one of the woman . but before he could well look about he , or well know how the whole thing have happen , the man and the two woman have take to they leg , and be stand on he foot lean against the iron railing . the whole thing have occupy a very short space of time , and yet the effect be very grave . at the first moment look round and endeavoure to listen , hope that some assistance might be near , -- some policeman , or , if not that , some wanderer by night who might be honest enough to help he . but he could hear or see no one , in this condition of thing it be not possible for he to pursue the ruffian , as he could not leave he friend lean against the park rail . it be at once manifest to he that have be much hurt , or at any rate incapacitate for immediate exertion , by the blow he have receive ; -- and as he put he hand up to he own head , from which in the scuffle he hat have fallen , he be not certain that he be not severely hurt himself . could see that be very pale , that he cravat have be almost wrench from he neck by pressure , that he waistcoat be tear open and the front of he shirt soil , -- and he could see also that a fragment of the watch - chain be hang loose , show that the watch be gone . " be you hurt much ? " he say , come close up and take a tender hold of he friend 's arm . smile and shake he head , but speak not a word . he be in truth more shaken , stun , and bewilder than actually injure . the ruffian 's fist have be at he throat , twiste he cravat , and for half a minute he have feel that he be chok . as he have struggle while one woman pull at he watch and the other search for he purse , -- struggle , alas ! unsuccessfully , -- the man have endeavoure to quiet he by kneeling on he chest , strangle he with he own necktie , and press hard on he gullet . it be a treatment which , after a few seconds of vigorous practice , be apt to leave the patient for a while disconcert and unwill to speak . " say a word if you can , " whisper , look into the other man 's face with anxious eye . at
at the moment there come across 's mind a remembrance that he have behave very badly to he friend , and some sort of vague misty doubt whether all this evil have not befall he because of he misconduct . but he know at the same time that be not responsible for the evil , and dismay as he have be , still he recal enough of the nature of the struggle in which he have be engage , to be aware that have befriend he gallantly . he could not even yet speak ; but he see the blood trickling down he friend 's temple and forehead , and lift up he hand , touch the spot with he finger . also put he hand up , and draw it away cover with blood . " oh , " say he , " that do not signify in the least . I get a knock , I know , and I be afraid I have lose my hat , but I be not hurt . " " oh , dear ! " the word be uttere with a low sigh . then there be a pause , during which support the sufferer . " I think that it be all over with I at one moment . " " you will be better now . " " oh , yes . my watch be gone ! " " I fear it be , " say . " and my purse , " say , collect he strength together sufficiently to search for he treasure . " I have eight L5 note in it . " " never mind you money or you watch if you bone be not break . " " it be a bore all the same to lose every shilling that one have . " then they walk very slowly away towards the step at the of 's column , regain he strength as he go , but still able to progress but leisurely . have not find he hat , and , be cover with blood , be , as far as appearance go , in a worse plight than the other . at the foot of the step they meet a policeman , to whom they tell they story , and who , as a matter of course , be fill with a immediate desire to arrest they both . to the policeman 's mind it be most distresse that a bloody - faced man without a hat , with a companion almost too weak to walk , should not be convey to a police - station . but after ten minute ' parley , during which sit on the bottom step and explain all the circumstance , he consent to get they a cab , to take they address , and then to go alone to the station and make he report . that the thief have get off with they plunder be only too manifest . take the injured man home to the house in , and then return in the same cab , hatless , to he own lodging . as he return he apply he mind to think how he could turn the event of the evening to he own use . he do not believe that be severely hurt . indeed there might be a question whether in the morning he own injury would not be the most severe . but the immediate effect on the flustere and despoil unfortunate one have be great enough to justify in take strong step if strong step could in any way benefin himself . would it be best to publish this affair on the house - top , or to bury it in the shade , as nearly as it might be bury ? he have determine in he own mind that he friend certainly have be tipsy . in no other way could he conduct be understand . and a row with a tipsy man at midnight in the park be not , at first sight , creditable . but it could be make to have a better appearance if tell by himself , than if publish from other quarter . the old housekeeper at must know something about it , and would , of course , tell what she know , and the loss of the money and the watch must in all probability be make known . before he have reach he own door he have quite make up he mind that he himself would tell the story after he own fashion . and he tell it , before he go to be that night . he washed the blood from he face and head , and cut away a part of the clotted hair , and then write a letter to old at . and between three and four o'clock in the morning he go out and post he letter in the nearest pillar , so that it might go down by the day mail and certainly be proceed by no other write tiding . the letter which he send be as follow :-- , I regret to have to send you a account of a rather serious accident which have happene to . I be now write at 3 a.m. , have just take he home , and it occur at about midnight . you may be quite sure that there be no danger or I should have advertise you by telegram . there be nothing do in town , and therefore , as the night be fine , we , very foolishly , agree to walk round 's late after dinner . it be a kind of thing that nobody do ; -- but we do it . when we have nearly get round I be in a hurry , whereas be for strolling slowly , and so I go on before he . but I be
be hardly two hundred yard in front of he before he be attack by three person , a man and two woman . the man I presume come upon he from behind , but he have not sufficiently collect he thought to remember exactly what occur . I hear the scuffle and of course turn back , -- and be luckily in time to get up before he be seriously hurt . I think the man would otherwise have strangle he . I be sorry to say that he lose both he watch and purse . he undoubtedly have be very much shaken , and altogether " knock out of time , " as people say . excuse the phrase , because I think it will best explain what I want you to understand . the man 's hand at he throat must have stop he breathing for some seconds . he certainly have receive no permanent injury , but I should not wonder if he should be unwell for some day . I tell you all exactly as it occur , as it strike I that you may like to run up to town for a day just to look at he . but you need not do so on the score of any danger . of course he will see a doctor to - morrow . there do not seem to be any necessity for call one up to - night . we do give notice to the police as we be come home , but I fear the ruffian have ample time for escape . he be too weak , and I be too fully employ with he , to think of pursue they at the time . of course he be at . most faithfully yours , FERDINAND . he do not say a word about , but he know that would see the letter and would perceive that he have be the means of preserve she brother ; and , in regard to the old barrister himself , think that the old man could not but feel grateful for he conduct . he have in truth behave very well to . he have receive a heavy blow on the head in young 's defence , -- of which he be determined to make good use , though he have think it expedient to say nothing about the blow in he letter . surely it would all help . surely the paternal mind would be soften towards he when the father should be make to understand how great have be he service to the son . that would make little of what have be do for he he do not in the least fear . be sometimes silly but be never ungenerous . in spite of he night 's work be in Square before nine on the follow morning , and on the side of he brow he bear a great patch of black plaster . " my head be very thick , " he say laugh , when ask after he wound . " but it would have go badly with I if the ruffian have strike a inch lower . I suppose my hat save I , though I remember very little . yes , old fellow , I have write to you father , and I think he will come up . it be better that it should be so . " " there be nothing the matter with I , " say . " one do not quite know last night whether there be or no . at any rate he come will not hurt you . it be always well to have you banker near you , when you fund be low . " then after a pause make he apology ,-- " I know I make a great ass of myself last night . " " do not think about it . " " I use a word I should not have use , and I beg you pardon . " " not another word , . between you and I thing can not go wrong . we love each other too well . " the letter give in the previous chapter be receive at late in the evening of the day on which it be write , and be discuss among all the Wharton that night . of course there be no doubt as to the father 's go up to town on the morrow . the letter be just such a letter have would surely make a man run to he son 's bedside . have the son write himself it would have be different ; but the fact that the letter have come from another man seem to be evidence that the poor sufferer could not write . perhaps the urgency with which have send off he dispatch , get he account of the fray ready for the very early day mail , though the fray have not take place till midnight , do not impress they sufficiently when they accept this as evidence of 's dangerous condition . at this conference at very little be say about , but there be a general feeling that he have behave well . " it be very odd that they should have part in the park , " say . " but very lucky that they should not have part sooner , " say . if a grain of suspicion against might have be set afloat in they minds by 's suggestion , it be altogether dissipate by 's reply ; -- for everybody there know that carry common sense for the two family . of course they all hate , but nothing could be extract from the incident , as far as its detail be yet know to they , which could be turn to he injury . while they sit together discuss the matter in the drawing -
- room hardly say a word . she utter a little shriek when the account of the affair be first read to she , and then listen with silent attention to what be say around she . when there have see for a moment to be a doubt , -- or rather a question , for there have be no doubt ,-- whether she father should go at once to , she have speak just a word . " of course you will go , papa . " after that , she say nothing till she come to he in he own room . " of course I will go with you to - morrow , papa . " " I do not think that will be necessary . " " oh , yes . think how wretched I should be . " " I would telegraph to you immediately . " " and I should not believe the telegraph . do not you know how it always be ? besides we have be more than the usual time . we be to go to town in ten day , and you would not think of return to fetch I . of course I will go with you . I have already begin to pack my thing , and be now at it . " she father , not know how to oppose she , yield , and Emily before she go to bed have make the lady of the house aware that she also intend to start the next morning at eight o'clock . during the first part of the journey very little be say between and . there be other person in the carriage , and she , though she have determine in some vague way that she would speak some word to she father before she reach they own house , have still want time to resolve what those word should be . but before she have reach she have make up she mind , and go on from she find herself for a time alone with she father . she be sit opposite to he , and after conversing for a while she touch he knee with she hand . " , " she say , " I suppose I must now have to meet in ? " " why should you have to meet in ? " " of course he will come there to see . after what have occur you can hardly forbid he the house . he have save 's life . " " I do not know that he have do anything of the kind , " say , who be vacillat between different opinion . he do in he heart believe that the Portuguese whom he so hate have save he son from the thief , and he also have almost come to the conviction that he must give he daughter to the man , -- but at the same time he could not as yet bring himself to abandon he opposition to the marriage . " perhaps you think the story be not true . " " I do not doubt the story in the least . of course one man stick to another in such a affair , and I have no doubt that behave as any english gentleman would . " " any english gentleman , papa , would have to come afterwards and see the friend he have save . do not you think so ? " " oh , yes ; -- he might call . " " and will have a additional reason for calling , -- and I know he will come . do not you think he will come ? " " I do not want to think anything about it , " say the father . " but I want you to think about it , papa . , I know you be not indifferent to my happiness . " " I hope you know it . " " I do know it . I be quite sure of it . and therefore I do not think you ought to be afraid to talk to I about what must concern my happiness so greatly . as far as my own self and my own will be concerned I consider myself give away to already . nothing but he marry some other woman , -- or he death ,-- would make I think of myself otherwise than as belong to he . I be not a bit asham of own my love -- to you ; nor to he , if the opportunity be allow I . I do not think there should be concealment about anything so important between people who be dear to each other . I have tell you that I will do whatever you bid I about he . if you say that I shall not speak to he or see he , I will not speak to he or see he -- willingly . you certainly need not be afraid that I should marry he without you leave . " " I be not in the least afraid of it . " " but I think you should think over what you be do . and I be quite sure of this , -- that you must tell I what I be to do in regard to receive in . " listen attentively to what he daughter say to he , shak he head from time to time as though almost equally distract by she passive obedience and by she passionate protestation of love ; but he say nothing . when she have complete she supplication he throw himself back in he seat and after a while take he book . it may be doubt whether he read much , for the question as to he girl 's happiness be quite as near he heart as she could
could wish it to be . it be late in the afternoon before they reach , and they be both happy to find that they be not trouble by at the first moment . be at home and in bed , and have not indeed as yet recover from the effect of the man 's knuckle at he windpipe ; but he be well enough to assure he father and sister that they need not have disturb themselves or hurrie they return from on he account . " to tell the truth , " say he , " be hurt worse than I be . " " he say nothing of be hurt himself , " say . " how be he hurt ? " ask in the quietest , stillest voice . " the fact be , " say , begin to tell the whole story after he own fashion , " if he have not be at hand then , there would have be a end of I . we have separate , you know , -- " " what could make two man separate from each other in the darkness of 's ? " " well , -- to tell the truth , we have quarrell . I have make a ass of myself . you need not go into that any further , except that you should know that it be all my fault . of course it be not a real quarrel , " -- when he say this Emily , who be sit close to he bed - head , press he arm under the clothes with she hand , -- " but I have say something rough , and he have go on just to put a end to it . " " it be uncommonly foolish , " say old . " it be very foolish go round the park at all at that time of night . " " no doubt , sir ; -- but it be my do . and if he have not go with I , I should have go alone . " here there be another pressure . " I be a little low in spirit , and want the walk . " " but how be he hurt ? " ask the father . " the man who be knee on I and squeeze the life out of I jump up when he hear come , and strike he over the head with a bludgeon . I hear the blow , though I be pretty well do for at the time myself . I do not think they hit I , but they get something round my neck , and I be half strangle before I know what they be do . poor ble horribly , but he say he be no the worse for it . " here there be another little pressure under the bed - clothes ; for Emily feel that she brother be plead for she in every word that he say . about ten on the follow morning come and ask for . he be show into the study , where he find the old man , and at once begin to give he account of the whole concern in a easy , unconcerned manner . he have the large black patch on the side of he head , which have be so put on as almost to become he . but it be so conspicuous as to force a question respect it from . " I be afraid you get rather a sharp knock yourself , ? " " I do get a knock , certainly ; -- but the odd part of it be that I know nothing about it till I find the blood in my eye after they have decamp . but I lose my hat , and there be a rather long cut just above the temple . it have not do I the slightest harm . the worst of it be that they get off with 's watch and money . " " have he much money ? " " Forty pound ! " and shook he head , thereby signify that forty pound at the present moment be more than could afford to lose . upon the whole he carry himself very well , ingratiat himself with the father , raise no question about the daughter , and say as little as possible of himself . he ask whether he could go up and see he friend , and of course be allow to do so . a minute before he enter the room Emily leave it . they do not see each other . at any rate he do not see she . but there be a feeling with both of they that the other be close , -- and there be something present to they , almost amount to conviction , that the accident of the park robbery would be good for they . " he certainly do save 's life , " Emily say to she father the next day . " whether he do or not , he do he best , " say . " when one 's dearest relation be concerned , " say Emily , " and when he life have be save , one feel that one have to be grateful even if it have be a accident . I hope he know , at any rate , that I be grateful . " the old man have not be a week in before he know that he have absolutely lose the game . come back to she house round the corner , ostensibly with the object of assist she relative in nursing , -- a purpose for which she certainly be not need ; but , as the matter progress , be not without suspicion that she return have be arrange by . she take
take upon herself , at any rate , to be loud in the praise of the man who have save the life of she " darling nephew , " -- and to see that other also should be loud in he praise . in a little time all have hear of the affair , and it have be discuss out of . down at the matter have be know , or partly know , -- but the telling of it have always been to the great honour and glory of the hero . major Pountney have almost break he heart over it , and , write to he friend from the , have assert he knowledge that it be all a " get - up thing " between the two man . the " breakfast Table " and the " " have be loud in praise of ; but the " 's , " under the management of , have naturally thrown much suspicion on the incident when it become known to the editor that have be entertain by the and of . " we have always feel some slight doubt as to the detail of the affair say to have happene about a fortnight ago , just at midnight , in 's . we should be glad to know whether the policeman have succeed in trace any of the steal property , or whether any real attempt to trace it have be make . " this be one of the paragraph , and it be hint still more plainly afterwards that , be short of money , have arrange the plan with the view of open he father 's purse . but the general effect be certainly serviceable to . do believe he to be a hero . be beyond measure grateful to he , -- not only for have save he from the thief , but also for have tell nothing of he previous folly . always allude to the matter as if , for all come ag , every ought to acknowledge that gratitude to a be the very first duty of life . the old man feel the absurdity of much of this , but still it affect he . when come he could not be rough to the man who have do a service to he son . and then he find himself compelle to do something . he must either take he daughter away , or he must yield . but he power of take he daughter away seem to be less than it have be . there be a air of quiet , unmerited suffer about she , which quell he . and so he yield . it be after this fashion . whether affect by the violence of the attack make on he , or from other cause , have be unwell after the affair , and have keep he room for a fortnight . during this time come to see he daily , and daily have to take herself out of the man 's way , and hide herself from the man 's sight . this she do with much tact and with lady - like quietness , but not without a air of martyrdom , which cut she father to the quick . " my dear , " he say to she one evening , as she be prepare to leave the drawing - room on hear he knock , " stop and see he if you like it . " " ! " " I do not want to make you wretch . if I could have die first , and get out of the way , perhaps it would have be better . " " Papa , you will kill I if you speak in that way ! if there be anything to say to he , do you say it . " and then she escape . well ! it be a add bitterness , but no doubt it be he duty . if he do intend to consent to the marriage , it certainly be for he to signify that consent to the man . it would not be sufficient that he should get out of the way and leave he girl to act for herself as though she have no friend in the world . the surrender which he have make to he daughter have come from a sudden impulse at the moment , but it could not now be withdrawn . so he stand out on the staircase , and when come up on he way to 's bedroom , he take he by the arm and lead he into the drawing - room . " , " he say , " you know that I have not be willing to welcome you into my house as a son - in - law . there be reasons on my mind , -- perhaps prejudice , -- which be strong against it . they be as strong now as ever . but she wish it , and I have the utmost reliance on she constancy . " " so have I , " say . " stop a moment , if you please , sir . in such a position a father 's thought be only as to he daughter 's happiness and prosperity . it be not he own that he should consider . I hear you well speak of in the outer world , and I do not know that I have a right to demand of my daughter that she should tear you from she affections , because -- because you be not just such as I would have she husband to be . you have my permission to see she . " then , before could say a word , he leave the room , and take he hat and hurrie away to he club . as he go he be aware
aware that he have make no term at all ; -- but then he be inclin to think that no term should be make . there seem to be a general understanding that be do well in the world , -- in a profession of the working of which himself know absolutely nothing . he have a large fortune at he own bestowal ,-- intended for he daughter , -- which would have be forthcome at the moment and pay down on the nail , have she marry . the very way in which the money should be invest and tie up and make to be safe and comfortable to the fletcher- cum - interest generally , have be fully settle among they . but now this other man , this stranger , this Portuguese , have enter in upon the inheritance . but the stranger , the Portuguese , must wait . know himself to be a old man . she be he child , and he would not wrong she . but she should have she money closely settle upon herself on he death , -- and on she child , should she then have any . it should be do by he will . he would say nothing about money to , and if should , as be probable , ask after he daughter 's fortune , he would answer to this effect . thus he almost resolve that he would give he daughter to the man without any inquiry as to the man 's means . the thing have to be do , and he would take no further trouble about it . the comfort of he life be gone . he home would no longer be a home to he . he daughter could not now be he companion . the sooner that death come to he the better , but till death should come he must conseal himself as well as he could by play whist at the . it be after this fashion that think of the come marriage between he daughter and she lover . " I have you father 's consent to marry you sister , " say immediately on enter 's room . " I know it must come soon , " say the invalid . " I can not say that it have be give in the most gracious manner , -- but it have be give very clearly . I have he express permission to see she . those be he last word . " then there be a sending of note between the sick - room and the sick man 's sister 's room . write and write , and Emily write , -- short line each of they , -- a few word scrawl . the last from be as follow :--" let he go into the drawing - room . . " and so go down , to meet he love , -- to encounter she for the first time as she recognise future husband and engage lover . Passionate , declare , and thorough as be she love for this man , the familiar intercourse between they have hithertoo be very limited . there have be little , -- we may perhaps say none , -- of that dalliance between they which be so delightful to the man and so wondrous to the girl till custom have stal the edge of it . he have never sit with he arm round she waist . he have rarely hold even she hand in he for a happy recognise pause of a few seconds . he have never kiss even she brow . and there she be now , stand before he , all he own , absolutely give to he , with the fullest assurance of love on she part , and with the declare consent of she father . even he have be a little confused as he open the door ,-- even he , as he pause to close it behind he , have have to think how he would address she , and perhaps have think in vain . but he have not a moment for any thought after enter the room . whether it be he do or hers he hardly know ; but she be in he arm , and she lip be press to he , and he arm be tight round she waist , hold she close to he breast . it seem as though all that be want have be understand in a moment , and as though they have liv together and love for the last twelve month with the fullest mutual confidence . and she be the first to speak :-- " , I be so happy ! be you happy ? " " my love ; my darling ! " " you have never doubt I , I know , -- since you first know it . " " Doubt you , my girl ! " " that I would be firm ! and now papa have be good to I , and how quickly one 's sorrow be over . I be yours , my love , for ever and ever . you know it before , but I like to tell you . I will be true to you in everything ! oh , my love ! " he have but little to say to she , but we know that for " lover lack matter , the cleanliest shift be to kiss . " in such moments silence charms , and almost any word be unsuitable except those soft , bird - like murmuring of love which , sweet as they be to the ear , can hardly be so written as to be sweet to the reader . the marriage the engagement be make in , and the marriage take place in the latter part of . when presse for a
a early day , -- which he do very strongly ,-- Emily raise no difficulty in the way of he wish . the father , foolishly enough , would at first have postpone it , and make himself so unpleasant to by he manner of do this , that the bride be drive to take she lover 's part . as the thing be to be do , what be to be gain by delay ? it could not be make a joy to he ; nor , look at the matter as he look at it , could he make a joy even of she presence during the few intervene week . propose to take he bride into Italy for the winter month , and to stay there at any rate through and , allege that he must be back in town by the beginning of ; -- and this be take as a fair plea for hasten the marriage . when the matter be settle , he go back to , as he have arrange to do with the Duchess , and manage to interest she in all he proceedings . she promise that she would call on he bride in town , and even go so far as to send she a costly wedding present . " you be sure she have get money ? " say the Duchess . " I be not sure of anything , " say , --" except this , that I do not mean to ask a single question about it . if he say nothing to I about money , I certainly shall say nothing to he . my feeling be this , Duchess ; I be not marry for she money . the money , if there be any , have have nothing to do with it . but of course it will be a pleasure add if it be there . " the Duchess compliment he , and tell he that this be exactly as it should be . but there be some delay as to the seat for . 's departure for have be postpone , -- the Duchess think only for a month or six week . the , however , be of opinion that should not vacate he seat till the day of he go be at any rate fix . the , moreover , have not make any promise of support he wife 's favourite . " do not set you heart upon it too much , , " the have say ; " but you may be sure I will not forget you . " then it have be settle between they that the marriage should not be postpone , or the propose trip to abandon , because of the probable vacancy at . should the vacancy occur during he absence , and should the consent , he could return at once . all this occur in the last week or two before he marriage . there be various little incidents which do not tend to make the happiness of complete . she write to she cousin , and also to ; -- and she father write to ; but the folk at do not give in they adherence . be still there , but have go home to . the obduracy of the Whartons might probably be owe to these two accident . declare aloud , as soon as the tiding reach she , that she never wish to see or hear anything more of . " she must be a girl , " say , " of a ingrain vulgar taste . " , whose letter from have be very short , reply as shortly to he cousin . " dear Abel ,-- we all hope that will be happy , though of course we regret the marriage . " the father , though he have not himself write triumphantly , or even hopefully , -- as fathers be will not to write when they daughter be give away in marriage , -- be woun by the curtness and unkindness of the baronet 's reply , and at the moment declare to himself that he would never go to any more . but on the follow day there come a worse blow than 's single line . Emily , not in the least doubt but that she request would be receive with the usual ready assent , have ask to be one of she bridesmaid . it must be suppose that the answer to this be write , if not under the dictation , at any rate under the inspiration , of . it be as follow :-- , of course we all wish you to be very happy in you marriage , but equally of course we be all disappoint . we have teach ourselves to think that you would have bound yourself closer with we down here , instead of separate yourself entirely from we . under all the circumstance mamma think it would not be wise for I to go up to as one of you bridesmaid . you affectionate , . this letter make poor Emily very angry for a day or two . " it be as unreasonable as it be ill - natured , " she say to she brother . " what else could you expect from a stiff - necke , prejudice set of provincial ignoramus ? " " what say be not true . she do not think that I be go to bind myself closer with they , as she call it . I have be quite open with she , and have always tell she that I could not be 's wife . " " why on earth should you marry to please they ? " " because they do not know they be determined to insult he . it be a insult never to mention even he name . and
and to refuse to come to my marriage ! the world be wide and there be room for we and they ; but it make I unhappy , -- very unhappy , -- that I should have to break with they . " and then the tear come into she eye . it be intend , no doubt , to be a complete breach , for not a single wedding present be send from to the bride . but from Longbarns ,-- from himself , -- there do come a elaborate coffee - pot , which , in spite of its inutility and ugliness , be very valuable to . but there be one other of she old Herefordshire friend who receive the tiding of she marriage without quarrell with she . she herself have write to she old lover . my , there have be so much true friendship and affection between we that I do not like that you should hear from any one but myself the news that I be go to be marry to . we be to be marry on the 28th of , -- this day month . yours affectionately , . to this she receive a very short reply ;-- , I be as I always have be . yours , . . he send she no present , nor do he say a word to she beyond this ; but in she anger against the Herefordshire people she never include . she po over the little note a score of time , and wept over it , and treasure it up among she inmost treasure , and tell herself that it be a thousand pity . she could talk , and do talk , to Ferdinand about the Wharton , and about old , and describe to he the arrogance and the stiffness and the ignorance of the squirearchy generally ; but she never speak to he of ,-- except in that one narrative of she past life , in which , girl - like , she tell she lover of the one other lover who have love she . but these thing of course give a certain melancholy to the occasion which perhaps be increase by the season of the year , -- by the fog , and by the emptiness and general sadness of the town . and add to this be the melancholy of old himself . after he have give he consent to the marriage he admit a certain amount of intimacy with he son - in - law , ask he to dinner , and discuss with he matter of general interest , -- but never , in truth , open he heart to he . indeed , how can any man open he heart to one whom he dislike ? at best he can only pretend to open he heart , and even this would not do . and very soon after the engagement leave and go to the 's place in the country . he object in do this and he aspiration in regard to a seat in parliament be all make known to he future wife , -- but he say not a word on the subject to she father ; and she , act under he instruction , be equally reticent . " he will get to know I in time , " he say to she , " and he manner will be soften towards I . but till that time shall come , I can hardly expect he to take a real interest in my welfare . " when leave not a word have be say between he and he father - in - law as to money . be content with such silence , not wish to make any promise as to immediate income from himself , pretend to look at the matter as though he should say that , as he daughter have make for herself she own bed , she must lie on it , such as it might be . and this silence certainly suite at the time . to tell the truth of he , -- though he be not absolutely penniless , he be altogether propertyless . he have be speculat in money without capital , and though he have now and again be successful , he have also now and again fail . he have contrive that he name should be mention here and there with the name of well - know wealthy commercial man , and have for the last twelve month make up a somewhat intimate alliance with that very sound commercial man , . but he dealings with be in truth much more confidential than those with , and at the present moment poor be alternately between triumph and despair as thing go this way or that . it be not , therefore , surprise that should volunteer no statement to the old lawyer about money , and that he should make no inquiry . he be quite confident that have the wealth which be suppose to belong to he , and be willing to trust to he power of obtain a fair portion of it as soon as he should in truth be 's son - in - law . situate as he be , of course he must run some risk . and then , too , he have speak of himself with a grain of truth when he have tell the Duchess that he be not marry for money . be not a honest man or a good man . he be a self - seek , intrigue adventurer , who do not know honesty from dishonesty when he see they together . but he have at any rate this good about he , that he do love the girl whom he be about to marry . he be willing to cheat all the world , -- so that
that he might succeed , and make a fortune , and become a big and a rich man ; but he do not wish to cheat she . it be he ambition now to carry she up with he , and he think how he might best teach she to assist he in do so , -- how he might win she to help he in he cheating , especially in regard to she own father . for to himself , to he own think , that which we call cheating be not dishonesty . to he think there be something bold , grand , picturesque , and almost beautiful in the battle which such a one as himself must wage with the world before he could make he way up in it . he would not pick a pocket , or turn a false card , or , as he think , forge a name . that which he do , and desire to do , take with he the name of speculation . when he persuade poor to hazard he all , know well that he induce the unfortunate man to believe what be false , and to trust what be utterly untrustworthy , he do not himself think that he be go beyond the line of fair enterprise . now , in he marriage , he have in truth join himself to real wealth . could he only command at once that which he think ought to be he wife 's share of the lawyer 's money , he do not doubt but that he could make a rapid fortune . it would not do for he to seem to be desirous of the money a day before the time ; -- but , when the time should come , would not he wife help he in he great career ? but before she could do so she must be make to understand something of the nature of that career , and of the need of such aid . of course there arise the question where they should live . but he be ready with a immediate answer to this question . he have be to look at a flat , -- a set of room , -- in the , in , or you ought more probably to call it . he propose to take they furnish till they could look about at they leisure and get a house that should suit they . would she like a flat ? she would have like a cellar with he , and so she tell he . then they go to look at the flat , and old condescende to go with they . though he heart be not in the business , still he think that he be bound to look after he daughter 's comfort . " they be very handsome room , " say , look round upon the rather gorgeous furniture . " oh , , be they not too grand ? " say Emily . " perhaps they be a little more than we quite want just at present , " he say . " but I will tell you , sir , just how it have happen . a man I know want to let they for one year , just as they be , and offer they to I for l450,-- if I could pay the money in advance , at the moment . and so I pay it . " " you have take they , then ? " say . " be it all settle ? " say Emily , almost with disappointment . " I have pay the money , and I have so far take they . but it be by no means settle . you have only to say you do not like they , and you shall never be ask to put you foot in they again . " " but I do like they , " she whisper to he . " the truth be , sir , that there be not the slightest difficulty in part with they . so that when the chance come in my way I think it best to secure the thing . it have all to be do , so to say , in a hour . my friend , -- as far as he be a friend , for I do not know much about he , -- wante the money and want to be off . so here they be , and Emily can do as she likes . " of course the room be regard from that moment as the home for the next twelve month of and . and then they be marry . the marriage be by no means a gay affair , the chief management of it fall into the hand of . . indeed provide not only the breakfast , -- or see rather that it be provide , for of course pay the bill , -- but the four bridesmaid also , and all the company . they be marry in the church in , then go back to the house in , and within a couple of hour be on they road to . through it all not a word be say about money . at the last moment , -- when he be free from fear as to any question about he own affair ,-- have hope that the old man would say something . " you will find so many thousand pound at you banker ' ; " -- or , " you may look to I for so many hundred a year . " but there be not a word . the girl have come to he without the assurance of a single shilling . in he great endeavour to get she he have be successful . as he think of this in the carriage , he
he press he arm close round she waist . if the worst be to come to the worst , he would fight the world for she . but if this old man should be stubborn , close - fist , and absolutely resolve to bestow all he money upon he son because of this marriage , -- ah !--how should he be able to bear such a wrong as that ? half - a - dozen time during that journey to he resolve to think nothing further about it , at any rate for a fortnight ; and yet , before he reach Dover , he have say a word to she . " I wonder what you father mean to do about money ? he never tell you ? " " not a word . " " it be very odd that he should never have say anything . " " do it matter , dear ? " " not in the least . but of course I have to talk about everything to you ; -- and it be odd . " the of the on the morning of he marriage , before he go to the altar , make one or two resolution as to he future conduct . the first be that he would give himself a fortnight from he marriage day in which he would not even think of money . he have make certain arrangement , in the course of which he have cause to stare with surprise and to sweat with dismay , but which nevertheless be successfully conclude . bills be draw to run over to , and ready money to a moderate extent be forthcoming , and fiscal tranquillity be insure for a certain short period . the confidence which have once feel in he friend 's own resource be somewhat on the decline , but he still believe in he friend 's skill and genius , and , after due inquiry , he believe entirely in he friend 's father - in - law . still think that thing would come round . , -- he always now call he friend by he name , -- be beautifully , seraphically confident . and , who have be in a manner magnetise by , be confident too -- at certain period of the day . he be very confident when he have have he two or three glass of sherry at luncheon , and he be often delightfully confident with he cigar and brandy - and - water at night . but there be period in the morning in which he would shake with fear and sweat with dismay . but himself , have with he friend 's assistance arrange he affair comfortably for a month or two , have , as a first resolution , promise himself a fortnight 's freedom from all cark car . he second resolution have be that at the end of the fortnight he would commence he operation on . up to the last moment he have hope , -- have almost expected , -- that a sum of money would have be pay to he . even a couple of thousand pound for the time would have be of great use to he ; -- but no tender of any kind have be make . not a word have be say . thing could not of course go on in that way . he be not go to play the coward with he father - in - law . then he bethotch himself how he would act if he father - in - law be sternly to refuse to do anything for he , and he assure himself that in such circumstance he would make himself very disagreeable to he father - in - law . and then he third resolution have reference to he wife . she must be instruct in he way . she must learn to look at the world with he eye . she must be teach the great importance of money , -- not in a griping , hard - fisted , prosaic spirit ; but that she might participate in that feeling of he own which have in it so much that be grand , so much that be delightful , so much that be picturesque . he would never ask she to be parsimonious , -- never even to be economical . he would take a glory in see she well dress and well attend , with she own carriage and she own jewel . but she must learn that the enjoyment of these thing must be build upon a conviction that the most important pursuit in the world be the acquiring of money . and she must be make to understand , first of all , that she have a right to at any rate a half of she father 's fortune . he have perceive that she have much influence with she father , and she must be teach to use this influence unscrupulously on she husband 's behalf . we have already see that under the pressure of he thought he do break he first resolution within a hour or two of he marriage . it be easy for a man to say that he will banish care , so that he may enjoy to the full the delight of the moment . but this be a power which no but a savage possess , -- or perhaps a . we have learn the lesson from the divine , the philosopher , and the poet . post equitem sedet atra cura . thus be mount high on he horse , -- for he have triumph greatly in he marriage , and really feel that the world could give he no delight so great as to have she beside he , and she as he own . but the inky devil sit close upon he shoulders
shoulders . where would he be at the end of three month if would do nothing for he , -- and if a certain venture in guano , to which he have temp , should not turn out the right way ? he believe in the guano and he believe in , but it be a terrible thing to have one 's whole position in the world hang upon either a unwilling father - in - law or a probable rise in the value of manure ! and then how would he reconcile himself to she if both father - in - law and guano should go against he , and how should he endure she misery ? the inky have force he to ask the question even before they have reach Dover . " do it matter ? " she have ask . then for the time he have repudiate he solicitude , and have declare that no question of money be of much consequence to he ,-- thereby make he future task with she so much the more difficult . after that he say nothing to she on the subject on that they wedding day , -- but he could not prevent himself from think of it . have he go to the depth of ruin without a wife , what would it have matte ? for year past he have be at the same kind of work , -- but while he be unmarried there have be a charm in the very danger . and as a single man he have succeed , be sometimes utterly impecunious , but still with a capacity of living . now he have lae himself with a burden of which the very intensity of he love immensely increase the weight . as for not think of it , that be impossible . of course she must help he . of course she must be teach how imperative it be that she should help he at once . " be there anything trouble you ? " she say , as she sit lean against he after they dinner in the hotel at . " what should trouble I on such a day as this ? " " if there be anything , tell it I . I do not mean to say now , at this moment , -- unless you wish it . whatever may be you trouble , it shall be my greatest happiness , as it be my first duty , to lessen they if I can . " the promise be very well . it all go in the right direction . it show he that she be at any rate prepare to take a part in the joint work of they life . but , nevertheless , she should be spare for the moment . " when there be trouble , you shall be tell everything , " he say , press he lip to she brow , " but there be nothing that need trouble you yet . " he smile as he say this , but there be something in the tone of he voice which tell she that there would be trouble . when he be in he receive a letter from , to whom he have be oblige to intrust a running address , but from whom he have enforce a promise that there should be no letter -writ unless under very pressing circumstance . the circumstance have not be press . the letter contain only one paragraph of any importance , and that be due to what try to regard as fidgety cowardice on the part of he ally . " please to bear in mind that I can not and will not arrange for the bill for due 3rd . " that be the paragraph . who have ask he to arrange for these bill ? and yet be well aware that he intend that poor Sexty should " arrange " for they , in the event of he failure to make arrangement with . at last he be quite unable to let the fortnight pass by without begin the lesson which he wife have to learn . as for that first intention as to drive he car out of he own mind for that time , he have long since abandon even the attempt . it be necessary to him that a considerable sum of money should be extract from the father - in - law , at any rate before the end of , and a week or even a day might be of importance . they have hurry on southward from , and before the end of the first week have pass over the , and be at a pleasant inn on the shore of . everything in they travels have be as yet delightful to . this man , of whom she know in truth so little , have certain good gift , -- gift of intellect , gift of temper , gift of voice and manner and outward appearance , -- which have hithertoo satisfi she . a husband who be also a eager lover must be delightful to a young bride . and hitherto no lover could have be more tender than . every word and every act , every look and every touch , have be love . have she know the world better she might have felt , perhaps , that something be expect where so much be give . perhaps a rougher manner , with some little touch of marital self - assertion , might be a safer commencement of married life , -- safer to the wife as come from she husband . by this time would have ask she to bring he he slipper , take infinite pride in have he little behest obey by so sweet a servitor . that also would have be pleasant to she have she heart
heart in the first instance follow he image ; but now also the idolatry of have be very pleasant . but the moment for the first lesson have come . " you father have not write to you since you start ? " he say . " not a line . he have not know we address . he be never very good at letter-writing . I do write to he from , and I scribble a few word to yesterday . " " it be very odd that he should never have write to I . " " do you expect he to write ? " " to tell you the truth , I rather do . not that I should have dream of he corresponding with I have he speak to I on a certain subject . but as , on that subject , he never open he mouth to I , I almost think he would write . " " do you mean about money ? " she ask in a very low voice . " well ; -- yes ; I do mean about money . thing hitherto have go so very strangely between we . sit down , dear , till we have a real domestic talk . " " tell I everything , " she say , as she nestle herself close to he side . " you know how it be at first between he and I . he object to I violently , -- I mean openly , to my face . but he base he objection solely on my nationality , -- nationality and blood . as to my condition in the world , fortune , or income , he never ask a word . that be strange . " " I suppose he think he know . " " he could not have think he know , dearest . but it be not for I to force the subject upon he . you can see that . " " I be sure whatever you do be right , . " " he be indisputably a rich man , -- one who might be suppose to be able and willing to give a only daughter a considerable fortune . now I certainly have never think of marrying for money . " here she rub she face upon he arm . " I feel that it be not for I to speak of money . if he choose to be reticent , I could be so equally . have he ask I , I should have tell he that I have no fortune , but be make a large though precarious income . it would then be for he to declare what he intend to do . that would , I think , have be preferable . as it be we be all in doubt . in my position a knowledge of what you father intend to do would be most valuable to I . " " should you not ask he ? " " I believe there have always be a perfect confidence between you and he ? " " certainly , -- as to all we way of live . but he never say a word to I about money in he life . " " and yet , my darling , money be most important . " " of course it be . I know that , . " " would you mind ask ? " she do not answer he at once , but sat thinking . and he also pause before he go on with he lesson . but , in order that the lesson should be efficacious , it would be as well that he should tell she as much as he could even at this first lecture . " to tell you the truth , this be quite essential to I at present , -- very much more than I have think it would be when we fix the day for we marriage . " she mind within she recoil at this , though she be very careful that he should not feel any such motion in she body . " my business be precarious . " " what be you business , ? " poor girl ! that she should have be allow to marry a man , and then have to ask such a question ! " it be generally commercial . I buy and sell on speculation . the world , which be shy of new word , have not yet give it a name . I be a good deal at present in the south american trade . " she listen , but receive no glimmering of a idea from he word . " when we be engage everything be as bright as ros with I . " " why do you not tell I this before , -- so that we might have be more prudent ? " " such prudence would have be horrid to I . but the fact be that I should not now have speak to you at all , but that since we leave I have have letter from a sort of partner of mine . in we business thing will go astray sometimes . it would be of great service to I if I could learn what be you father 's intention . " " you want he to give you some money at once . " " it would not be unusual , dear , -- when there be money to be give . but I want you specially to ask he what he himself would propose to do . he know already that I have take a home for you and pay for it , and he know -- . but it do not signify go into that . " " tell I everything . " " he be aware that there be
be many expense . of course if he be a poor man there would not be a word about it . I can with absolute truth declare that have he be penniless it would have make no difference as to my suit to you . but it would possibly have make some difference as to we after plan . he be a thorough man of the world , and he must know all that . I be sure he must feel that something be due to you , -- and to I as you husband . but he be odd - temper , and , as I have not speak to he , he choose to be silent to I . now , my darling , you and I can not afford to wait to see who can be silent the longest . " " what do you want I to do ? " " to write to he . " " and ask he for money ? " " not exactly in that way . I think you should say that we should be glad to know what he intend to do , also say that a certain sum of money would at present be of use to I . " " would it not be better from you ? I only ask , . I never have even speak to he about money , and of course he would know that you have dictat what I say . " " no doubt he would . it be natural that I should do so . I hope the time may come when I may write quite freely to you father myself , but hitherto he have hardly be courteous to I . I would rather that you should write , -- if you do not mind it . write you own letter , and show it I . if there be anything too much or anything too little I will tell you . " and so the first lesson be tatch . the poor young wife do not at all like the lesson . even within she own bosom she find no fault with she husband . but she begin to understand that the life before she be not to be a life of rose . the first word speak to she in the train , before it reach , have explain something of this to she . she have feel at once that there would be trouble about money . and now , though she do not at all understand what might be the nature of those trouble , though she have derive no information whatever from she husband 's hint about the south american trade , though she be as ignorant as ever of he affair , yet she feel that the trouble would come soon . but never for a moment do it seem to she that he have be unjust in bring she into troubled water . they have love each other , and therefore , whatever might be the trouble , it be right that they should marry each other . there be not a spark of anger against he in she bosom ; -- but she be unhappy . he demand from she the writing of the letter almost immediately after the conversation which have be give above , and of course the letter be write , -- write and recopy , for the paragraph about the money be , of course , at last of he wording . and she could not make the remainder of the letter pleasant . the feel that she be make a demand for money on she father run through it all . but the reader need only see the passage in which make he demand , -- through she hand . " have be speak to I about my fortune . " it have go much against the grain with she to write these word , " my fortune . " " but I have no fortune , " she say . he insist however , explain to she that she be entitle to use these word by she father 's undoubted wealth . and so , with a ach heart , she write they . " have be speak to I about my fortune . of course , I tell he that I know nothing , and that as he have never speak to I about money before we marriage , I have never ask about it . he say that it would be of great service to he to know what be you intention ; and also that he hope you may find it convenient to allow he to draw upon you for some portion of it at present . he say that would be of great use to he in he business . " that be the paragraph , and the work of write it be so distasteful to she that she could hardly bring herself to form the letter . it seem as though she be seize the advantage of the first moment of she freedom to take a violent liberty with she father . " it be altogether he own fault , my pet , " he say to she . " I have the greatest respect in the world for you father , but he have allow himself to fall into the habit of keep all he affair secret from he child ; and , of course , as they go out into the world , this secrecy must in some degree be invade . there be precisely the same thing go on between he and ; only be a great deal rougher to he than you be likely to be . he never will let know whether he be to regard himself as a rich man or a poor man . " " he give he a allowance . "
" " because he can not help himself . to you he do not do even as much as that , because he can help himself . I have choose to leave it to he and he have do nothing . but this be not quite fair , and he must be tell so . I do not think he could be tell in more dutiful language . " Emily do not like the idea of tell she father anything which he might not like to hear ; but she husband 's behest were to she in these , she early married day , quite imperative . the of the have beg she father to address he reply to she at , where , -- as she explain to he , -- they expect to find themselves within a fortnight from the date of she write . they have reach the lake about the end of , when the weather have still be fine , but they intend to pass the winter month of and within the warmth of the city . that intervene fortnight be to she a period of painful anticipation . she fear to see she father 's handwriting , feel almost sure that he would be bitterly angry with she . during this time she husband frequently speak to she about the letter , -- about she own letter and she father 's expect reply . it be necessary that she should learn she lesson , and she could only do so by have the subject of money make familiar to she ear . it be not a part of he plan to tell she anything of the means by which he hope to make himself a wealthy man . the less she know of that the better . but the fact that she father absolutely owed to he a large amount of money as she fortune could not be make too clear to she . he be very desirous to do this in such a manner as not to make she think that he be accuse she , -- or that he would accuse she if the money be not forthcome . but she must learn the fact , and must be imbue with the conviction that she husband would be the most ill - treat of man unless the money be forthcome . " I be a little nervous about it too , " say he , allud to the expect letter ; --" not so much as to the money itself , though that be important ; but as to he conduct . if he choose simply to ignore we after we marriage he will be behave very badly . " she have no answer to make to this . she could not defend she father , because by do so she would offend she husband . and yet she whole life - long trust in she father could not allow she to think it possible that he should behave ill to they . on they arrival at he go at once to the post-office , but there be as yet no letter . the fortnight , however , which have be name have only just run itself out . they go on from day to day inspect building , look at picture , make for themselves a taste in marble and bronze , visit the lovely villag which cluster on the hill round the city , -- do precisely in this respect as do all young married couple who devote a part of they honeymoon to ; -- but in all they little journeying and in all they work of pleasure the inky devil sit not only behind he but behind she also . the heavy care of life be already begin to work furrow on she face . she would already sit , knitt she brow , as she think of come trouble . would not she father certainly refuse ? and would not she husband then begin to be less loving and less gracious to herself ? every day for a week he call at the post-office when he go out with she , and still the letter do not come . " it can hardly be possible , " he say at last to she , " that he should decline to answer he own daughter 's letter . " " perhaps he be ill , " she reply . " if there be anything of that kind Everett would tell we . " " perhaps he have go back to ? " " of course he letter would go after he . I own it be very singular to I that he should not write . it look as though he be determined to cast you off from he altogether because you have marry against he wish . " " not that , ; -- do not say that ! " " well ; we shall see . " and on the next day they do see . he go to the post-office before breakfast , and on this day he return with a letter in he hand . she be sit waiting for he with a book in she lap , and see the letter at once . " be it from papa ? " she say . he nod he head as he hand it to she . " open it and read it , . I have get to be so nervous about it , that I can not do it . it seem to be so important . " " yes ; -- it be important , " he say with a grim smile , and then he open the letter . she watch he face closely as he read it , and at first she could tell nothing from it . then , in that moment , it first occur to she that he
he have a wonderful command of he feature . all this , however , last but half a minute . then he chuck the letter , lightly , in among the tea-cup , and come to she take she closely in he arm and almost hurt she by the violence of he repeat kiss . " have he write kindly ? " she say , as soon as she could find she breath to speak . " by , he be a brick after all . I own I do not think it . my darling , how much I owe you for all the trouble I have give you . " " oh , ! if he have be good to you I shall be so happy . " " he have be awfully good . , ha , ha ! " and then he begin walk about the room as he laugh in a unnatural way . " upon my word it be a pity we do not say four thousand , or five . think of he take I just at my word . it be a great deal better than I expect ; that be all I can say . and at the present moment it be of the utmost importance to I . " all this do not take above a minute or two , but during that minute or two she have be so bewilder by he manner as almost to fancy that the expression of he delight have be ironical . he have be so unlike himself as she have know he that she almost doubt the reality of he joy . but when she take the letter and read it , she find that he joy be true enough . the letter be very short , and be as follow :-- my , what you have say under you husband 's instruction about money , I find upon consideration to be fair enough . I think he should have speak to I before he marriage ; but then again perhaps I ought to have speak to he . as it be , I be willing to give he the sum he require , and I will pay L3000 to he account , if he would tell I where he would have it lod . then I shall think I have do my duty by he . what I shall do with the remainder of any money that I may have , I do not think he be entitle to ask . be well again , and as idle as ever . you aunt be make a fool of herself at . I have hear nothing from . everything be very quiet and lonely here . you affectionate father , . . as he have dine at the every day since he daughter have leave he , and have play on a average a dozen rubber of whist dailly , he be not justifi in complain of the loneliness of . the letter seem to herself to be very cold , and have not she husband rejoice over it so warmly she would have consider it to be unsatisfactory . no doubt the would be give ; but that , as far as she could understand she father 's word , be to be the whole of she fortune . she have never know anything of she father 's affair or of he intention , but she have certainly suppose that she fortune would be very much more than this . she have learn in some indirect way that a large sum of money would have go with she hand to , could she have bring herself to marry that suitor favour by she family . and now , have learn , as she have learn , that money be of vital importance to she husband , she be dismay at what see to she to be parental parsimony . but he be overjoyed , -- so much so that for a while he lose that restraint over himself which be habitual to he . he eat he breakfast in a state of exultation , and talk , -- not allud specially to this L3000 , -- as though he have the command of almost unlimited means . he order a carriage and drive she out , and buy present for she ,-- thing as to which they have both before decide that they should not be buy because of the expense . " pray do not spend you money for I , " she say to he . " it be nice to have you give I thing , but it would be nicer to I even than that to think that I could save you expense . " but he be not in a mood to be deny . " you do not understand , " he say . " I do not want to be save from little extravagance of this sort . Ow to circumstance , you father 's money be at this moment of importance to I ; -- but he have answer to the whip and the money be there , and that trouble be over . we can enjoy ourselves now . other trouble will spre up , no doubt , before long . " she do not quite like be tell that she father have " answer to the whip , " -- but she be willing to believe that it be a phrase common among man to which it would be prudish to make objection . there be , also , something in she husband 's elation which be distasteful to she . could it be that reverse of fortune with reference to moderate sum of money , such as this which be now come into he hand , would always affect he in the same way ? be it not almost unmanly , or
or at any rate be it not undignified ? and yet she try to make the best of it , and lent herself to he holiday mood as well as she be able . " shall I write and thank papa ? " she say that even . " I have be think of that , " he say . " you can write if you like , and of course you will . but I also will write , and have better do so a post or two before you . as he have come round I suppose I ought to show myself civil . what he say about the rest of he money be of course absurd . I shall ask he nothing about it , but no doubt after a bit he will make permanent arrangement . " everything in the business wound she more or less . she now perceive that he regard this L3000 only as the first instalment of what he might get , and that he joy be due simply to this temporary success . and then he call she father absurd to she face . for a moment she think that she would defend she father ; but she could not as yet bring herself to question she husband 's word even on such a subject as that . he do write to , but in do so he altogether laid aside that flighty manner which for a while have annoye she . he thoroughly understand that the wording of the letter might be very important to he , and he take much trouble with it . it must be now the great work of he life to ingratiate himself with this old man , so that , at any rate at the old man 's death , he might possess at least half of the old man 's money . he must take care that there should be no division between he wife and she father of such a nature as to make the father think that he son ought to enjoy any special privilege of primogeniture or of male inheritance . and if it could be so manage that the daughter should , before the old man 's death , become he favourite child , that also would be well . he be therefore very careful about the letter , which be as follow :-- my , I can not let you letter to Emily pass without thank you myself for the very liberal response make by you to what be of course a request from myself . let I in the first place assure you that have you , before we marriage , make any inquiry about my money affair , I would have tell you everything with accuracy ; but as you do not do so I think that I should seem to intrude upon you , if I introduce the subject . it be too long for a letter , but whenever you may like to allude to it , you will find that I will be quite open with you . I be engage in business which often require the use of a considerable amount of capital . it have so happen that even since we be marry the immediate use of a sum of money become essential to I to save I from sacrifice a cargo of guano which will be of greatly increase value in three month ' time , but which otherwise must have go for what it would now fetch . you kindness will see I through that difficulty . of course there be something precarious in such a business as mine ; -- but I be endeavour to make it less so from day to day , and hope very shortly to bring it into that humdrum groove which best befit a married man . should I ask further assistance from you in do this , perhaps you will not refuse it if I can succeed in make the matter clear to you . as it be I thank you sincerely for what you have do . I will ask you to pay the you have so kindly promise , to my account at Messrs . and , . they be not regular banker , but I have a account there . we be wander about and enjoy ourselves mightily in the properly romantic manner . Emily sometimes seem to think that she would like to give up business , and , and all sublunary trouble , in order that she might settle herself for life under a italian sky . but the idea do not generally remain with she very long . already she be begin to show symptom of home sickness in regard to . yours always most faithfully , . to this letter receive no reply ; -- nor do he expect one . between and she father a few letter pass , not very long ; nor , as regard those from , be they very interesting . in none of they , however , be there any mention of money . but early in receive a most pressing , -- we might almost say a agonising letter from he friend Parker . the gist of the letter be to make understand that must at once sell certain interests in a come cargo of guano , -- at whatever sacrifice ,-- unless he could be certified as to that money which must be pay in , and which he , , must pay , should Ferdinand be at that moment unable to meet he bond . the answer send to shall be give to the reader . my , and Absurdly impatient friend , you be always like a toad under a harrow , and that without the slightest cause . I have money lie at 's more than double enough for the bill . why can not
not you trust a man ? if you will not trust I in say so , you can go to and ask he . but , remember , I shall be very much annoyed if you do so , -- and that such a inquiry can not but be injuriious to I . if , however , you will not believe I , you can go and ask . at any rate , do not meddle with the guano . we should lose over L1000 each of we , if you be to do so . by , a man should neither marry , nor leave for a day , if he have to do with a fellow so nervous as you be . as it be I think I shall be back a week or two before my time be properly up , lest you and one or two other should think that I have levant altogether . I have no hesitation in say that more fortune be lose in business by trembling cowardice than by any amount of imprudence or extravagance . my hair stand on end when you talk of part with guano in because there be bill which have to be meet in . Pluck up you heart , man , and look around , and see what be do by man with good courage . yours always , . these be the only communications between we married couple and they friend at home with which I need trouble my reader . need I tell any further tale of they honeymoon . if the time be not one of complete and unalloyed joy to , -- and we must fear that it be not ,-- it be to be remember that but very little complete and unalloyed joy be allow to sojourner in this vale of tear , even though they have be but two month marry . in the first week in they appear in the mansion , and take possession of she new home with a heart as full of love for she husband as it have be when she walk out of the church in , though it may be that some of she sweetest illusion have already be dispell . the 's we must go back for a while to and see the guest whom the have collect there for she festivity . the hospitality of the 's house have be maintain almost throughout the autumn . just at the end of they go to , for what the call a quiet month , -- which , however , at the 's urgent request become six week . but even here the house be full all the time , though from deficiency of bedroom the guest be very much less numerous . but at matching the Duchess have be uneasy and almost cross . . have go with she husband to , and she have teach herself to fancy that she could not live without . and she husband have insist upon have round he politician of he own sort , man who really prefer work to archery , or even to hunt , and who discuss the evils of direct taxation absolutely in the drawing - room . the Duchess be assure that the country could not be govern by the support of such man as these , and be very glad to get back to , -- whither also come with he wife , and the people , and , and , the of the , with and , and and , -- be the only representative of the other or coalesced party . and be there , have be urgent with the Duchess , -- and have fully explained to he friend that he have acced to the wish of he hostess only on the assurance of she that the house would not be again trouble by the presence of . such assurance be common between the two friend , but be innocent , as , of course , neither believe the other . and be again there , -- with many other . the melancholy poverty of have captivate the . " she shall come and live here , if you like , " the Duchess have say in answer to a request from she husband on he new friend 's behalf ,--" I 've no doubt she will be willing . " the place be not crowd as it have be before ; but still about thirty guest sit down to dinner dailly , and , , and be all keep hard at work . be we Duchess idle . she be always make up the party , -- mean the coalition , -- do something to strengthen the buttress , write little letter to little people , who , little as they be , might become big by amalgamation . " one have always to be bind one 's fagot , " she say to , have read she not altogether in vain . " where should we have be without you ? " she have whisper to when that be leave at the termination of he second visit . she have particularly dislike , and be aware that she husband have on this occasion be hardly as gracious as he should have be , in true policy , to so powerful a colleague . she husband have be peculiarly shy of since the day on which they have walk together in the park , -- and , consequently , the have whisper to he . " do not bind you fagot too conspicuously , " . have say to she . then the Duchess have fall to a seat almost exhaust by labour , mingl with regret , and by the doubts which from time to time pervad even she audacious spirit . " I be not a god , " she say , " or
or a , or a italian with a long name begin with , that I should be able to do these thing without ever make a mistake . and yet they must be done . and as for he , -- he do not help I in the least . he wander about among the clouds of the multiplication table , and think that a majority will drop into he mouth because he do not shut it . can you tie the fagot any better ? " " I think I would leave it untied , " say . " you would not do anything of the kind . you would be just as fussy as I be . " and thus the game be carry on at from week to week . " but you will not leave he ? " this be say to by he wife a day or two before , and the question be intend to ask whether think of give up he place . " not if I can help it . " " you like the work . " " that have but little to do with the question , unfortunately . I certainly like have something to do . I like earn money . " " I do not know why you like that especially , " say the wife , laugh . " I do at any rate , -- and , in a certain sense , I like authority . but in serve with the I find a lack of that sympathy which one should have with one 's chief . he would never say a word to I unless I speak to he . and when I do speak , though he be studiously civil , -- much too courteous , -- I know that he be bore . he have nothing to say to I about the country . when he have anything to communicate , he prefer to write a minute for , who then write to , -- and so it reach I . " " do not it do as well ? " " it may do with I . there be reason which bind I to he , which will not bind other man . men do not talk to I about it , because they know that I be bound to he through you . but I be aware of the feeling which exist . you can not be really loyal to a king if you never see he , -- if he be always lock up in some almost divine recess . " " a king may make himself too common , Phineas . " " no doubt . a king have to know where to draw the line . but the draw no intentional line at all . he be not by nature gregarious or communicative , and be therefore hardly fitte to be the head of a ministry . " " it will break she heart if anything go wrong . " " she ought to remember that seldom live very long , " say . " but she will recover even if she do break she heart . she be too full of vitality to be much repress by any calamity . have you hear what be to be do about ? " " the want to get it for this man , . " " but it have not be promise yet ? " " the seat be not vacant , " say , " and I do not know when it will be vacant . I think there be a hitch about it , -- and I think the Duchess be go to be make very angry . " throughout the autumn the have be a unhappy man . while the absolute work of the have last he have find something to conseal he ; but now , though he be surround by private secretaries , and though dispatch - boxe go and come twice a day , though there be dozen of letter as to which he have to give some instruction , -- yet , there be in truth nothing for he to do . it seem to he that all the real work of the government have be filch from he by he colleague , and that he be stick up in pretended authority , -- a kind of wooden , from whom no real ministration be demand . he first fear have be that he be himself unfit ; -- but now he be uneasy , fear that other think he to be unfit . there be with he budget , and with he three or four dozen half rebellious colony , and Drotch with the house to lead and a ship to build , and with he scheme of municipal Home rule for , and with a codified , -- all full of work , all with something special to be do . but for he , -- he have to arrange who should attend the , what ribbon should be give away , and what middle - aged young man should move the address . he sigh as he think of those happy day in which he use to fear that he mind and body would both give way under the pressure of decimal coinage . but have read the 's character rightly in say that he be neither gregarious nor communicative , and therefore but little fit to rule . he have think that it be so himself , and now from day to day he be become more assured of he own deficiency . he could not throw himself into cordial relation with the , or even with the . but , though he have never wish to be put into he present high office , now that he be there he dread the sense of failure which would follow
follow he descent from it . it be this feeling rather than genuine ambition , rather than the love of power or patronage or pay , which induce man to cling to place . the absence of real work , and the quantity of mock work , both alike make the life wearisome to he ; but he could not endure the idea that it should be write in history that he have allow himself to be make a faineant , and then have fail even in that . history would forget what he have do as a work in record the feebleness of the which would bear he name . the one man with whom he could talk freely , and from whom he could take advice , be now with he , here at he Castle . he be shy at first even with the of , but that shyness he could generally overcome , after a few word . but though he be always sure of he old friend 's sympathy and of he old friend 's wisdom , yet he doubte he old friend 's capacity to understand himself . the young feel the old to be thicker - skinned than himself and therefore unable to appreciate the thorn which so sorely worry he own flesh . " they talk to I about a policy , " say the host . they be closet at this time in the 's own sanctum , and there yet remain a hour before they need dress for dinner . " who talk about a policy ? " " especially . " for the of have never forget the arrogance of that advice give in the park . " be of course entitle to speak , though I do not know that he be likely to say anything very well worth the hearing . what be he special policy ? " " if he have any , of course , I would hear he . it be not that he want any special thing to be do , but he think that I should get up some special thing in order that parliament may be satisfied . " " if you want to create a majority that might be true . just listen to he and have do with it . " " I can not go on in that way . I can not submit to what amount to complaint from the gentleman who be act with I . would they submit long to my silence . I be begin to feel that I have be wrong . " " I do not think you have be wrong at all . " " a man be wrong if he attempt to carry a weight too great for he strength . " " a certain nervous sensitiveness , from which you should free yourself as from a disease , be you only source of weakness . think about you business as a shoemaker think of he . do you best , and then let you customer judge for themselves . Caveat emptor . a man should never endeaavor to price himself , but should accept the price which other put on he , -- only be careful that he should learn what that price be . you policy should be to keep you government together by a strong majority . after all , the making of new law be too often but a unfortunate necessity lay on we by the impatience of the people . a lengthen period of quiet and therefore good government with a minimum of new law would be the greatest benefin the country could receive . when I recommend you to comply with the 's behest I do so because I think that you might inaugurate such a period more certainly than any other one man . " this old be quite content with a state of thing such as he describe . he have be a for more than half he life . he like be a . he think it well for the country generally that he party should be in power , -- and if not he party in its entirety , then as much of he party as might be possible . he do not expect to be write of as a or a , but he think that memoirs would speak of he as a useful nobleman , -- and he be contente . he be not only not ambitious himself , but the effervescence and general turbulence of ambition in other man be distasteful to he . be second nature to he , and the power of submit to defeat without either shame or sorrow have become perfect with he by long practice . he would have make he brother such as he be himself , -- have not he brother be so lamentably thin - skinned . " I suppose we must try it for another session ? " say the of with a lachrymose voice . " of course we must , -- and for other after that , I both hope and trust , " say the of , get up . " if I do not go up - stair I shall be late , and then she will look at I with unforgiving eye . " on the follow day after lunch the take a walk with . he have fall into a habit of walking with almost every day of he life , till the people in the begin to believe that be the mistress of some deep policy of she own . for there be many there who do in truth think that statecraft could never be absent from a minister 's mind , day or night . but in truth chiefly make herself agreeable to the by never make any most distant allusion to public affair . it might be doubt whether she
she even know that the man who pay she so much honou be the head of the british government as well as the of . she be a tall , thin , shrivell - up old woman , -- not very old , fifty perhaps , but look at least ten year more ,-- very melancholy , and sometimes very cross . she have be notably religious , but that be gradually wear off as she advanc in year . the rigid strictness of Sabbatarian practice require the full energy of middle life . she have be leave entirely alone in the world , with a very small income , and not many friend who be in any way interested in she existence . but she know herself to be , and feel that the possession of that name ought to be more to she than money and friend , or even than brothers and sister . " the weather be not frightene you , " say the . snow have fall , and the path , even where they have be sweep , be wet and sloppy . " never frighten I , you . I always have thick boot ;-- I be very particular about that ; -- and cork soles . " " cork sole be admirable . " " I think I owe my life to cork soles , " say enthusiastically . " there be a man name in who make they . do you ever try he for boot ? " " I do not think I ever do , " say the . " then you have better . he be very good and very cheap too . those tradesman never think they can charge you enough . I find I can wear 's boot the whole winter through and then have they resol . I do not suppose you ever think of such thing ? " " I like to have my foot dry . " " I have get to calculate what they cost . " they then pass major , who be come and go between the stable and the house , and who take off he hat and who salute the host and he companion with perhaps more flow courtesy than be necessary . " I never have find out what that gentleman 's name be yet , " say . " Pountney , I think . I believe they call he major Pountney . " " oh , ! there be Pountney in . perhaps he be one of they ? " " I do not know where he come from , " say the , -- " nor , to tell the truth , where he go to . " look up at he with a interested air . " he seem to be one of those idle man who get into people 's house heaven know why , and never do anything . " " I suppose you ask he ? " say . " the do , I dare say . " " how odd it would be if she be to suppose that you have ask he . " " the Duchess , no doubt , know all about it . " then there be a little pause . " she be obliged to have all sort of people , " say the apologetically . " I suppose so , -- when you have so many come and go . I be sorry to say that my time be up to - morrow , so that I shall make way for somebody else . " " I hope you will not think of go , ,-- unless you be engage elsewhere . we be delighted to have you . " " the have be very kind , but --" " the , I fear , be almost too much engage to see as much of she guest individually as she ought to do . to I you be here be a great pleasure . " " you be too good to I ,-- much too good . but I shall have stay out my time , and I think , , I will go to - morrow . I be very methodical , you know , and always act by rule . I have walk my two mile now , and I will go in . if you do want boot with cork soles mind you go to 's . dear I ; there be that major again . that be four time he have be up and down that path since we have be walk here . " go in , and the turn back , think of he friend and perhaps think of the cork soles of which she have to be so careful and which be so important to she comfort . it could not be that he fancie to be clever , nor can we imagine that she conversation satisfy any of those want to which he and all of we be subject . but nevertheless he like , and be never bore by she . she be natural , and she want nothing from he . when she talk about cork soles she mean cork soles . and then she do not tread on any of he numerous corn . as he walk on he determine that he would induce he wife to persuade to stay a little longer at the Castle . in meditating upon this he make another turn in the grounds , and again come upon major as that gentleman be return from the stable . " a very cold afternoon , " he say , feel it to be ungracious to pass one of he own guest in he own grounds without a word of salutation . " very cold indeed , you , -- very cold . " the have intend to pass on ,
, but the major manage to stop he by standing in the pathway . the major do not in the least know he man . he have hear that the be shy , and therefore think that he be timid . he have not hithertoo be speak to by the , -- a condition of thing which he attribute to the 's shyness and timidity . but , with much thought on the subject , he have resolve that he would have a few word with he host , and have therefore pass backward and forward between the house and the stable rather frequently . " very cold , indeed , but yet we have have beautiful weather . I do not know when I have enjoy myself so much altogether as I have at . " the bow , and make a little but a vain effort to get on . " a splendid pile ! " say the major , stretch he hand gracefully towards the building . " it be a big house , " say the . " a noble mansion ; --perhaps the noblest mansion in the three kingdom , " say major . " I have see a great many of the best country residence in , but nothing that at all equals . " then the make a little effort at progression , but be still stop by the daring major . " by - the - by , you , if you have a few minute to spare , -- just half a minute , -- I wish you would allow I to say something . " the assume a look of disturbance , but he bow and walk on , allow the major to walk by he side . " I have the greatest possible desire , my , to enter public life . " " I think you be already in the army , " say the . " so I be ;-- be on 's staff in for two year , and have see as much of what I call home service as any man go . one of my chief object be to take up the army . " " it seem that you have take it up . " " I mean in parliament , you . I be very fairly off as regards private mean , and would stand all the racket of the expense of a contest myself , -- if there be one . but the difficulty be to get a seat , and , of course , if it can be privately managed , it be very comfortable . " the look at he again , -- this time without bowing . but the major , who be not observant , rush on to he destruction . " we all know that will soon be vacant . let I assure you that if it might be consistent with you 's plan in other respects to turn you kind countenance towards I , you would find that you would have a supporter than whom none would be more staunch , and perhaps I may say , one who in the house would not be the least useful ! " that portion of the major 's speech which refer to the 's kind countenance have be learn by heart , and be throw trippingly off the tongue with a kind of twang . the major have perceive that he have not be at once interrupt when he begin to open the budget of he political aspiration , and have allow himself to indulge in pleasing augury . " nothing ask and nothing have , " have be adopt as the motto of he life , and more than once he have express to he conviction that , -- " by , if you have only cheek enough , there be nothing you can not get . " on this emergency the major certainly be not deficient in cheek . " if I might be allow to consider myself you 's candidate , I should indeed be a happy man , " say the major . " I think , sir , " say the , " that you proposition be the most unbecoming and the most impertinent that ever be address to I . " the major 's mouth fall , and he star with all he eye as he look up into the 's face . " good afternoon , " say the , turn quickly round and walk away . the major stood for a while transfix to the place , and , cold as be the weather , be bath in perspiration . a keen sense of have " put he foot into it " almost crush he for a time . then he assure himself that , after all , the " could not eat he , " and with that consolatory reflection he creep back to the house and up to he own room . to put the man down have of course be a easy task to the , but he be not satisfied with that . to the major it seem that the have pass on with easy indifference ; -- but in truth he be very far from be easy . the man 's insolent request have wound he at many point . it be grievous to he that he should have as a guest in he own house a man whom he have be force to insult . it be grievous to he that he himself should not have be hold in personal respect high enough to protect he from such a insult . it be grievous to he that he should be openly address ,-- address by a absolute stranger , -- as a borough - mongering lord , who would not scruple to give away a seat in parliament as seat be give away in
in former day . and it be especially grievous to he that all these misfortune should have come upon he as a part of the result of he wife 's manner of exercise he hospitality . if this be to be he certainly would not be much longer ! have any aspirant to political life ever da so to address , or , or , the old Premier whom he remember ? he think not . they have manage differently . they have be able to defend themselves from such attack by personal dignity . and would it have be possible that any man should have da so to speak to he uncle , the late ? he think not . as he shut himself up in he own room he grieve inwardly with a deep grief . after a while he walk off to he wife 's room , still pertur in spirit . the perturbation have indeed increase from minute to minute . he would rather give up politics altogether and shut himself up in absolute seclusion than find himself subject to the insolence of any Pountney that might address he . with he wife he find . now for this lady personally he entertain what for he be a warm regard . in various matter of much importance he and she have be bring together , and she have , to he thinking , invariably behave well . and a intimacy have be establish which have enable he to be at ease with she ,-- so that she presence be often a comfort to he . but at the present moment he have not wish to find any one with he wife , and feel that she be in he way . " perhaps I be disturb you , " he say in a tone of voice that be solemn and almost funereal . " not at all , " say the Duchess , who be in high spirit . " I want to get you promise now about . do not mind she . of course she know everything . " to be tell that any body know everything be another shock to he . " I have just get a letter from . " could it be right that he wife should be correspond on such a subject with a person so little know as this ? " may I tell he that he shall have you interest when the seat be vacant ? " " certainly not , " say the , with a scowl that be terrible even to he wife . " I wish to speak to you , but I wish to speak to you alone . " " I beg a thousand pardon , " say , prepare to go . " do not stir , , " say the Duchess ; " he be go to be . " " if . will allow I , with every feeling of the most perfect respect and sincerest regard , to ask she to leave I with you for a few minute , I shall be oblige . and if , with she usual hearty kindness , she will pardon my abruptness -- " then he could not go on , he emotion be too great ; but he put out he hand , and take hers raise it to he lip and kiss it . the moment have become too solemn for any further hesitation as to the lady 's go . the Duchess for a moment be struck dumb , and , of course , leave the room . " in the name of heaven , , what be the matter ? " " who be major ? " " who be major ! how on earth should I know ? he be -- Major . he be about everywhere . " " do not let he be ask into any house of mine again . but that be a trifle . " " anything about major must , I should think , be a trifle . have tiding come that the heaven be go to fall ? nothing short of that could make you so solemn . " " in the first place , , let I ask you not to speak to I again about the seat for . I be not at present prepare to argue the matter with you , but I have resolve that I will know nothing about the election . as soon as the seat be vacant , if it should be vacate , I shall take care that my determination be know in . " " why should you abandon you privileges in that way ? it be sheer weakness . " " the interference of any peer be unconstitutional . " " there be , " say the energetically , " where the of return the member regularly , in spite of all they Reform bill ; and , and ; -- and look at with a whole county in he pocket , not to speak of two borough ! what nonsense , ! anything be constitutional , or anything be unconstitutional , just as you choose to look at it . " it be clear that the Duchess have really study the subject carefully . " very well , my dear , let it be nonsense . I only beg to assure you that it be my intention , and I request you to act accordingly . and there be another thing I have to say to you . I shall be sorry to interfere in any way with the pleasure which you may derive from society , but as long as I be burdene with the office which have be impos upon I , I will not again entertain any guest in my own house . " " ! " " you can not turn the people out who
who be here now ; but I beg that they may be allow to go as the time come , and that they place may not be fill by further invitation . " " but further invitation have go out ever so long ago , and have be accept . you must be ill , my dear . " " Ill at ease , -- yes . at any rate let none other be send out . " then he remembe a kindly purpose which he have form early in the day , and fall back upon that . " I should , however , be glad if you would ask to remain here . " the star at he , really think now that something be amiss with he . " the whole thing be a failure and I will have no more of it . it be degrad I . " then without allow she a moment in which to answer he , he march back to he own room . but even here he spirit be not as yet at rest . that major must not go unpunished . though he hate all fuss and noise he must do something . so he write as follow to the major :-- the of trust that major Pountney will not find it inconvenient to leave shortly . should major wish to remain at the Castle over the night , the of hope that he will not object to be serve with he dinner and with he breakfast in he own room . a carriage and horse will be ready for 's use , to take he to , as soon as major may express to the servants he wish to that effect . , -- , 18-- . this note the send by the hand of he own servant , have say enough to the man as to the carriage and the possible dinner in the major 's bedroom , to make the man understand almost exactly what have occur . a note from the major be bring to the while he be dress . the have glance at the note throw it into the fire ; and the major that even eat he dinner at the at . the Duchess be Much it be hardly possible that one man should turn another out of he house without many people know it ; and when the one person be a and the other such a major as major , the affair be apt to be talk about very widely . the of course never open he mouth on the subject , except in answer to question from the Duchess ; but all the servants know it . " tell I that you have send that wretch man out of the house with a flea in he ear , " say the Duchess . " I send he out of the house , certainly . " " he be hardly worth you anger . " " he be not at all worth my anger ; -- but I could not sit down to dinner with a man who have insult I . " " what do he say , ? I know it be something about . " to this question the give no answer , but in respect to he be stern as adamant . two day after the departure of the major it be know to generally that in the event of there be a election the 's agent would not as usual suggest a nominee . there be a paragraph on the subject in the paper , and another in the " even . " the of , -- that he might show he respect to the law , not only as to the letter of the law , but as to the spirit also , -- have make it know to he tenantry in and generally that he would in no way influence they choice of a candidate in the event of a election . but these newspaper do not say a word about major . the club of course know all about it , and no man at any club ever know more than . after he meet he friend the major on the step of the new military club , the active service , which be declare by many man in the army to have leave all the other military club " absolutely nowhere . " " , ! " he say , " you seem to have make a mess of it at last down at the 's . " " I wonder what you know about it . " " you have to come away pretty quick , I take it . " " of course I come away pretty quick . " so much as that the major be aware must be know . there be detail which he could deny safely , as it would be impossible that they should be support by evidence , but there be matter which must be admit . " I will bet a fiver that beyond that you know nothing about it . " " the ordere you off , I take it . " " after a fashion he do . there be circumstance in which a man can not help himself . " this be diplomatical , because it leave the to suppose that the be the man who could not help himself . " of course I be not there , " say , " and I can not absolutely know , but I suppose you have be interfere with the Duchess about . will bear a great deal , -- but since she have take up politics , by , you have better not touch she there . " at last it come to be believe that the major have be turn out by the order of the Duchess , because
because he have venture to put himself forward as a opponent to , and the major felt himself really grateful to he friend the for this arrangement of the story . and there come at last to be mix up with the story some half - understood innuendue that the major 's jealousy against have be of a double nature , -- in reference both to the Duchess and the borough , -- so that he escape from much of that disgrace which naturally attach itself to a man who have be kick out of another man 's house . there be a mystery ; -- and when there be a mystery a man should never be condemn . where there be a woman in the case a man can not be expect to tell the truth . as for call out or in any way punish the , that of course be out of the question . and so it go on till at last the major be almost proud of what he have do , and talk about it willingly with mysterious hint , in which practice make he perfect . but with the Duchess the affair be very serious , so much so that she be drive to call in advice , -- not only from she constant friend , , but afterwards from , from , and lastly even from the of , to whom she be hardly willing to subject herself , the be the special friend of she husband . but the matter become so important to she that she be unable to trifle with it . at the expulsion of major soon become a forgotten affair . when the Duchess learn the truth she quite approve of the expulsion , only hint to that the act of kick our should have be more absolutely practical . and the loss of , though it hurt she sorely , could be endure . she must write to she friend , when the time should come , excuse herself as best she might , and must lose the exquisite delight of make a member of parliament out of she own hand . the newspaper , however , have take that matter up in the proper spirit , and political capital might to some extent be make of it . the loss of , though it bruise , break no bone . but the have again express himself with unusual sternness respect she ducal hospitality , and have reiterat the declaration of he intention to live out the remainder of he period of office in republican simplicity . " we have try it and it have fail , and let there be a end of it , " he say to she . simple and direct disobedience to such a order be as little in she way as simple or direct obedience . she know she husband well , and know how he could be manage and how he could not be manage . when he declare that there should be a " end of it , " -- mean a end of the very system by which she hope to perpetuate he power , -- she do not dare to argue with he . and yet he be so wrong ! the trial have be no failure . the thing have be do and well do , and have succeed . be failure to be presume because one impertinent puppy have find he way into the house ? and then to abandon the system at once , whether it have fail or whether it have succeed , would be to call the attention of all the world to a acknowledge failure , -- to a failure so disreputable that its acknowledgment must lead to the loss of everything ! it be know now , -- so argue the Duchess to herself , -- that she have devote herself to the work of cementing and consolidat the by the graceful hospitality which the wealth of herself and she husband enable she to dispense . she have make herself a by the manner in which she open she saloon , she banquet hall , and she garden . it have never be do before , and now it have be well do . there have be no failure . and yet everything be to be break down because he nerve have receive a shock ! " let it die out , " . have say . " the people will come here and will go away , and then , when you be up in , you will soon fall into you old way . " but this do not suit the new ambition of the Duchess . she have so feed she mind with daring hope that she could not bear that it should " die out . " she have arrange a course of thing in she own mind by which she should come to be know as the great 's wife ; and she have , perhaps unconsciously , apply the epithet more to herself than to she husband . she , too , wish to be write of in memoir , and to make a niche for herself in history . and now she be tell that she be to let it " die out ! " " I suppose he be a little bilious , " have say . " do not you think he will forget all about it when he get up to ? " the Duchess be sure that she husband would not forget anything . he never do forget anything . " I want he to be tell , " say the Duchess , " that everybody think that he be do very well . I do not mean about politics exactly , but as to keep the party together . do not you think that we have succeed ?
? " think that upon the whole they have succeed ; but suggest at the same time that there be seed of weakness . " and be not sound , you know , " say . " he can not make they sounder by shutt himself up like a hermit , " say the Duchess . , who have peculiar privileges of he own , promise that if he could by any means make a occasion , he would let the know that they side of the be more than contente with the way in which he do he work . " you do not think we have make a mess of it ? " she say to , ask he a question . " I do not think that the have make a mess of it , -- or you , " say , who have come to love the Duchess because he wife love she . " but it will not go on for ever , . " " you know what I have do , " say the Duchess , who take it for grant that kknow all that he wife know . " have it answer ? " be silent for a moment . " of course you will tell I the truth . you will not be so bad as to flatter I now that I be so much in earnest . " " I almost think , " say , " that the time have go by for what one may call drawing - room influence . they use to be very great . use they extensively , though by no means as you have do . but the spirit of the world have change since then . " " the spirit of the world never change , " say the Duchess , in she soreness . but she strongest dependence be on the old . the party at the be almost break up when she consult he . she have be so far true to she husband as not to ask another guest to the house since he command ; -- but they who have be ask before come and go as have be arrange . then , when the place be nearly empty , and when and and be wonder among themselves at this general collapse , she ask she husband 's leave to invite they old friend again for a day or two . " I do so want to see he , and I think he will come , " say the Duchess . the give he permission with a ready smile , -- not because the propose visitor be he own confidential friend , but because it suit he spirit to grant such a request as to any one after the order that he have give . have she name major Pountney , I think he would have smile and acced . the come , and to he she pour out she whole soul . " it have be for he and for he honour that I have do it ; -- that man and woman might know how really gracious he be , and how good . of course , there have be money spend , but he can afford it without hurt the child . it have be so necessary that with a people should know each other ! there be some little absurd row here . a man who be a mere nobody , one of the travel butterfly man that fill up space and talk to girl , get hold of he and be impertinent . he be so thin - skinn that he could not shake the creature into the dust as you would have do . it annoye he , -- that , and , I think , see so many strange face , -- so that he come to I and declare , that as long as he remain in office he would not have another person in the house , either here or in . he mean it literally , and he mean I to understand it literally . I have to get special leave before I could ask so dear a old friend as you . " " I do not think he would object to I , " say the , laugh . " of course not . he be only too glad to think you would come . but he take the request as be quite the proper thing . it will kill I if this be to be carry out . after all that I have do , I could show myself nowhere . and it will be so injurious to he ! could not you tell he , ? no one else in the world can tell he but you . nothing unfair have be attempte . no job have be do . I have endeavoure to make he house pleasant to people , in order that they might look upon he with grace and favour . be that wrong ? be that unbecom a wife ? " the old patt she on the head as though she be a little girl , and be more comforting to she than she other counsellor . he would say nothing to she husband now ; -- but they must both be up in at the meeting of parliament , and then he would tell he friend that , in he opinion , no sudden change should be make . " this husband of yours be a very peculiar man , " he say , smile . " he honesty be not like the honesty of other man . it be more downright ; -- more absolutely honest ; less capable of bear even the shadow which the stain from another 's dishonesty might throw upon it . give he credit for all that , and remember that you can
can not find everything combine in the same person . he be very practical in some thing , but the question be , whether he be not too scrupulous to be practical in all thing . " at the close of the interview the kiss he and promise to be guide by he . the occurrence of the last few week have soften the Duchess much . the two candidate for on he arrival in find a letter wait for he from the Duchess . this come into he hand immediately on he reach the room in , and be of course the first object of he care . " that contain my fate , " he say to he wife , put he hand down upon the letter . he have talk to she much of the chance that have come in he way , and have show himself to be very ambitious of the honour offer to he . she of course have sympathise with he , and be willing to think all good thing both of the and of the , if they would between they put she husband into parliament . he pause a moment , still hold the letter under he hand . " you would hardly think that I should be such a coward that I do not like to open it , " he say . " you have get to do it . " " unless I make you do it for I , " he say , hold out the letter to she . " you will have to learn how weak I be . when I be really anxious I become like a child . " " I do not think you be ever weak , " she say , caresse he . " if there be a thing to be do you would do it at once . but I will open it if you like . " then he tore off the envelope with a air of comic importance and stand for a few minute while he read it . " what I first perceive be that there have be a row about it , " he say . " a row about it ! what sort of a row ? " " my dear friend the Duchess have not quite hit it off with my less dear friend the . " " she do not say so ? " " oh dear , no ! my friend the Duchess be much too discreet for that ; -- but I can see that it have be so . " " be you to be the new member ? if that be arrange I do not care a bit about the and . " " these thing do not settle themselves quite so easily as that . I be not to have the seat at any rate without fight for it . there be the letter . " the Duchess 's letter to she new adherent shall be give , but it must first be understood that many different idea have pass through the writer 's mind between the writing of the letter and the order give by the to he wife concern the borough . she of course become aware at once that must be inform that she could not do for he what she have suggest that she would do . but there be no necessity of write at the instant . have not yet vacate the seat , and be away on he travels . the month of be pass in comparative quiet at the Castle , and during that time it become known at that the election would be open . the would not even make a suggestion , and would neither express , nor feel , resentment should a member be return altogether hostile to he . by degree the Duchess accustom herself to this condition of affair , and as the consternation cause by she husband 's very imperious conduct wear off , she begin to ask herself whether even yet she need quite give up the game . she could not make a member of parliament altogether out of she own hand , as she have once fondly hope she might do ; but still she might do something . she would in nothing disobey she husband , but if be to stand for , it could not but be know in the borough that be she friend . therefore she write the follow letter :-- , -- , 18-- . my , I remember that you say that you would be home at this time , and therefore I write to you about the borough . thing be change since you go away , and , I fear , not change for you advantage . we understand that will apply for the Chiltern hundred at the end of , and that the election will take place in . no candidate will appear as favour from hence . we use to run a favourite , and we favourite would sometimes win ,-- would sometimes even have a walk over ; but those good time be gone . all the good time be go , I think . there be no reason that I know why you should not stand as well as any one else . you can be early in the field ; -- because it be only now know that there will be no interest . and I fancy it have already leak out that you would have be the favourite if there have be a favourite ; -- which might be beneficial . I need hardly say that I do not wish my name to be mention in the matter . sincerely yours , . , the ironmonger , would , I do not doubt , be proud to nominate you . " I do not understand much about it
it , " say Emily . " I dare say not . it be not mean that any novice should understand much about it . of course you will not mention she 's letter . " " certainly not . " " she intend to do the very best she can for I . I have no doubt that some understrapper from the Castle have have some communication with . the fact be that the will not be see in it , but that the Duchess do not mean that the borough shall quite slip through they finger . " " shall you try it ? " " if I do I must send a agent down to see on the sly , and the sooner I do so the better . I wonder what you father will say about it ? " " he be a old . " " but would he not like he son - in - law to be in parliament ? " " I do not know that he would care about it very much . he seem always to laugh at people who want to get into parliament . but if you have set you heart upon it , -- " " I have not set my heart on spend a great deal of money . when I first thought of the expense would have be almost nothing . it would have be a walk over , as the call it . but now there will certainly be a contest . " " give it up if you can not afford it . " " nothing venture nothing have . you do not think you father would help I in do it ? it would add almost as much to you position as to mine . " Emily shook she head . she have always hear she father ridicule the folly of man who spend more than they could afford in the vanity of write two letter after they name , and she now explain that it have always be so with he . " you would not mind ask he , " he say . " I will ask he if you wish it , certainly . " ever since they marriage he have be teach she ,--intentionally teach she , -- that it would be the duty of both of they to get all they could from she father . she have learn the lesson , but it have be very distasteful to she . it have not induce she to think ill of she husband . she be too much engross with he , too much in love with he for that . but she be begin to feel that the world in general be hard and greedy and uncomfortable . if it be proper that a father should give he daughter money when she be marry , why do not she father do so without wait to be ask ? and yet , if he be unwilling to do so , would it not be better to leave he to he pleasure in the matter ? but now she begin to perceive that she father be to be regard as a milch cow , and that she be to be the dairy - may . she husband at time would become terribly anxious on the subject . on receive the promise of he have be elate , but since that he have continually talk of what more she father ought to do for they . " perhaps I have better take the bull by the horn , " he say , " and do it myself . then I shall find out whether he really have we interest at heart , or whether he look on you as a stranger because you have go away from he . " " I do not think he will look upon I as a stranger . " " we will see , " say . it be not long before he make the experiment . he have call himself a coward as to the opening of the Duchess 's letter , but he have in truth always courage for peril of this nature . on the day of they arrival they dine with in , and certainly the old man have receive he daughter with great delight . he have be courteous also to , and Emily , amidst the pleasure of he welcome , have forget some of she trouble . the three be alone together , and when Emily have ask after she brother , have laugh and say that be a ass . " you have not quarrell with he ? " she say . he ridicule the idea of any quarrel , but again say that be a ass . after dinner and be leave together , as the old man , whether alone or in company , always sit for a hour sipping port wine after the manner of he forefather . have already determine that he would not let the opportunity escape he , and begin he attack at once . " I have be invite , sir , " he say with he sweetest smile , " to stand for . " " you too ! " say . but , though there be a certain amount of satire in the exclamation , it have be good - humoure satire . " yes , sir . we all get bit sooner or later , I suppose . " " I never be bit . " " you sagacity and philosophy have be the wonder of the world , sir . there can be no doubt that in my profession a seat in the house would be of the greatest possible advantage to I . it enable a man to do a great many thing which he could not touch without it . " " it may
may be so . I do not know anything about it . " " and then it be a great honour . " " that depend on how you get it , and how you use it ;-- very much also on whether you be fit for it . " " I shall get it honestly if I do get it . I hope I may use it well . and as for my fitness , I must leave that to be ascertain when I be there . I be sorry to say there will probably be a contest . " " I suppose so . a seat in parliament without a contest do not drop into every young man 's mouth . " " it very nearly drop into mine . " then he tell he father - in - law almost all the particular of the offer which have be make he , and of the manner in which the seat be now suggest to he . he somewhat hesitat in the use of the name of the Duchess , leave a impression on that the offer have in truth come from the . " should there be a contest , would you help I ? " " in what way ? I could not canvass at , if you mean that . " " I be not think of give you personal trouble . " " I do not know a soul in the place . I should not know that there be such a place except that it return a member of parliament . " " I mean with money , sir . " " to pay the election bill ! no ; certainly not . why wshould I ? " " for 's sake . " " I do not think it would do Emily any good , or you either . it would certainly do I none . it be a kind of luxury that a man should not attempt to enjoy unless he can afford it easily . " " a luxury ! " " yes , a luxury ; just as much as a four - in - hand coach or a yacht . man go into parliament because it give they fashion , position , and power . " " I should go to serve my country . " " success in you profession I think you say be you object . of course you must do as you please . if you ask I for advice , I advise you not to try it . but certainly I will not help you with money . that ass Everett be quarrell with I at this moment because I will not give he money to go and stand somewhere . " " not at ! " " I be sure I can not say . but do not let I do he a injury . to give he he due , he be more reasonable than you , and only want 's a promise from I that I will pay electioneer bill for he at the next general election . I have refuse he , -- though for reason which I need not mention I think he better fitte for parliament than you . I must certainly also refuse you . I can not imagine any circumstance which would induce I to pay a shilling towards get you into parliament . if you will not drink any more wine , we will join Emily upstairs . " this have be very plain speak , and by no means comfortable to . what of personal discourtesy there have be in the lawyer 's word , -- and they have not certainly be flattering , -- he could throw off from he as mean nothing . as he could not afford to quarrel with he father - in - law , he think it probable that he might have to bear a good deal of incivility from the old man . he be quite prepared to bear it as long as he could see a chance of a reward ; -- though , should there be no such chance , he would be ready to avenge it . but there have be a decision in the present refusal which make he quite sure that it would be vain to repeat he request . " I shall find out , sir , " he say , " whether it may probably be a costly affair , and if so I shall give it up . you be rather hard upon I as to my motive . " " I only repeat what you tell I yourself . " " I be quite sure of my own intentions , and know that I need not be asham of they . " " not if you have plenty of money . it all depend on that . if you have plenty of money , and you fancy go that way , it be all very well . come , we will go upstairs . " the next day he see , who welcome he back with warm affection . " he will do nothing for I ;-- nothing at all . I be almost begin to doubt whether he will ever speak to I again . " " Nonsense ! " " I tell you everything , you know , " say . " in I lose a little money at whist . they get plunge at the club , and I be in it . I have to tell he , of course . he keep I so short that I can not stand any blow without go to he like a school - boy . " " be it much ? " " no ; -- to he no more than half - a - cry to you . I have to ask he for a
a hundred and fifty . " " he refuse it ! " " no ; -- he do not do that . have it be ten time as much , if I owe the money , he would pay it . but he blow I up , and talk about gambling , -- and -- and -- " " I should have take that as a matter of course . " " but I be not a gambler . a man now and then may fall into a thing of that kind , and if he be decently well off and do not do it often , he can bear it . " " I think you quarrel have be altogether about parliament . " " oh no ! he have be always the same about that . he tell I that I be go head foremost to the dog , and I could not stand that . I should not be surprise if he have not lose more at card than I have during the last two year . " make a offer to act as go - between , to effect a reconciliation ; but decline the offer . " it would be make too much of a absurdity , " he say . " when he want to see I , I suppose he will send for I . " do dispatch a agent down to at , and the agent find that be a very discreet man . at first know little or nothing , -- see hardly to be aware that there be a member of parliament for , and declare himself to be indifferent as to the parliamentary character of the borough . but at last he melt a little , and by degree , over a glass of hot brandy - and - water with the agent at the , confess to a shade of a opinion that the return of for the borough would not be disagreeable to some person or person who do not live quite a hundred mile away . the instruction give by to he agent be of the most cautious kind . the agent be merly to feel the ground , make a few inquiry , and do nothing . he client do not intend to stand unless he could see the way to almost certain success with very little outlay . but the agent , perhaps like the job , do a little outstep he employer 's order . , when the frost of he first modesty have be thaw , introduce the agent to , the maker of cork soles , and and between they have soon decide that should be run for the borough as the " Castle " candidate . " the will not interfere , " say ; " and , of course , the 's man of business can not do anything openly ; -- but the 's people will know . " then tell the agent that there be already another candidate in the field , and in a whisper communicate the gentleman 's name . when the agent get back to , he give to understand that he must certainly put himself forward . the borough expect he . and consider themselves pledge to bring he forward and support he , -- on behalf of the Castle . be quite sure that the Castle influence be predominant . the 's name have never be mention at Silverbridge ,-- hardly even that of the Duchess . since the 's declaration " the " have take the part which the old use to play . the agent be quite sure that no one could get in for without have the Castle on he side . no doubt the 's declaration have have the ill effect of bring up a competitor , and thus of causing expense . that could not now be help . the agent be of opinion that the have have no alternative . the agent hint that time be change , and that though duke be still duke , and could still exercise ducal influence , they be drive by these change to act in a altered form . the proclamation have be especially necessary because the be . the agent do not think that should be in the least angry with the . everything would be do that the Castle could do , and would be no doubt return ,-- though , unfortunately , not without some expense . how much would it cost ? any accurate answer to such a question would be impossible , but probably about . it might be ;--could not possibly be above . wince as he hear these sum name , but he do not decline the contest . then the name of the opposition candidate be whisper to . it be ! start , and ask some question as to 's interest in the neighbourhood . the Fletcher be connect with the , and as soon as the declaration of the have be make know , the interest have arouse itself , and have invite that rise young barrister , , to stand for the borough on strictly conservative view . have acced , and a print declaration of he purpose and political principle have be just publish . " I have beaten he once , " say to himself , " and I think I can beat he again . " " yes ;-- a lie ! " " so you go to after all , " say to he ally , . " you could not believe I when I tell you the money be all right ! what a cur you be ! " " that be right ;-- abuse I . " " well , it be horrid . do not I tell you that it must necessarily injure I with the house ? how be two fellows
fellows to get on together unless they can put some trust in each other ? even if I do run you into a difficulty , do you really think I be ruffian enough to tell you that the money be there if it be untrue ? " look like a cur and feel like a cur , as he be be thus abuse . he be not angry with he friend for call he bad name , but only anxious to excuse himself . " I be out of sort , " he say , " and so d ---- would hippish I do not know what i be about . " " - and - soda ! " suggest . " perhaps a little of that ;-- though , by , it be not often I do that kind of thing . I do not know a fellow who work harder for he wife and child than I do . but when one see such thing all round one , -- a fellow utterly smashed here who have a string of hunter yesterday , and another fellow buy a house in and pull it down because it be not big enough , who be contente with a little box at last summer , one do not quite know how to keep one 's leg . " " if you want to learn a lesson look at the two man , and see where the difference lie . the one have have some heart about he , and the other have be a coward . " scratch he head , balance himself on the hind leg of he stool , and tacitly acknowledge the truth of all that he enterprising friend say to he . " have old come down well ? " at last he ask . " I have never say a word to old about money , " reply , -- " except as to the cost of this election I be tell you of . " " and he would not do anything in that ? " " he do not approve of the thing itself . I do not doubt but that the old gentleman and I shall understand each other before long . " " you have get the length of he foot . " " but I do not mean to drive he . I can get along without that . he be a old man , and he can not take he money along with he when he go the great journey . " " there be a brother , , -- be not there ? " " yes , -- there be a brother ; but have enough for two ; and if he be to put either out of he will it would not be my wife . old man do not like part with they money , and he be like other old man . if it be not so I should not bother myself come into the city at all . " " have he enough for that , ? " " I suppose he be worth a quarter of a million . " " by ! and where do he get it ? " " perseverance , sir . put by a shilling a day , and let it have its natural increase , and see what it will come to at the end of fifty year . I suppose old have be put by two or three thousand out of he professional income , at any rate for the last thirty year , and never for a moment forget its natural increase . that be one way to make a fortune . " " it be not rapid enough for you and I , . " " no . that be the old - fashioned way , and the most sure . but , as you say , it be not rapid enough ; and it rob a man of the power of enjoy he money when he have make it . but it be a very good thing to be closely connect with a man who have already do that kind of thing . there be no doubt about the money when it be there . it do not take to itself wing and fly away . " " but the man who have it stick to it uncommon hard . " " of course he do ; -- but he can not take it away with he . " " he can leave it to hospital , . that be the devil ! " " Sexty , my boy , I see you have take a outlook into human life which do you credit . yes , he can leave it to hospital . but why do he leave it to hospital ? " " something of be afraid about he soul , I suppose . " " no ; I do not believe in that . such a man as this , who have be hard - fist all he life , and who have have he eye thoroughly open , who have make he own money in the sharp intercourse of man to man , and who keep it to the last gasp , -- he do not believe that he will do he soul any good by give it to hospital when he can not keep it himself any longer . he mind have free itself from those cobweb long since . he give he money to hospital because the last pleasure of which he be capable be that of spit he relation . and it be a great pleasure to a old man , when he relation have be disgust with he for be old and love he money . I rather think I should do it myself . " " I would give myself a chance of go to heave
heave , I think , " say . " do not you know that man will rob and cheat on they death - bed , and say they prayer all the time ? will not leave he money to hospital if he be well handle by those about he . " " and you will handle he well ; -- eh , ? " " I will not quarrel with he , or tell he that he be a curmudgeon because he do not do all that I want he . he be over seventy , and he can not carry he money with he . " all this leave so vivid a impression of the wisdom of he friend on the mind of , that in spite of the harrow fear by which he have be torment on more than one occasion already , he allow himself to be persuade into certain fiscal arrangement , by which would find himself put at ease with reference to money at any rate for the next four month . he have at once tell himself that this election would cost he L1000 . when various sum be mention in reference to such a affair , safety could alone be find in take the outside sum ;-- perhaps might generally be more surely find by add fifty per cent. to that . he know that he be wrong about the election , but he assure himself that he have have no alternative . the misfortune have be that the should have make he proclamation about the borough immediately after the offer make by the Duchess . he have be almost force to send the agent down to inquire ; -- and the agent , when make he inquiry , have compromise he . he must go on with it now . perhaps some idea of the pleasantness of increase intimacy with the Duchess of encourage he in this way of think . the Duchess be up in town in , and leave a card in . on the very next day the card of the be leave for at the . go into the city every day , leave home at about eleven o'clock , and not return much before dinner . the young wife at first find that she hardly know what to do with she time . she aunt , , be distasteful to she . she have already learn from she husband that he have but little respect for . " you remember the sapphire brooch , " he have say once . " that be part of the price I have to pay for be allow to approach you . " he be sit at the time with he arm round she waist , look out on beautiful scenery and talking of he old difficulty . she could not find it in she heart to be angry with he , but the idea bring to she mind be disagreeable to she . and she be thoroughly angry with . of course in these day Mrs . come to see she , and of course when she be up in , she go to the house round the corner , -- but there be no close intimacy between the aunt and the niece . and many of she father 's friend , -- whom she regard as the set , -- be very cold to she . she have not make herself a glory to , and , -- as all these people say , -- have break the heart of the best young man of the day . this make a great falling - off in she acquaintance , which be the more felt as she have never be , as a girl , devote to a large circle of dearest female friend . she whom she have love best have be , and have refuse to be she bridesmay almost without a expression of regret . she see she father occasionally . once he come and dine with they at they room , on which occasion struggle hard to make up a well - sound party . there be from the Admiralty , and the Happerton , and , with whom have become acquainted at , and old . but the barrister , who have dine out a good deal in he time , perceive the effort . who , that ever with difficulty scrape he dinner guest together , be able afterwards to obliterate the sign of the struggle ? it be , however , a first attempt , and , whose courage be good , think that he might do better before long . if he could get into the house and make he mark there people then would dine with he fast enough . but while this be go on 's life be rather dull . he have provide she with a brougham , and everything around she be even luxurious , but there come upon she gradually a feeling that by she marriage she have divide herself from she own people . she do not for a moment allow this feeling to interfere with she loyalty to he . have she not know that this division would surely take place ? have she not marry he because she love he better than she own people ? so she sit herself down to read , -- for they have study Italian together during they honeymoon , and she have find that he know the language well . and she be busy with she needle . and she already begin to anticipate the happiness which would come to she when a child of he should be lie in she arm . she be of course much interested about the election . nothing could have yet be do , because as yet there be no vacancy ; but still the subject be discuss daily between they . "
" who do you think be go to stand against I ? " he say one day with a smile . " a very old friend of yours . " she know at once who the man be , and the blood come to she face . " I think he might as well have leave it alone , you know , " he say . " do he know ? " she ask in a whisper . " know ; -- of course he know . he be do it on purpose . but I beat he once , old girl , do not I ? and I will beat he again . " she like he to call she old girl . she love the perfect intimacy with which he treat she . but there be something which grate against she feeling in this allusion by he to the other man who have love she . of course she have tell he the whole story . she have conceive it to be she duty to do so . but then the thing should have be over . it be necessary , perhaps , that he should tell she who be he opponent . it be impossible that she should not know when the fight come . but she do not like to hear he boast that he have beat once , and that he would beat he again . by do so he like the sweet fragrance of she love to the dirty turmoil of a electioneering contest . he do not understand , -- how should he ?-- that though she have never love , have never be able to bring herself to love he when all she friend have wish it , she feeling to he be nevertheless those of affectionate friendship ; -- that she regard he as be perfect in he way , a thorough gentleman , a man who would not for worlds tell a lie , as most generous among the generous , most noble among the noble . when the other Whartons have throw she off , he have not be cold to she . that very day , as soon as she husband have leave she , she look again at that little note . " I be as I always have be ! " and she remember that farewell down by the bank of the . " you will always have one , -- one besides he , -- who will love you best in the world . " they be dangerous word for she to remember ; but in recalle they to she memory she have often assure herself that they should not be dangerous to she . she be too sure of she own heart to be afraid of danger . she have love the one man and have not love the other ; -- but yet , now , when she husband talk of beat this man again , she could not but remember the word . she do not think , -- or rather have not think , -- that would willingly stand against she husband . it have occur to she at once that he must first have become a candidate without know who would be he opponent . but have assure she as a matter of fact that have know all about it . " I suppose in politics man be different , " she say to herself . she husband have evidently suppose that have propose himself as a candidate for , with the express object of do a injury to the man who have carry off he love . and she repeat to herself she husband 's word , " he be do it on purpose . " she do not like to differ from she husband , but she could hardly bring herself to believe that revenge of this kind should have recommend itself to . some little time after this , when she have be settle in about a month , a letter be bring she , and she at once recognise 's writing . she be alone at the time , and it occur to she at first that perhaps she ought not to open any communication from he without show it to she husband . but then it seem that such a hesitation would imply a doubt of the man , and almost a doubt of herself . why should she fear what any man might write to she ? so she open the letter , and read it , -- with infinite pleasure . it be as follow :-- my . Lopez , I think it best to make a explanation to you as to a certain coincidence which might possibly be misunderstood unless explai . I find that you husband and I be to be opponent at . I wish to say that I have pledge myself to the borough before I have hear he name as connect with it . I have very old associations with the neighbourhood , and be invite to stand by friend who have know I all my life as soon as it be understand that there would be a open contest . I can not retire now without break faith with my party , nor do I know that there be any reason why I should do so . I should not , however , have come forward have I know that be to stand . I think you have better tell he so , and tell he also , with my compliment , that I hope we may fight we political battle with mutual good - fellowship and good - feeling . yours very sincerely , . Emily be very much pleased by this letter , and yet she weep over it . she feel that she understand accurately all the motives that be at work within the man
man 's breast when he be write it . as to its truth , -- of course the letter be gospel to she . oh , -- if the man could become she husband 's friend how sweet it would be ! of course she wish , thoroughly wish , that she husband should succeed at . but she could understand that such a contest as this might be carry on without personal animosity . the letter be so like , -- so good , so noble , so generous , so true ! the moment she husband come in she show it to he with delight . " I be sure , " she say as he be read the letter , " that he have not know that you be to stand . " " he know it as well as I do , " he reply , and as he speak there come a dark scowl across he brow . " he write to you be a piece of infernal impudence . " " oh , ! " " you do not understand , but I do . he deserve to be horsewhip for daring to write to you , and if I can come across he he shall have it . " " oh , -- for heaven 's sake ! " " a man who be you reject lover , -- who have be try to marry you for the last two year , presum to commence a correspondence with you without you husband 's sanction ! " " he mean you to see it . he say I be to tell you . " " ! that be simple cowardice . he mean you not to tell I ; and then when you have answer he without tell I , he would have have the whip - hand of you . " " oh , , what evil thought you have ! " " you be a child , my dear , and must allow I to dictate to you what you ought to think in such a matter as this . I tell you he know all about my candidature , and that what he have say here to the contrary be a mere lie ; -- yes , a lie . " he repeat the word because he see that she shrank at hear it ; but he do not understand why she shrank , -- that the idea of such a accusation against be intolerable to she . " I have never hear of such a thing , " he continue . " do you suppose it be common for man who have be throw over to write to the ladie who have reject they immediately after they marriage ? " " do not the circumstance justify it ? " " no ; -- they make it infinitely worse . he should have feel himself to be debar from writing to you , both as be my wife and as be the wife of the man whom he intend to oppose at . " this he say with so much anger that he frightene she . " it be not my fault , " she say . " no ; it be not you fault . but you should regard it as a great fault commit by he . " " what be I to do ? " " give I the letter . you , of course , can do nothing . " " you will not quarrel with he ? " " certainly I will . I have quarrell with he already . do you think I will allow any man to insult my wife without quarrell with he ? what I shall do I can not yet say , and whatever I may do , you have better not know . I never think much of these Herefordshire swell who believe themselves to be the very cream of the earth , and now I think less of they than ever . " he be then silent , and slowly she take herself out of the room , and go away to dress . all this be very terrible . he have never be rough to she before , and she could not at all understand why he have be so rough to she now . surely it be impossible that he should be jealous because she old lover have write to she such a letter as that which she have show he ! and then she be almost stun by the opinion he have express about , opinion which she know , -- be sure that she know , -- to be absolutely erroneous . a liar ! oh , heaven ! and then the letter itself be so ingenuous and so honest ! anxious as she be to do all that she husband bade she , she could not be guide by he in this matter . and then she remembe he word : " you must allow I to dictate to you what you ought to think . " could it be that marriage mean as much as that , -- that a husband be to claim to dictate to he wife what opinion she be to form about this and that person ,-- about a person she have know so well , whom he have never know ? surely she could only think in accordance with she own experience and she own intelligence ! she be certain that be no liar . not even she own husband could make she think that . " yes ;-- with a Horsewhip in my " , when she crept out of she own room and join she husband just before dinner , be hardly able to speak to he , so thoroughly be she dismay , and trouble , and horrify , by the manner in which he have
have take 's letter . while she have be alone she have think it all over , anxious if possible to bring herself into sympathy with she husband ; but the more she think of it the more evident do it become to she that he be altogether wrong . he be so wrong that it seem to she that she would be a hypocrite if she pretend to agree with he . there be half - a - dozen accusation convey against by she husband 's view of the matter . he be a liar , give a false account of he candidature ; -- and he be a coward ; and a enemy to she , who have lay a plot by which he have hope to make she act fraudulently towards she own husband , who have endeavoure to creep into a correspondence with she , and so to compromise she ! all this , which she husband 's mind have so easily conceive , be not only impossible to she , but so horrible that she could not refrain from disgust at she husband 's conception . the letter have be leave with he , but she remember every word of it . she be sure that it be a honest letter , mean no more than have be say ,-- simply intend to explain to she that he would not willingly have stood in the way of a friend whom he have love , by interfere with she husband 's prospect . and yet she be tell that she be to think as she husband bay she think ! she could not think so . she could not say that she think so . if she husband would not credit she judgment , let the matter be refer to she father . would at any rate acknowledge that she father could understand such a matter even if she could not . during dinner he say nothing on the subject , nor do she . they be attend by a page in button whom he have hire to wait upon she , and the meal pass off almost in silence . she look up at he frequently and see that he brow be still black . as soon as they be alone she speak to he , have study during dinner what word she would first say : " be you go down to the club to - night ? " he have tell she that the matter of this election have be take up at the progress , and that possibly he might have to meet two or three person there on this evening . there have be a proposition that the club should bear a part of the expenditure , and he be very solicitous that such a arrangement should be make . " no , " say he , " I shall not go out to - night . I be not sufficientely light - hear . " " what make you heavy - hear , ? " " I should have think you would have know . " " I suppose I do know , -- but I do not know why it should . I do not know why you should be displease . at any rate , I have do nothing wrong . " " no ; -- not as to the letter . but it astonish I that you should be so -- so bound to this man that -- " " to he , ! " " no ; -- you be bound to I . but that you have so much regard for he as not to see that he have grossly insult you . " " I have a regard for he . " " and you dare to tell I so ? " " ! what should I be if I have any feeling which I do not dare to tell you ? there be no harm in regard a man with friendly feeling whom I have know since I be a child , and whom all my family have love . " " you family want you to marry he ! " " they do . but I have marry you , because I love you . but I need not think badly of a old friend , because I do not love he . why should you be angry with he ? what can you have to be afraid of ? " then she come and sit on he knee and caress he . " it be he that shall be afraid of I , " say . " let he give the borough up if he mean what he say . " " who could ask he to do that ? " " not you ,-- certainly . " " oh , no . " " I can ask he . " " could you , ? " " yes ; -- with a horsewhip in my hand . " " indeed , indeed you do not know he . will you do this ; -- will you tell my father everything , and leave it to he to say whether have behave badly to you ? " " certainly not . I will not have any interference from you father between you and I . if I have listen to you father , you would not have be here now . you father be not as yet a friend of mine . when he come to know what I can do for myself , and that I can rise higher than these Herefordshire people , then perhaps he may become my friend . but I will consult he in nothing so peculiar to myself as my own wife . and you must understand that in come to I all obligation from you to he become extinct . of course he be you
you father ; but in such a matter as this he have no more to say to you than any stranger . " after that he hardly speak to she ; but sit for a hour with a book in he hand , and then rise and say that he would go down to the club . " there be so much villainy about , " he say , " that a man if he mean to do anything must keep himself on the watch . " when she be alone she at once burst into tear ; but she soon dry she eye , and put down she work , settle herself to think of it all . what do it mean ? why be he thus change to she ? could it be that he be the same Ferdinand to whom she have give herself without a doubt as to he personal merit ? every word that he have speak since she have show he the letter from have be injuriious to she , and offensive . it almost seem as though he have determined to show himself to be a tyrant to she , and have only put off play the part till the first convenient opportunity after they honeymoon . but through all this , she idea be loyal to he . she would obey he in all thing where obedience be possible , and would love he better than all the world . oh yes ; -- for be he not she husband ? be he to prove himself the worst of man she would still love he . it have be for better or for worse ; and as she have repeat the word to herself , she have swear that if the worst should come , she would still be true . but she could not bring herself to say that have behave badly . she could not lie . she know well that he conduct have be noble and generous . then unconsciously and involuntarily , -- or rather in opposition to she own will and inward effort , -- she mind would draw comparison between she husband and . there be some peculiar gift , or , or acquirement belong without dispute to the one , and which the other lack . what be it ? she have hear she father say when talk of gentleman , -- of that race of gentleman with whom it have be he lot to live , -- that you could not make a silk purse out of a sow 's ear . the use of the proverb have offend she much , for she have know well whom he have then regard as a silk purse and whom as a sow 's ear . but now she perceive that there have be truth in all this , though she be as anxious as ever to think well of she husband , and to endow he with all possible virtue . she have once venture to form a doctrine for herself , to preach to herself a sermon of she own , and to tell herself that this gift of gentle blood and of gentle nurture , of which she father think so much , and to which something of divinity be attribute down in , be after all but a weak , spiritless quality . it could exist without intellect , without heart , and with very moderate culture . it be compatible with many littleness and with many vex . as for that love of honest , courageous truth which she father be will not to attribute to it , she regard he theory as base upon legend , as in earlier year be the theory of the courage , and constancy , and loyalty of the knights of those day . the beau ideal of a man which she then picture to herself be grac , first with intelligence , then with affection , and lastly with ambition . she know no reason why such a hero as she fancy create should be bear of lord and lady rather than of work mechanic , should be rather than spanish or french . the man could not be she hero without education , without attribute to be attaine no doubt more easily by the rich than by the poor ; but , with that grant , with those attaine , she do not see why she , or why the world , should go back beyond the man 's own self . such have be she theory as to man and they attribute , and act on that , she have give herself and all she happiness into the keeping of . now , there be gradually come upon she a change in she conviction ,-- a change that be most unwelcome , that she strove to reject , -- one which she would not acknowledge that she have adopt even while adopt it . but now , -- ay , from the very hour of she marriage , -- she have commence to learn what it be that she father have mean when he speak of the pleasure of live with gentleman . certainly be a gentleman . he would not have entertain the suspicion which she husband have express . he could not have fail to believe such assertion as have be make . he could never have suggest to he own wife that another man have endeavoure to entrap she into a secret correspondence . she seem to hear the tone of 's voice , as those of she husband still ring in she ear when he bay she remember that she be now remove from she father 's control . every now and then the tear would come to she eye , and she would sit pondering , listless , and low in heart . then she would suddenly rouse
rouse herself with a shake , and take up she book with a resolve that she would read steadily , would assure herself as she do so that she husband should still be she hero . the intelligence at any rate be there , and , in spite of he roughness , the affection which she crave . and the ambition , too , be there . but , ala , ala ! why should such vile suspicion have foule he mind ? he be late that night , but when he come he kiss she brow as she lay in bed , and she know that he temper be again smooth . she feign to be sleepy , though not asleep , as she just put she hand up to he cheek . she do not wish to speak to he again that night , but she be glad to know that in the morning he would smile on she . " be early at breakfast , " he say to she as he leave she the next morning , " for I be go down to Silverbridge to - day . " then she start up . " to - day ! " " yes ; -- by the 11.20 . there be plenty of time , only do not be unusually late . " of course she be something more than usually early , and when she come out she find he read he paper . " it be all settle now , " he say . " have apply for the hundred , and be to move for the new writ to - morrow . it have come rather sudden at last , as these thing always do after long delay . but they say the suddenness be rather in my favour . " " when will the election take place ? " " I suppose in about a fortnight ; -- perhaps a little longer . " " and must you be at all that time ? " " oh dear no . I shall stay there to - night , and perhaps to - morrow night . of course I shall telegraph to you directly I find how it be to be . I shall see the principal inhabitant , and probably make a speech or two . " " I do so wish I could hear you . " " you would find it awfully dull work , my girl . and I shall find it awfully dull too . I do not imagine that and will be pleasant companion . well ; I shall stay there a day or two and setle when I be to go down for the absolute canvass . I shall have to go with my hat in my hand to every bless inhabitant in that dirty little town , and ask they all to be kind enough to drop in a paper for the most humble of they servants , . " " I suppose all candidate have to do the same . " " oh yes ; -- you friend , master , will have to do it . " she wince at this . be she friend , but at the present moment he ought not so to have speak of he . " and from all I hear , he be just the sort of fellow that will like the do of it . it be odious to I to ask a fellow that I despise for anything . " " why should you despise they ? " " low , ignorant , greasy cad , who have no idea of the real meaning of political privileges ; --men who would all sell they vote for thirty shilling each , if that game have not be make a little too hot ! " " if they be like that I would not represent they . " " oh yes , you would ; -- when you come to understand the world . it be a fine thing to be in parliament , and that be the way to get in . however , on this visit I shall only see the great man of the town , -- the Sprouts and Sprugeons . " " shall you go to ? " " oh , heaven , no ! I may go anywhere now rather than there . the be suppose to be in absolute ignorance of the very name of the candidate , or whether there be candidate . I do not suppose that the word Silverbridge will be even whisper in he ear till the thing be over . " " but you be to get in by he friendship . " " or by hers ; -- at least I hope so . I have no doubt that the and the Sprugeon have be give to understand by the Locock and the Pritchard what be the Duchess 's wish , and that it have also be intimate in some subtle way that the Duke be willing to oblige the Duchess . there be ever so many way , you know , of kill a cat . " " and the expense ? " suggest Emily . " oh , -- ah ; the expense . when you come to talk of the expense thing be not so pleasant . I never see such a set of meaningless ass in my life as those man at the club . they talk and talk , but there be not one of they who know how to do anything . now at the club over the way they do arrange matter . it be a common cause , and I do not see what right they have to expect that one man should bear all the expense . I have a deuce good mind to leave they in the lurch . " " do not do
do it , , if you can not afford it . " " I shall go on with it now . I can not help feel that I have be a little let in among they . when the Duchess first promise I it be to be a simple walk over . now that they have get they candidate , they go back from that and open the thing to any comer . I can not tell you what I think of for take advantage of such a chance . and then the political committee at the club coolly say that they have get no money . it be not honest , you know . " " I do not understand all that , " say Emily sadly . every word that he say about cut she to the heart ;-- not because it grieve she that should be abuse , but that she husband should condescmend to abuse he . she escape from further conflict at the moment by proclaim she ignorance of the whole matter ; but she know enough of it to be well aware that have as good a right to stand as she husband , and that she husband lower himself by personal animosity to the man . then take he departure . " oh , , " she say , " I do so hope you may be successful . " " I do not think he can have a chance . from what people say , he must be a fool to try . that be , if the Castle be true to I . I shall know more about it when I come back . " that afternoon she dine with she father , and there meet . it be of course know that have go down to , and Emily learn in Square that have go with he . " from all I hear , they be two fools for they pain , " say the lawyer . " why , papa ? " " the have give the thing up . " " but still he interest remain . " " no such thing ! if there be a honest man in it be the of , and when he say a thing he mean it . leave to themselves , the people of a little town like Silverbridge be sure to return a Conservative . they be half of they small farmer , and of course will go that way if not make to go the other . if the club mean to pay the cost --" " the club will pay nothing , papa . " " then I can only hope that be do well in he business ! " after that , nothing further be say about the election , but she perceive that she father be altogether oppose to the idea of she husband be in parliament , and that he sympathy and even he wish be on the other side . when . suggest that it would be a very nice thing for they all to have in , -- she always call he now ,-- rail at she . " why should it be a nice thing ? I wonder whether you have any idea of a meaning in you head when you say that . do you suppose that a man get L1000 a year by go into parliament ? " " law , ; how uncivil you be ! of course I know that member of parliament be not pay . " " where be the niceness then ? if a man have he time at he command and have study the art of legislation it may be nice , because he will be do he duty ; -- or if he want to get into the government rick like you brother - in - law , it may be nice ; -- or if he be a idle man with a large fortune it may be nice to have some place to go to . but why it should be nice for I can not understand . have some idea in he head when he talk about parliament , -- though I can not say that I agree with he . " it may easily be understand that after this Emily would say nothing further in as to she husband 's prospects at . be at for a couple of day , and then return , as he wife think , by no means confident of success . he remain in town nearly a week , and during that time he manage to see the Duchess . he have write to she say that he would do himself the honour of call on she , and when he come be admit . but the account he give to he wife of the visit do not express much satisfaction . it be quite late in the evening before he tell she whither he have be . he have intend to keep the matter to himself , and at last spoke of it , -- guide by the feeling which induce all man to tell they secret to they wife , -- because it be a comfort to he to talk to some one who would not openly contradict he . " she be a sly creature after all , " he say . " I have always think that she be too open rather than sly , " say he wife . " people always try to get a character just opposite to what they deserve . when I hear that a man be always to be believe , I know that he be the most dangerous liar go . she hum and haw and would not say a word about the borough . she go so far as to tell I that I be not to say a word about it
it to she . " " be not that best if she husband wish she not to talk of it ? " " it be all humbug and falsehand to the very bottom . she know that I be spend money about it , and she ought to be on the square with I . she ought to tell I what she can do and what she can not . when I ask she whether might be trust , she say that she really wish that I would not say anything more to she about it . I call that dishonest and sly . I should not at all wonder but that Fletcher have be with the Duke . if I find that out , will not I expose they both ! " " what be it of yours ? " thing have not go altogether smoothly with the Duchess herself since the breaking up of the party at , -- nor perhaps quite smoothly with the . it be now . the be again sit , and they be both in , -- but till they come to tow they have remain at the Castle , and that huge mansion have not be find to be more comfortable by either of they as it become empty . for a time the Duchess have be cow by she husband 's stern decision ; but as he again become gentle to she ,-- almost see by he manner to apologise for he unwonted roughness , -- she pluck up she spirit and declare to herself that she would not give up the battle . all that she do , -- be it not for he sake ? and why should she not have she ambition in life as well as he he ? and have she not succeed in all that she have do ? could it be right that she should be ask to abandon everything , to own herself to have be defeat , to be show to have fail before all the world , because such a one as major have make a fool of himself ? she attribute it all to major Pountney ; -- very wrongly . when a man 's mind be veer towards some decision , some conclusion which he have be perhaps slow in reache , it be probably a little thing which at last fix he mind and clench he thought . the have be gradually teach himself to hate the crowd around he and to reprobate he wife 's strategy , before he have know that there be a major Pountney under he roof . other have offend he , and first and foremose among they he own colleague , . the Duchess hardly read he character aright , and certainly do not understand he present motive , when she think that all might be forget as soon as the disagreeable savour of the major should have pass away . but in nothing , as she think , have she husband be so silly as in he abandonment of . when she hear that the day be fix for declare the vacancy , she venture to ask he a question . he manner to she lately have be more than urbane , more than affectionate ; -- it have almost be that of a lover . he have pett she and caress she when they meet , and once even say that nothing should really trouble he as long as he have she with he . such a speech as that never in he life have he make before to she ! so she pluck up she courage and ask she question , -- not exactly on that occasion , but soon afterwards ; " not I say a word to Sprugeon about the election ? " " not a word ! " and he look at she as he have look on that day when he have tell she of the major 's sins . she toss she head and poute she lip and walk on without speak . if it be to be so , then indeed would she have fail . and , therefore , though in he general manner he be love to she , thing be not go smooth with she . and thing be not go smooth with he because there have reach he a most troublous dispatch from drought only two day before the cabinet meeting at which the point to be make in the 's speech be to be decide . it have be already agree that a proposition should be make to parliament by the government , for a extension of the county suffrage , with some slight redistribution of seat . the town with less than 20,000 inhabitant be to take in some increase portion of the country parish around . but there be not enough of a policy in this to satisfy , nor be the conduct of the bill through the to be place in he hand . that be to be intrust to , and would be , if not nominally the leader , yet the chief man of the government in the of . this be displease to , and he have , therefore , demand from the more of a " policy . " 's present idea of a policy be the building four bigger ship of war than have ever be build before , -- with larger gun , and more man , and thicker iron plate , and , above all , with a greater expenditure of money . he have even go so far as to say , though not in he semi-official letter to the , that he think that " the Salvation of the " should be the cry of the party . " after all , " he say , " what the people care about be the Salvation of the
the Empire ! " be at the head of the Admiralty ; and if glory be to be achieve by the four ship , it would rest first on the head of . now the think that the Empire be safe , and have be throughout he political life averse to increase the army and navy estimate . he regard the four ship as altogether unnecessary , -- and when remind that he might in this way consolidate the , say that he would rather do without the and the four ship than have to do with both of they together , -- a opinion which be think by some to be almost traitorous to the party as now organise . the secret of cabinets be not to be disclose lightly , but it come to be understood , -- as what be do at cabinet meeting generally do come to be understand , -- that there be something like a disagreement . the , the of , and be altogether against the four ship . be support by and another of he old friend . at the advice of the elder , a paragraph be hatch , in which it be declare that she Majesty , " have regard to the safety of the nation and the possible , though happily not probable , chance of war , think that the present strength of the navy should be consider . " " it will give he scope for a new gun - boat on a altered principle , " say the of . but the , could he have have he own way , would have give no scope whatever . he would have let the have go to the dog and have fall himself into infinite political ruin , but that he do not dare that man should hereafter say of he that this attempt at government have fail because he be stubborn , imperious , and self - confident . he have know when he take he present place that he must yield to other ; but he have not know how terrible it be to have to yield when a principle be in question , -- how great be the suffering when a man find himself compelle to do that which he think should not be do ! therefore , though he have be strangely love to he wife , the time have not go smoothly with he . in direct disobedience to she husband the do speak a word to . when at the Castle she be frequently drive through , and on one occasion have she carriage stop at the ironmonger 's door . out come , and there be at first half - a - dozen stand by who could hear what she say . , the cook , want to have some new kind of iron plate erect in the kitchen . of course she have provide herself beforehand with she excuse . as a rule , when the cook want anything do , he do not send word to the tradesman by the Duchess . but on this occasion the be personally most anxious . she want to see how the iron plate would work . it be to be a particular kind of iron plate . then , have watch she opportunity , she say she word , " I suppose we shall be safe with ? " when be about to reply , she shook she head and go on about the iron plate . this would be quite enough to let understand that she be still anxious about the borough . be a intelligent man , and possess of discretion to a certain extent . as soon as he see the little frown and the shake of the head , he understand it all . he and the Duchess have a secret together . would not everything about the Castle in which a morsel of iron be employ want renew ? and would not the Duchess take care that it should all be renew by ? but then he must be active , and he activity would be of no avail unless other help he . so he whisper a word to , and it soon become know that the Castle interest be all alive . but unfortunately the be also on the alert . the have be very much in earnest when he make up he mind that the old custom should be abandon at and have endeavoure to impress that determination of he upon he wife . the know more about he property and be better acquaint with its detail than he wife or other believ . he hear that in spite of all he order the interest be be maintain , and a word be say to he which seem to imply that this be he wife 's doings . it be then about the middle of , and arrangement be in process for the removal of the family to . the have already be up to for the meeting of parliament , and have now come back to , purport to return to with he wife . then it be that it be hint to he that she be still anxious as to the election , -- and have manifest she anxiety . the rumour hurt he , though he do not in the least believe it . it show to he , as he think , not that he wife have be false to he , -- as in truth she have be , -- but that even she name could not be keep free from slander . and when he speak to she on the subject , he do so rather with the view of prove to she how necessary it be that she should keep herself altogether aloof from such matter , than with any wish to make further inquiry . but
but he elicit the whole truth . " it be so hard to kill a old establish evil , " he say . " what evil have you fail to kill now ? " " those people at still say that I want to return a member for they . " " oh ; that be the evil ! you know I think that instead of kill a evil , you have murder a excellent institution . " this at any rate be very imprudent on the part of the Duchess . after that disobedient word speak to , she should have be more on she guard . " as to that , , I must judge for myself . " " oh yes , -- you have be jury , and judge , and executioner . " " I have do as I think right to do . I be sorry that I should fail to carry you with I in such a matter , but even fail in that I must do my duty . you will at any rate agree with I that when I say the thing should be do , it should be do . " " if you want to destroy the house , and cut down all the tree , and turn the place into a wilderness , I suppose you would only have to speak . of course I know it would be wrong that I should have a opinion . as ' man ' you be of course to have you own way . " she be in one of she most aggravate mood . though he might compel she to obey , he could not compel she to hold she tongue . " , I do not think you know how much you add to my trouble , or you would not speak to I like that . " " what be I to say ? it seem to I that any more suicidal thing than throw away the borough never be done . who will thank you ? what additional support will you get ? how will it increase you power ? it be like throw off he clothes in the storm because he daughter turn he out . and you do not do it because you think it right . " " yes , I do , " he say , scowl . " you do it because disgust you . you kick he out . why would not that satisfy you without sacrifice the borough ? it be not what I think or say about it , but that everybody be think and say the same thing . " " I choose that it shall be so . " " very well . " " and I do not choose that you name shall be mix up in it . they say in Silverbridge that you be canvasse for . " " who say so ? " " I presume it be not true . " " who say so , ? " " it matter not who have say so , if it be untrue . I presume it to be false . " " of course it be false . " then the remembe she word to , and the cowardice of the lie be heavy on she . I doubt whether she would have be so shocked by the idea of a falsehood as to have be keep back from it have she before resolve that it would save she ; but she be not in she practice a false woman , she courage be too high for falsehood . it now seem to she that by this lie she be own herself to be quell and bring into absolute subjection by she husband . so she burst out into truth . " now I think of it , I do say a word to . I tell he that -- that I hope would be return . I do not know whether you call that canvassing . " " I desire you not to speak to , " he thunder forth . " that be all very well , , but if you desire I to hold my tongue altogether , what be I to do ? " " what business be this of yours ? " " I suppose I may have my political sympathy as well as another . really you be become so autocratic that I shall have to go in for woman 's rights . " " you mean I to understand then that you intend to put yourself in opposition to I . " " what a fuss you make about it all ! " she say . " Nothe that one can do be right ! you make I wish that I be a milkmaid or a farmer 's wife . " so say she bounce out of the room , leave the sick at heart , low in spirit , and doubtful whether he be right or wrong in he attempt to manage he wife . surely he must be right in feel that in he high office a clearer conduct and cleaner way of walking be expect from he than from other man ! Noblesse oblige ! to he uncle the privilege of return a member to parliament have be a thing of course ; and when the radical newspapers of the day abuse he uncle , he uncle take that abuse as a thing of course . the old act after he kind , and do not care what other say of he . and he himself , when he first come to he dukedom , be not as he be now . duty , though they be heavy enough , be lighter then . serious matter be less serious . there be this and that matter of public policy on which he be intent
intent , but , think humbly of himself , he have not yet learn to conceive that he must fit he public conduct in all thing to a straight rule of patriotic justice . now it be different with he , and though the change be painful , he feel it to be imperative . he would afain have be as other man , but he could not . but in this change it be so needful to he that he should carry with he the full sympathy of one person ; -- that she who be the nearest to he of all should act with he ! and now she have not only disobey he , but have tell he , as some grocer 's wife might tell she husband , that he be " make a fuss about it all ! " and then , as he think of the scene which have be describe , he could not quite approve of himself . he know that he be too self - conscious , -- that he be think too much about he own conduct and the conduct of other to he . the phrase have be odious to he , but still he could not acquit himself of " make a fuss . " of one thing only be he sure , -- that a grievous calamity have befall he when circumstance compelle he to become the 's . he say nothing further to he wife till they be in together , and then he be temp to caress she again , to be love to she , and to show she that he have forgive she . but she be brusque to he , as though she do not wish to be forgive . " , " he say , " do not separate yourself from I . " " separate myself ! what on earth do you mean ? I have not dream of such a thing . " the answer he as though he have allude to some actual separation . " I do not mean that . forbid that a misfortune such as that should ever happen ! do not disjoin yourself from I in all these trouble . " " what be I to do when you scold I ? you must know pretty well by this time that I do not like to be scold . 'I desire you not to speak to ! ' " as she repeat he word she imitate he manner and voice closely . " I should not dream of address the child with such magnificence of anger . ' what business be it of yours ? ' no woman like that sort of thing , and I be not sure that I be acquaint with any woman who like it much less than -- , of . " as she say these last word in a low whisper , she curtsey down to the ground . " you know how anxious I be , " he begin , " that you should share everything with I ,-- even in politics . but in all thing there must at last be one voice that shall be the rule voice . " " and that be to be yours , -- of course . " " in such a matter as this it must be . " " and , therefore , I like to do a little business of my own behind you back . it be human nature , and you have get to put up with it . I wish you have a better wife . I dare say there be many who would be better . there be the Duchess of who never trouble she husband about politics , but only scold he because the wind blow from the east . it be just possible there might be worse . " " oh , ! " " you have better make the best you can of you bargain and not expect too much from she . and do not ride over she with a very high horse . and let she have she own way a little if you really believe that she have you interest at heart . " after this he be quite aware that she have get the better of he altogether . on that occasion he smile and kiss she , and go he way . but he be by no means satisfied . that he should be thwart by she , eat into he very heart ; -- and it be a wretched thing to he that he could not make she understand he feeling in this respect . if it be to go on he must throw up everything . coelum , fiat -- proper subordination from he wife in regard to public matter ! no wife have a fuller allowance of privilege , or more complete power in she hand , as to thing fit for woman 's management . but it be intolerable to him that she should seek to interfere with he in matter of a public nature . and she be constantly do so . she have always this or that aspirant for office on hand ; -- this or that job to be carry , though the job be not perhaps much in themselves ; -- this or that affair to be manage by she own political ally , such as and . and in he heart he suspect she of a design of manage the government in she own way , with she own particular friend , , for she . if he could in no other way put a end to such evils as these , he must put a end to he own political life . coelum , fiat justitia . now " justitia " to he be not compatible with feminine interference in he own special work . it
it may therefore be understand that thing be not go very smoothly with the and ; and it may also be understand why the Duchess have have very little to say to about the election . she be aware that she owe something to , whom she have certainly encourage to stand for the borough , and she have therefore send she card to he wife and be prepared to invite they both to she party ; -- but just at present she be a little tired of , and perhaps unjustly dispose to couple he with that unfortunate wretch , Major Pountney . show that a man should not , in he letter to , have tell she that when he find out who be to be he antagonist at , it be too late for he to give up the contest . he be , he say , bound in faith to continue it by what have pass between himself and other . but in truth he have not reach he conclusion without some persuasion from other . he have be at Longbarns with he brother when he first hear that intend to stand , and he at once signify he desire to give way . the information reach he from , of , a gentleman connect with the who be now suppose to represent the interest in the county , and who have first suggest to that he should come forward . it be hold at that be bound in honour to and to 's friend , and to this opinion he have yield . since 's marriage she name have never be mention at in 's presence . when he be away , -- and of course he life be chiefly pass in , -- old . be free enough in she abuse of the silly creature who have allow herself to be take out of she own rank by a . but she have be make to understand by she elder son , the lord of Longbarns , that not a word be to be say when yoArthu be there . " I think he ought to be teach to forget she , " have say . but in he own quiet but imperious way , have declare that there be some man to whom such lesson could not be teach , and that be one of they . " be he never to get a wife , then ? " have ask . would not pretend to answer that question , but be quite sure that he brother would not be temp into other matrimonial arrangement by anything that could be say against . when . declare in she extreme anger that be a fool for he trouble , do not contradict she , but declare that the folly be of a nature to require tender treatment . matters be in this condition at Longbarns when communicate to he brother the contents of 's letter , and express he own purpose of give up . " I do not quite see that , " say . " no ; -- and it be impossible that you should be expect to see it . I do not quite know how to talk about it even to you , though I think you be about the softest - hear fellow out . " " I do not acknowledge the soft heart ; -- but go on . " " I do not want to interfere with that man . I have a sort of feeling that as he have get she he might as well have the seat too . " " the seat , as you call it , be not there for he gratification or for yours . the seat be there in order that the people of may be represent in parliament . " " let they get somebody else . I do not want to put myself in opposition to he , and I certainly do not want to oppose she . " " they can not change they candidate in that way at a day 's notice . you would be throw over , and , if you ask I , I think that be a thing you have no right to do . this objection of yours be sentimental , and there be nothing of which a man should be so much in dread as sentimentalism . it be not you fault that you oppose . you be in the field first , and you must go on with it . " , when he speak in this way , be , at , always suppose to be right ; and on the present occasion he , as usual , prevail . then write he letter to the lady . he would not have like to have have it know that the composition and copying of that little note have cost he a hour . he have wish that she should understand he feeling , and yet it be necessary that he should address she in word that should be perfectly free from affection or emotion . he must let she know that , though he write to she , the letter be for she husband as well as for herself , and he must do this in a manner which would not imply any fear that he write to she would be take amiss . the letter when complete be at any rate simple and true ; and yet , as we know , it be take very much amiss . have by no means recover from the blow he have receive that day when Emily have tell he everything down by the river side ; but then , it must be say of he , that he have no intention of recovery . he be as a man who , have take a burden on he back , declare
declare to himself that he will , for certain reason , carry it throughout he life . the man know that with the burden he can not walk as man walk who be unencumbered , but for those reason of he he have choose to lade himself , and have do so he abandon regret and submit to he circumstance . so have it be with he . he would make no attempt to throw off the load . it be now far back in he life , as much at least as three year , since he have first assu himself of he desire to make the companion of he life . from that day she have be the pivot on which he whole existence have move . she have refuse he offer more than once , but have do so with so much tender kindness , that , though he have find himself to be wounded and bruise , he have never abandon he object . she father and all he own friend encourage he . he be continually tell that she coldness be due to the simple fact that she have not yet learn to give she heart away . and so he have persever , be ever thoroughly intent on he purpose , till he be tell by herself that she love be give to this other man . then he know that it behove he to set some alte course of life before he . he could not shoot he rival or knock he over the head , nor could he carry off he girl , as use to be do in rougher time . there be nothing now for a man in such a catastrophe as this but submission . but he might submit and shake off he burden , or submit and carry it hopelessly . he tell himself that he would do the latter . she have be he goddess , and he would not now worship at another shrine . and then idea come into he head , -- not hope , or purpose , or a belief even in any possibility , -- but vague idea , mere castle in the air , that a time might come in which it might be in he power to serve she , and to prove to she beyond doubt what have be the nature of he love . like other of he family , he think ill of , believe the man to be a adventurer , one who would too probably fall into misfortune , however high he might now seem to hold he head . he be certainly a man not stand on the solid basis of land , or of per ,-- those solidity to which such as the Whartons and Fletchers be will nt to trust . no doubt , should there be such fall , the man 's wife would have other help than that of she reject lover . she have a father , brother , and cousin , who would also be there to aid she . the idea be , therefore , but a castle in the air . and yet it be dear to he . at any rate he resolve that he would live for it , and that the woman should still be he goddess , though she be the wife of another man , and might now perhaps never even be see by he . then there come upon he , immediately almost after she marriage , the necessity of writing to she . the task be one which , of course , he do not perform lightly . he never say a word of this to anybody else ; -- but he brother understand it all , and in a somewhat silent fashion fully sympathise with he . could not talk to he about love , or mark passage of poetry for he to read , or deal with he at all romantically ; but he could take care that he brother have the best horse to ride , and the warmest corner out shooting , and that everything in the house should be do for he brother 's comfort . as the squire look and speak at Longbarns , other look and speak , -- so that everybody know that be to be contradict in nothing . have he , just at this period , order a tree in the park to be cut down , it would , I think , have be cut down , without reference to the master ! but , perhaps , 's power be most feel in the way in which he repress the expression of he mother 's high indignation . " mean slut ! " she once say , speak of in she eldest son 's hearing . for the girl , to she thinking , have be mean and have be a slut . she have not know , -- so . thought , -- what birth and blood require of she . " mother , " have say , " you would break 's heart if he hear you speak in that way , and I be sure you would drive he from Longbarns . keep it to yourself . " the old woman have shake she head angrily , but she have endeavoure to do as she have be bid . " be not you brother ri that horse a little rashly ? " say to in the hunt field one day . " I do not observe , " say ; " but whatever horse he be on , he always ride rashly . " yoArthu be mount on a long , rak thorough - breed black animal , which he have buy himself about a month ago , and which , have be run at steeplechase , rush at every fence as though he be go
go to swallow it . he brother have beg he to put some rough - rider up till the horse could be get to go quietly , but yoArthu have persever . and during the whole of this day the squire have be in a tremor , lest there should be some accident . " he use to have a little more judgment , I think , " say . " he go at that double just now as hard as the brute could tear . if the horse have not do it all , where would he have be ? " " in the further ditch , I suppose . but you see the horse do do it all . " this be all very well as a answer to , -- to whom it be not necessary that should explain the circumstance . but the squire have know as well as that he brother have be ride rashly , and he have understand the reason why . " I do not think a man ought to break he neck , " he say , " because he can not get everything that he wish . " the two brother be stand then together before the fire in the squire 's own room , have just come in from hunting . " who be go to break he neck ? " " they tell I that you try to to - day . " " because I be ride a pull horse . I will back he to be the biggest leaper and the quickest horse in . " " I dare say , -- though for the matter of that the chance be very much against it . but a man should not ride so as to have those thing say of he . " " what be a fellow to do if he can not hold a horse ? " " get off he . " " that be nonsense , ! " " no , it be not . you know what i mean very well . if I be to lose half my property to - morrow , do not you think it would cut I up a good deal ? " " it would I , I know . " " but what would you think of I if I how about it ? " " do I howl ? " ask angrily . " every man howl who be drive out of he ordinary course by any trouble . a man howl if he go about frown always . " " do I fry ? " " or laugh . " " do I laugh ? " " or gallop over the country like a mad devil who want to get rid of he debt by break he neck . memento -- . you remember all that , do not you ? " " I remember it ; but it be not so easy to do it . " " try . there be other thing to be do in life except get married . you be go into parliament . " " I do not know that . " " tell I there be not a doubt about it . think of that . fix you mind upon it . do not take it only as a accident , but as the thing you be to live for . if you will do that , -- if you will so manage that there shall be something to be do in parliament which only you can do , you will not ride a runaway horse as you do that brute to - day . " yoArthu look up into he brother 's face almost weepe . " we expect much of you , you know . I be not a man to do anything except be a good steward for the family property , and keep the old house from fall down . you be a clever fellow , -- so that between we , if we both do we duty , the Fletcher may still thrive in the land . my house shall be you house , and my wife you wife , and my child you child . and then the honour you win shall be my honour . hold up you head , -- and sell that beast . " squeeze he brother 's hand and go away to dress . the a month after this affair with the runaway horse go to , preparatory to he final sojourn at for the week previous to he election . , the seat of , , who be a great man in these part , be about twenty mile from , and the tedious work of canvasse the elector could not therefore be do from thence ; -- but he spend a couple of pleasant day with he old friend , and learn what be be say and what be be do in and about the borough . be a man , not as yet quite forty year of age , very popular , with a large family , of great wealth , and master of the county hound . he father have be a embarrassed man , with a large estate ; but this have marry a lady with immense wealth , and have prosper in the world . he be not a active politician . he do not himself care for parliament , or for the good thing which political power can give , and be on this account averse to the . he think that and the other be touch pitch and have defile themselves . but he be conscious that in so think he be one of but a small minority ; and , bad as the world around he certainly be , terrible as have be the fall of the glory of old , he be nevertheless content
content to live without loud grumbl as long as the farmer pay he they rent , and the labourer in he part of the country do not strike for wage , and the land when sell would fetch thirty year ' purchase . he have not therefore be careful to ascertain that would pledge himself to oppose the Coalition before he proffer he assistance in this matter of the borough . it would not be easy to find such a candidate , or perhaps possible to bring he in when find . the Fletcher have always be good conservatives , and be proper people to be in parliament . a Conservative in parliament be , of course , oblige to promote a great many thing which he do not really approve . quite understand that . you can not have test and qualifications , rotten borough and the divine right of king , back again . but as the glorious institution of the country be make to perish , one after the other , it be better that they should receive the coup tenderly from loving hand than be roughly throttle by radicals . would thank he star that he could still preserve fox down in he own country , instead of do any of this dirty work , -- for let the best be make of such work , still it be dirty , -- and be willing , now as always , to give he assistance , and if necessary to spend a little money , to put a Fletcher into parliament and to keep a out . there be to be a third candidate . that be the first news that hear . " it will do we all the good in the world , " say . " the in the borough be not satisfy with . they say they do not know he . as long as a certain set could make it be believe that he be the 's nominee they be content to accept he ;-- even though he be not propose directly by the 's people in the usual way . but the have make himself understand at last . you have see the 's letter ? " yoArthu have not see the 's letter , which have only be publish in the " " of that week , and he now read it , sit in 's magistrate 's - room , as a certain chamber in the house have be call since the day of the present squire 's great- grandfather . the 's letter be address to he recognise man of business in those part , and be as follow :-- , -- , 187 --. my , [ be the successor of one , who have reign supreme in those part under the old . ] I be afraid that my wish with regard to the borough and the forthcoming election there of a member of parliament be not yet clearly understood , although I endeavoure to declare they when I be at . I trust that no elector will vote for this or that gentleman with a idea that the return of any special candidate will please I . the ballot will of course prevent I or any other man from know how a elector may vote ; -- but I beg to assure the elector generally that should they think fit to return a member pledge to oppose the government of which I form a part , it would not in any way change my cordial feeling towards the town . I may perhaps be allow to add that , in my opinion , no elector can do he duty except by voting for the candidate whom he think best qualified to serve the country . in regard to the gentleman who be now before the constituency , I have no feeling for one rather than for the other ; and have I any such feeling I should not wish it to actuate the vote of a single elector . I should be glad if this letter could be publish so as to be bring under the eyes of the elector generally . yours faithfully , OMNIUM . when the say that he fear that he wish be not understand , and speak of the inefficacy of he former declaration , he be allud of course to the and to . guess that it might be so , and , still wish to have the Duchess for he good friend , be at once assiduous in explaining to he friend in the borough that even this letter do not mean anything . a be bound to say that kind of thing ! but the borough , if it wish to please the , must return in spite of the 's letter . be 's doctrine . but he do not carry with he . at once see he opportunity , and suggest to Boung , the local brewer , that he should come forward . Boung be a man rapidly grow into provincial eminence , and jump at the offer . consequently there be three candidate . Boung come forward as a prepare to give a cautious , but very cautious , support to the . Boing , in he print address , say very sweet thing of the generally . the borough be bless by the vicinity of the . but , look at the present perhaps unprecedented crisis in affair , Boung be prepare to give no more than a very cautious support to the 's government . read Boung 's address immediately after the 's letter . " the more the merrier , " say . " just so . do Boung will not rob you of a vote , but he will cut the ground altogether from under the other man 's foot . you see that as far as actual political programme
programme go there be not much to choose between any of you . you be all government man . " " with a difference . " " one man in these day be so like another , " continue sarcastically , " that it require good eye to see the shade of the colour . " " then you would better support Boung , " say . " I think you have just a turn in you favour . besides , I could not really carry a vote myself . as for Boung , I would sooner have he than a foreign cad like . " then frown and become confused , remember the catastrophe about the young lady whose story he have hear . " Boung use to be plain as Bing before he get rich and make he name beautiful , " continue , " but I suppose do come of foreign extraction . " " I do not know what he come from , " say moodily . " they tell I he be a gentleman . however , as we be to have a contest , I hope he may not win . " " of course you do . and he sha not win . nor shall the great Boung . you shall win , and become , and make I a peer . would you like papa to be ? " he say to a little girl , who then rush into the room . " no , I would not . I would like papa to give I the pony which the man want to sell out in the yard . " " she be quite right , , " say the squire . " I be much more likely to be able to buy they pony as simple than I should be if I have a lord 's coronet to pay for . " this be on a , and on the follow drive the candidate over to and start he on he work of canvassing . Boung have be busy ever since 's brilliant suggestion have be make , and have be in the field even before he . each one of the candidate call at the house of every elector in the borough , -- and every man in the borough be a elector . when they have be at work for four or five day each candidate assure the borough that he have already receive promise of vote sufficient to insure he success , and each candidate be as anxious as ever , -- nay , be more rabidly anxious than ever , -- to secure the promise of a single vote . hint be make by honest citizen of the pleasure they would have in support this or that gentleman , -- for the honest citizen assure one gentleman after the other of the satisfaction they have in see so all - sufficient a candidate in the borough , -- if the smallest pecuniary help be give they , even a day 's pay , so that they poor child might not be injure by they go to the poll . but the candidate and they agent be stern in they reply to such temptation . " that be a of that rascal Sprout , " say to . " that be one of 's man . if he could get half - a - crown from you it would be all up with we . " but though call a rascal , he lay the same bait both for Boung and for ; -- but lay it in vain . everybody say that it be a very clean election . " a brewer stand , and a glass of beer ! " say one old elector who have remember better thing when the borough never hear of a contest . on the third day of he canvass with he gang of agent and follower behind he meet with he gang in the street . it be probable that they would so meet , and have resolve what he would do when such a meeting take place . he walk up to , and with a kindly smile offer he hand . the two man , though they have never be intimate , have know each other , and be determined to show that he would not quarrel with a man because that man have be he favour rival . in comparison with that other matter this affair of the candidature be of course trivial . but who have , as the reader may remember , make some threat about a horsewhip , have come to a resolution of a very different nature . he put he arm a -kimbo , rest he hand on he hip , and altogether decline the proffer civility . " you have better walk on , " he say , and then stand , scowl , on the spot till the other should pass by . look at he for a moment , then bow and pass on . at least a dozen man see what have take place , and be aware that have express he determination to quarrel personally with , in opposition to 's expressed wish for amity . and before they have go to bed that night all the dozen know the reason why . of course there be some one then at clever enough to find out that have be in love with , but that have lately be marry to . no doubt the incident add a pleasurable emotion to the excitement cause by the election at generally . a personal quarrel be attractive everywhere . the expectation of such a occurrence will bring together the whole House of Commons . and of course this quarrel be very attractive in . there be some Fletcherites and Lopezites in the quarrel ; as there be also , who
who maintain that when gentleman could not canvass without quarrelling in the street they be manifestly unfit to represent such a borough as in parliament ; -- and that therefore Boung should be return . be in the town that day , though not till after the occurrence , and could not avoid speaking of it . " the man must be a cur , " say . " it would make no difference in the world to I , " say , struggle hard to prevent sign of emotion from show themselves in he face , " be it not that he have marry a lady whom I have long know and whom I greatly esteem . " he feel that he could hardly avoid all mention of the marriage , and yet be determine that he would say no word that he brother would call " howling . " " there have be no previous quarrel , or offence ? " ask . " none in the least . " when so speak he forgot altogether the letter he have write ; nor , have he then remember it , would he have think it possible that that letter should have give offence . he have be the sufferer , not . this man have robb he of he happiness ; and , though it would have be foolish in he to make a quarrel for a grievance such as that , there might have be some excuse have he do so . it have take he some time to perceive that greatly as this man have injure he , there have be no injustice do to he , and that therefore there should be no complaint make by he . but that this other man should complain be to he unintelligible . " he be not worth you notice , " say . " he be simply not a gentleman , and do not know how to behave himself . I be very sorry for the young lady ; -- that be all . " at this allusion to feel that he face become red with the rising blood ; and he feel also that he friend should not have speak thus openly , -- thus irreverently , -- on so sacr a subject . but at the moment he say nothing further . as far as he canvass be concerned it have be successful , and he be begin to feel sure that he would be the new member . he endeavoure therefore to dry he sorrow in this come triumph . but have be by no means gratify with he canvass or with the conduct of the borough generally . he have already begin to feel that the and and the borough have throw he over shamefully . immediately on he arrival in a local attorney have with the blandest possible smile ask he for a cheque for . of course there must be money spend at once , and of course the money must come out of the candidate 's pocket . he have know all this beforehand , and yet the demand for the money have come upon he as a injury . he give the cheque , but show clearly by he manner that he resent the application . this do not tend to bind to he more closely the service of those who be present when the demand be make . and then , as he begin he canvass , he find that he could not conjure at all with the name of the , or even with that of the Duchess ; and be tell on the second day by himself that he have better fight the battle " on he own hook . " now he own hook in be certainly not a strong hook . be still of opinion that a good deal might be do by judicious manipulation , and go so far as to suggest that another cheque for L500 in the hand of , the lawyer , would be effective . but do not give the other cheque , and whisper to he that the have be too many for the Duchess . still he have persever , and a set of understrapper around he , who would make nothing out of the election without he candidature , assure he from time to time that he would even yet come out all right at the ballot . with such a hope still exist he have not scruple to affirm in he speech that the success of he canvass have be complete . but , on the morning of the day on which he meet in the street , Boung have call upon he accompany by two of the Bong agent and by himself , -- and have suggest that he , , should withdraw from the contest , so that Boung might be return , and that the " liberal interest " of the borough might not be sacrifice . this be a heavy blow , and one which be not the man to bear with equanimity . from the moment in which the Duchess have mention the borough to he , he have regard the thing as certain . after a while he have understood that he return must be accompany by more trouble and greater expense than he have at first anticipate ; -- but still he have think that it be all but sure . he have altogether misunderstand the nature of the influence exercise by the Duchess , and the nature also of the 's resolution . have of course wish to have a candidate , and have allure he . perhaps he have in some degree be ill - treat by the borough . but he be a man whom the feeling of injustice to himself would drive almost to frenzy , though he never measure the amount of he own
own injustice to other . when the proposition be make to he , he scowl at they all , and declare that he would fight the borough to the last . " then you will let in to a certainty , " say . now there be a idea in the borough that , although all the candidate be ready to support the 's government , Boung and be the two liberal . Boung be sit in the room when the appeal be make , and declare that he fear that such would be the result . " I will tell you what I will do , " say ; " I will toss up which of we retire . " , on behalf of Boung , protest against that proposition . Boing , who be a gentleman of great local influence , be in possession of four -fifth of the liberal interest of the borough . even be he to retire could not get in . declare that this be know to all the borough at large . he , , be sorry that a gentleman like should have be bring down there under false idea . he have all through tell that the have be in earnest , but have not comprehend the position . it have be a pity . but anybody who understand the borough could see with one eye that have not a chance . if would retire Boung would no doubt be return . if go to the poll , would probably be the new member . this be the picture as it be paint by , -- who have , even then , hear something of the love of the two candidate , and who have think that would be glad to injure 's chance of success . so far he be not wrong ; -- but the sense of the injury do to himself oppress so much that he could not guide himself by reason . the idea of retiring be very painful to he , and he do not believe these man . he think it to be quite possible that they be there to facilitate the return of . he have never even hear of Boing till he have come to Silverbridge two or three day ago . he still could not believe that Boung would be return . he think over it all for a moment , and then he give he answer . " I have be bring down here to fight , and I will fight it to the last , " he say . " then you will hand over the borough to , " say , get up and usher Boing out of the room . it be after that , but on the same day , that and meet each other in the street . the affair do not take a minute , and then they part , each on he own way . in the course of that evening tell he candidate that he , , could not concern himself any further in that election . he be very sorry for what have occur ;-- very sorry indeed . it be no doubt a pity that the have be so firm . " but , " -- and shrug he shoulders as he speak , --" when a nobleman like the choose to have a way of he own , he must have it . " go on to declare that any further candidature would be waste of money , waste of time , and waste of energy , and then signify he intention of retiring , as far as this election go , into private life . when ask , he acknowledge that they who have be act with he have come to the same resolve . have in fact come there as the 's nominee , and as the have no nominee , be in fact " nowhere . " " I do not suppose that any man be ever so treat before , since member be first return to parliament , " say . " well , sir ; -- yes , sir ; it be a little hard . but , you see , sir , she mean the best . she do mean the best , no doubt . it may be , sir , there be a little misunderstanding ; -- a little misunderstanding at the Castle , sir . " then retir , and understand that he be to see nothing more of the ironmonger . of course there be nothing for he now but to retire ; -- to shake the dust off he foot and get out of as quickly as he could . but he friend have all desert he and he do not know how to retire . he have pay , and he have a strong opinion that a portion at least of the money should be return to he . he have a keen sense of ill - usage , and at the same time a feeling that he ought not to run out of the borough like a whipt dog , without show he face to any one . but he strongest sensation at this moment be one of hatred against . he be sure that would be the new member . he do not put the least trust in Boung . he have teach himself really to think that have insult he by writing to he wife , and that a further insult have be offer to he by that meeting in the street . he have tell he wife that he would ask to give up the borough , and that he would make that request with a horsewhip in he hand . it be too late now to say anything of the borough , but it might not be too late for the horsewhip . he have
have a great desire to make good that threat as far as the horsewhip be concerned ,-- have a idea that he would thus lower in he wife 's eye . it be not that he be jealous , -- not jealous accord to the ordinary meaning of the word . he wife 's love to himself have be too recently give and too warmly maintain for such a feeling as that . but there be a rancorous hatred in he heart against the man , and a conviction that he wife at any rate esteem the man whom he hate . and then would he not make he retreat from the borough with more honour if before he leave he could horsewhip he successful antagonist ? we , who know the feeling of generally better than do , would say -- certainly not . we would think that such a incident would by no means redound to the credit of . and he himself , probably , at cooler moment , would have see the folly of such a idea . but anger about the borough have drive he mad , and now in he wretchedness the suggestion have for he a certain charm . the man have outrage all propriety by writing to he wife . of course he would be justifi in horsewhipp he . but there be difficulty . a man be not horsewhip simply because you wish to horsewhip he . in the evening , as he be sit alone , he get a note from . " 's compliment . do not think a address to the elector should appear in to - morrow 's ' Gazette , '-- very short and easy ; -- something like the follow . " then add a very " short and easy letter " to the elector of the borough of , in which be suppose to tell they that although he canvass promise to he every success , he feel that he owe it to the borough to retire , lest he should injure the borough by split the interest with they much respect fellow - townsman , Boing . in the course of the evening he do copy that letter , and send it out to the newspaper office . he must retire , and it be better for he that he should retire after some recognise fashion . but he write another letter also , and send it over to the opposition hotel . the other letter be as follow :-- sir ,-- before this election begin you be guilty of gross impertinence in write a letter to my wife , -- to she extreme annoyance and to my most justifiable anger . any gentleman would think that the treatment you have already receive at she hand would have serve to save she from such insult , but there be man who will never take a lesson without a beating . and now , since you have be here , you have presume to offer to shake hand with I in the street , though you ink to have know that I should not choose to meet you on friendly term after what have take place . I now write to tell you that I shall carry a horsewhip while I be here , and that if I meet you in the street again before I leave the town I shall use it . FERDINAND . . this letter he send at once to he enemy , and then sit late into the night think of he threat and of the manner in which he would follow it up . if he could only get one fair blow at he purpose , he think , would be achieve . in any matter of horsewhipp the truth hardly ever get itself correctly know . the man who have give the first blow be generally suppose to have thrash the other . what might follow , though it might be inconvenient , must be borne . the man have insult he by writing to he wife , and the sympathy of the world , he think , would be with he . to give he he due , it must be own that he have no personal fear as to the encounter . that night have go over to , and on the follow morning he return with . " for heaven 's sake , look at that ! " he say , hand the letter to he friend . " do you ever write to he wife ? " ask , when he read it . " yes ;-- I do . all this be dreadful to I ;-- dreadful . well ; -- you know how it use to be with I . I need not go into all that ; need I ? " " do not say a word more than you think necessary . " " when you ask I to stand for the place I have not hear that he think of be a candidate . I write and tell she so , and tell she also that have I know it before I would not have come here . " " I do not quite see that , " say . " perhaps not ;-- perhaps I be a fool . but we need not go into that . at any rate there be no insult to he . I write in the simplest language . " " look at it all round I think you have better not have write . " " you would not say so if you see the letter . I be sure you would not . I have know she all my life . my brother be marry to she cousin . oh heaven ! we have be all but engage . I would have do anything for she . be it not natural
natural that I should tell she ? as far as the language be concerned the letter be one to be read at . " " he say that she be annoyed and insulted . " " impossible ! it be a letter that any man might have write to any woman . " " well ; -- you have get to take care of yourself at any rate . what will you do ? " " what ought I to do ? " " go to the police . " have himself once , when young , thrash a man who have offend he and have then think himself much aggrieve because the police have be call in . but that have be twenty year ago , and 's opinion have be matur and , perhaps , correcte by age . " no ; I will not do that , " say . " that be what you ought to do . " " I could not do that . " " then take no notice of the letter and carry a fairly big stick . it should be big enough to hurt he a good deal , but not to do he any serious damage . " at that moment a agent come in with news of the man 's retirement from the contest . " have he leave the town ? " ask . no ;--he have not leave the town , nor have he be see by any one that morne . " you have better let I go out and get the stick , before you show yourself , " say . and so the stick be select . as the two walk down the street together , almost the first thing they see be stand at he hotel door with a cutting whip in he hand . he be at that moment quite alone , but on the opposite side of the street there be a policeman , -- one of the borough constable ,-- very slowly make he way along the pavement . he movement , indeed , be so slow that any one watch he would have come to the conclusion that that particular part of the have some attraction for he at that special moment . Alas , alas ! how age will alter the spirit of a man ! twenty year since would have think any one to be a mean miscreant who would have interpose a policeman between he and he foe . but it be to be fear that while select that stick he have say a word which be cause the constable to loiter on the pavement ! but turn no eye to the policeman as he walk on with he friend , and do not see the man . " what a ass he be ! " say , -- as he get the handle of the stick well into he hand . then advanc to they with he whip raise ; but as he do so the policeman come across the street quickly , but very quietly , and stand right before he . the man be so thoroughly in the way of the aggrieve wretch that it be out of the question that he should touch with he whip . " do you usually walk about attend by a policeman ? " say , with all the scorn which he know how to throw into he voice . " I do not know that the man be here , " say . " you may tell that to the marine . all the borough shall know what a coward you be . " then he turn round and address the street , but still under the shadow , as it be , of the policeman 's helmet . " this man who presume to offer himself as a candidate to represent in have insult my wife . and now , because he fear that I shall horsewhip he , he go about the street under the care of a policeman . " " this be intolerable , " say , turn to he friend . " , " say . " I be sorry to say that I must give you in charge ;-- unless you will undertake to leave the town without interfere further with either by word or deed . " " I will undertake nothing , " say . " the man have insult my wife , and be a coward . " about two o'clock on the afternoon of that day appear before the Silverbridge bench of magistrate , and be there swear to keep the peace to for the next six month . after that he be allow to leave the town , and be back in , with he wife in , to dinner that evening . on the day but one after this the ballot be take , and at eight o'clock on the evening of that day be declare to be duly elect . but Boung run he very hard . the number be -- Fletcher 315 308 Boung 's friend during these two last day have not hesitate to make what use they could on behalf of they own candidate of the and . if have insult the other man 's wife , surely he could not be a proper member for . and then the row be declare to have be altogether discreditable . two stranger have come into this peaceful town and have absolutely quarrelled with stick and whip in the street , call each other opprobrious name . would it not be better that they should elect they own respectable townsman ? all this be nearly effective . but , in spite of all , be at last return . in , as he return to town , recovere something of he sense , though he still fancie that have do he a positive
positive injury by writing to he wife . but something of that madness leave he which have come from he deep sense of injury , both as to the letter and as to the borough , and he begin to feel that he have be wrong about the horsewhip . he be very low in spirit on this return journey . the money which he have spend have be material to he , and the loss of it for the moment leave he nearly bear . while he have have before he eye the hope of be a member of parliament he have be able to buoy himself up . the position itself would have go very far with , and would , he think , have have some effect even with he father - in - law . but now he be return a beaten man . who be there that have not feel that fall from high hope to utter despair which come from some single failure ? as he think of this he be conscious that he anger have lead he into great imprudence at . he have not be circumspect , as it specially behove a man to be surround by such difficulty as he . all he life he have be school he temper so as to keep it under control ,-- sometimes with great difficulty , but always with a consciousness that in he life everything might depend on it . now he have , alas , allow it to get the better of he . no doubt he have be insult ; -- but , nevertheless , he have be wrong to speak of a horsewhip . he one great object must now be to conciliate he father - in - law , and he have certainly increase he difficulty in do this by he squabble down at . of course the whole thing would be report in the papers , and of course the story would be tell against he , as the respectability of the town have be oppose to he . but he know himself to be clever , and he still hope that he might overcome these difficulty . then it occur to he that in do this he must take care to have he wife entirely on he side . he do not doubt she love ; he do not in the least doubt she rectitude ; -- but there be the lamentable fact that she think well of . it might be that he have be a little too imperious with he wife . it suite he disposition to be imperious within he own household ; -- to be imperious out of it , if that be possible ; -- but he be conscious of have have a fall at , and he must for a while take in some sail . he have telegraph to she , acquaint she with he defeat , and tell she to expect he return . " oh , , " she say , " I be so unhappy about this . it have make I so wretch ! " " better luck next time , " he say with he sweetest smile . " it be no good groaning over spill milk . they have not treat I really well , -- have they ? " " I suppose not ,-- though I do not quite understand it all . " he be burn to abuse , but he abstain . he would abstain at any rate for the present moment . " Duke and duchess be no doubt very grand people , " he say , " but it be a pity they should not know how to behave honestly , as they expect other to behave to they . the Duchess have throw I over in the most infernal way . I really can not understand it . when I think of it I be lose in wonder . the truth , I suppose , be , that there have be some quarrel between he and she . " " who will get in ? " " oh , Boung , no doubt . " he do not think so , but he could not bring himself to declare the success of he enemy to she . " the people there know he . you old friend be as much a stranger there as I be . by - the - way , he and I have a little row in the place . " " a row , ! " " you need not look like that , my pet . I have not kill he . but he come up to speak to I in the street , and I tell he what I think about he writing to you . " on hear this Emily look very wretched . " I could not restrain myself from do that . come ;-- you must admit that he should not have write . " " he mean it in kindness . " " then he should not have mean it . just think of it . suppose that I have be make up to any girl , -- which by - the - by I never do but to one in my life , " -- then he put he arm round she waist and kiss she , " and she be to have marry some one else . what would have be say of I if I have begin to correspond with she immediately ? do not suppose I be blame you , dear . " " certainly I do not suppose that , " say Emily . " but you must admit that it be rather strong . " he pause , but she say nothing . " only I suppose you can bring yourself to admit nothing against he . however , so it be
be . there be a row , and a policeman come up , and they make I give a promise that I do not mean to shoot he or anything of that kind . " as she hear this she turn pale , but say nothing . " of course I do not want to shoot he . I wish he to know what I think about it , and I tell he . I hate to trouble you with all this , but I could not bear that you should not know it all . " " it be very sad ! " " enough ! I have have plenty to bear , I can tell you . everybody seem to turn away from I there . everybody desert I . " as he say this he could perceive that he must obtain she sympathy by recount he own misery and not 's sins . " I be all alone and hardly know how to hold up my head against so much wretchedness . and then I find myself call upon to pay a enormous sum for my expense . " " oh , ! " " think of they demand L500 ! " " do you pay it ? " " yes , indeed . I have no alternative . of course they take care to come for that before they talk of my resigning . I believe it be all plan beforehand . the whole thing seem to I to have be a swindle from begin to end . by heaven , I be almost inclin to think that the Duchess know all about it herself ! " " about the L500 ! " " perhaps not the exact sum , but the way in which the thing be to be do . in these day one do not know whom to trust . , and woman too , have become so dishonest that nobody be safe anywhere . it have be awfully hard upon I ,-- awfully hard . I do not suppose that there be ever a moment in my life when the loss of L500 would have be so much to I as it be now . the question be , what will you father do for we ? " Emily could not but remember she husband 's intense desire to obtain money from she father not yet three month since , as though all the world depend on he get it , -- and he subsequent elation , as though all he sorrow be over for ever , because the money have be promise . and now ,-- almost immediately , -- he be again in the same position . she endeavoure to judge he kindly , but a feeling of insecurity in reference to he affair strike she at once and make she heart cold . everything have be achieve , then , by a gift of L3000,--surely a small sum to effect such a result with a man live as she husband liv . and now the whole L3000 be gone ; --surely a large sum to have vanish in so short a time ! something of the uncertainty of business she could understand , but a business must be perilously uncertain if subject to such vicissitude as these ! but as idea of this nature crowd themselves into she mind she tell herself again and again that she have take he for better and for worse . if the worse be already come she would still be true to she promise . " you have better tell papa everything , " she say . " have it not better come from you ? " " no , . of course I will do as you bid I . I will do anything that I can do . but you have better tell he . he nature be such that he will respect you more if it come from yourself . and then it be so necessary that he should know all ;-- all . " she put whatever emphasis she know how to use upon this word . " you could tell he -- all , as well as I . " " you would not bring yourself to tell it to I , nor could I understand it . he will understand everything , and if he think that you have tell he everything , he will at any rate respect you . " he sit silent for a while meditating , feel always and most acutely that he have be ill - use , -- never think for a instant that he have ill - use other . " L3000 , you know , be no fortune for you father to give you ! " she have no answer to make , but she groan in spirit as she hear the accusation . " do not you feel that yourself ? " " I know nothing about money , . if you have tell I to speak to he about it before we be marry I would have do so . " " he ought to have speak to I . it be marvellous how close - fist a old man can be . he can not take it with he . " then he sit for half - a - hour in moody silence , during which she be busy with she needle . after that he jump up , with a manner altogether alte , -- gay , only that the attempt be too visible to deceive even she , -- and shake himself , as though he be ridde himself of he trouble . " you be right , old girl . you be always right ,-- almost . I will go to you father to - morrow , and tell he everything . it be not so very much that I want he to do
do . thing will all come right again . I be asham that you should have see I in this way ; --but I have be disappoint about the election , and trouble about that . you shall not see I give way again like this . give I a kiss , old girl . " she kiss he , but she could not even pretend to recover herself as he have do . " have we not better give up the brougham ? " she say . " certainly not . for heaven 's sake do not speak in that way ! you do not understand thing . " " no ; certainly I do not . " " it be not that I have not the means of live , but that in my business money be so often require for instant use . and situate as I be at present a addition to my capital would enable I to do so much ! " she certainly do not understand it , but she have sufficient knowledge of the world and sufficient common sense to be aware that they present rate of expenditure ought to be matter of importance to a man who feel the loss of L500 as he feel that loss at . on the next morning be at 's chamber early , -- so early that the lawyer have not yet reach they . he have resolve , -- not that he would tell everything , for such man never even intend to tell everything , -- but that he would tell a good deal . he must , if possible , affect the mind of the old man in two way . he must ingratiate himself ; -- and at the same time make it understand that 's comfort in life would depend very much on she father 's generosity . the first must be first accomplish , if possible , -- and then the second , as to which he could certainly produce at any rate belief . he have not marry a rich man 's daughter without a intention of get the rich man 's money ! would understand that . if the worst come to the worst , must of course maintain he daughter , -- and he daughter 's husband ! but thing have not come to the worst as yet , and he do not intend on the present occasion to represent that view of he affair to he father - in - law . when he enter he chamber find seat there . he be himself at this moment very unhappy . he have renew he quarrel with , -- or rather have renew the quarrel with he . there have be words between they about money lose at card . hard word have be use , and have tell he father that if either of they be a gambler it be not he . have resent this bitterly and have drive he son from he presence , -- and now the quarrel make he very wretched . he certainly be sorry that he have call he son a gambler , but he son have be , as he think , inexcusable in the retort which he have make . he be a man to whom he friend give credit for much sternness ; -- but still he be one who certainly have no happiness in the world independent of he child . he daughter have leave he , not , as he think , under happy auspices , -- and he be now , at this moment , soft - hear and tender in he regards as to she . what be there in the world for he but he child ? and now he feel himself to be alone and destitute . he be already tired of whist at the . that which have be a delight to he once or twice a week , become almost loathsome when it be renew from day to day ; -- and not the less when he son tell he that he also be a gambler . " so you have come back from ? " he say . " yes , sir ; I have come back , not exactly triumphant . a man should not expect to win always . " have resolve to pluck up he spirit and carry himself like a man . " you seem to have get into some scrape down there , besides lose you election . " " oh ; you have see that in the papers already . I have come to tell you of it . as be concerned in it you ought to know . " " Emily concerned ! how be she concerned ? " then tell the whole story , -- after he own fashion , and yet with no palpable lie . have write to she a letter which he have think to be very offensive . on hear this , look very grave , and ask for the letter . say that he have destroy it , not think that such a document should be preserve . then he go on to explain that it have have reference to the election , and that he have think it to be highly improper that should write to he wife on that or on any other subject . " it depend very much on the letter , " say the old man . " but on any subject ,-- after what have pass . " " they be very old friend . " " of course I will not argue with you , ; but I own that it anger I . it anger I very much ,-- very much indeed . I take it to be a insult to she , and when he accost I in the street down at I tell he so .
. I may not have be very wise , but I do it on she behalf . surely you can understand that such a letter might make a man angry . " " what do he say ? " " that he would do anything for she sake , -- even retire from Silverbridge if he friend would let he . " scratch he head , and see that he be perplex . " should he have offer to do anything for she sake , after what have pass ? " " I know the man so well , " say , " that I can not and do not believe he to have harbour a improper thought in reference to my child . " " perhaps it be a indiscretion only . " " perhaps so . I can not say . and then they take you before the magistrate ? " " yes ; -- in my anger I have threaten he . then there be a policeman and a row . and I have to swear that I would not hurt he . of course I have no wish to hurt he . " " I suppose it ruin you chance at ? " " I suppose it do . " this be a lie , as have retire before the row take place . " what I care for most now be that you should not think that I have misbehave myself . " the story have be tell very well , and be almost dispose to sympathise with he son - in - law . that have mean nothing that could be regard as offensive to he daughter he be quite sure ; -- but it might be that in make a offer intend to be generous he have use language which the condition of the persons concerned make indiscreet . " I suppose , " he say , " that you spend a lot of money at ? " this give the opening that he want , and he describe the manner in which the L500 have be extract from he . " you can not play that game for nothing , " say . " and just at present I could very ill afford it . I should not have do it have I not feel it a pity to neglect such a chance of rising in the world . after all , a seat in the of be a honour . " " yes ; -- yes ;--yes . " " and the Duchess , when she speak to I about it , be so certain . " " I will pay the , " say . " oh , sir , that be generous ! " then he get up and take the old man 's hand . " some day , when you be at liberty , I hope that you will allow I to explain to you the exact state of my affair . when I write to you from I tell you that I would wish to do so . you do not object ? " " no ; " say the lawyer , -- but with infinite hesitation in he voice . " no ; I do not object . but I do not know how I could serve they . I shall be busy just now , but I will give you the cheque . and if you and Emily have nothing better to do , come and dine to - morrow . " with real tear in he eye take the cheque , and promise to come on the morrow . " and in the meantime I wish you would see . " of course he promise that he would see . again he be exalt , on this occasion not so much by the acquisition of the money as by the grow conviction that he father - in - law be a cow capable of be milk . and the quarrel between and he father might clearly be useful to he . he might either serve the old man by reduce to proper submission , or he might manage to creep into the empty space which the son 's defection would make in the father 's heart and the father 's life . he might at any rate make himself necessary to the old man , and become such a part of the household in as to be indispensable . then the old man would every day become older and more in want of assistance . he think that he see the way to worm himself into confidence , and , soon , into possession . the old man be not a man of iron as he have fear , but quite human , and if properly manage , soft and malleable . he see in the city that day , and use he cheque for L500 in some triumphant way , partly cajoling and partly bully he poor victim . to also he have to tell he own story about the row down at . he have threaten to thrash the fellow in the street , and the fellow have not da to come out of he house without a policeman . yes ; -- he have lose he election . the swindling of those fellow at have be too much for he . but he flatter himself that he have get the better of . that be the tone in which he tell the story to he friend in the city . then , before dinner , he find at the club . be to be find there now almost every day . he excuse to himself lay in the political character of the institution . the club intend to do great thing , -- to find liberal candidate for all the borough and county in which be not hithertoo furnish , and
and then to supply the candidate with money . such be the great purpose of the progress . it have not as yet send out many candidate or collect much money . as yet it be , politically , almost quiescent . and therefore , whose sense of duty take he there , spend he afternoons either in the whist - room or at the billiard - table . the story of the row have to be tell again , and be tell nearly with the same incidents as have be narrate to the father . he could of course abuse more roundly , and be more confident in he assertion that have insult he wife . but he come as quickly as he could to the task which he have on hand . " what be all this between you and you father ? " " simply this . I sometimes play a game of whist , and therefore he call I a gambler . then I remind he that he also sometimes play a game of whist , and I ask he what deduction be to be draw . " " he be awfully angry with you . " " of course I be a fool . my father have the whip - hand of I , because he have money and I have none , and it be simply kick against the prick to speak as I do . and then too there be not a fellow in have a higher respect for he father than I have , nor yet a warmer affection . but it be hard to be drive in that way . be a nasty word . " " yes , it be ; very nasty . but I suppose a man do gamble when he lose so much money that he have to ask he father to pay it for he . " " if he do so often , he gamble . I never ask he for money to pay what I have lose before in my life . " " I wonder you tell he . " " I never lie to he , and he ought to know that . but he be just the man to be harder to he own son than to anybody else in the world . what do he want I to do now ? " " I do not know that he want you to do anything , " say . " do he send you to I ? " " well ; -- no ; I can not say that he do . I tell he I should see you as a matter of course , and he say something rough , -- about you be a ass . " " I dare say he do . " " but if you ask I , " say , " I think he would take it kindly of you if you be to go and see he . come and dine to - day , just as if nothing have happen . " " I could not do that ,-- unless he ask I . " " I can not say that he ask you , . I would say so , in spite of its be a lie , if I do not fear that you father might say something unkind , so that the lie would be detect by both of you . " " and yet you ask I to go and dine there ! " " yes , I do . it be only go away if he do cut up rough . and if he take it well , -- why then , -- the whole thing be do . " " if he want I , he can ask I . " " you talk about it , my boy , just as if a father be the same as anybody else . if I have a father with a lot of money , by he should knock I about with he stick if he like , and I would be just the same the next day . " " unfortunately I be of a stiffer nature , " say , take some pride to himself for he stiffness , and be perhaps as little " stiff " as any young man of he day . that evening , after dinner in , the conversation between the father - in - law and the son - in - law turn almost exclusively on the son and brother - in - law . or nothing be say about the election , and the name of be not mention . but out of he full heart the father spoke . he be wretch about . do mean to cut he ? " he want you to withdraw some name you call he , " say . " withdraw some name , -- as he might ask some hot - head fellow to do , of he own age , like himself ; some fellow that he have quarrell with ! do he expect he father to send he a write apology ? he have be gambl , and I tell he that he be a gambler . be that too much for a father to say ? " shrug he shoulders , and declare that it be a pity . " he will break my heart if he go on like this , " say the old man . " I ask he to come and dine to - day , but he do not seem to like it . " " like it ! no . he like nothing but that infernal club . " when the evening be over feel that he have do a good stroke of work . he have not exactly make up he mind to keep the father and son apart . that be
be not a part of he strategy , -- at any rate as yet . but he do intend to make himself necessary to the old man , -- to become the old man 's son , and if possible the favourite son . and now he think that he have already do much towards the achievement of he object . the there be great triumph at Longbarns when the news of 's victory reach the place ; -- and when he arrive there himself with he friend , , he be receive as a conquering hero . but of course the tiding of " the row " have go before he , and it be necessary that both he and should tell the story ; -- nor could it be tell privately . be there , and . the old lady have hear of the row , and of course require to be tell all the particular . this be not pleasant to the hero , as in talk of the man it be impossible for they not to talk of the man 's wife . " what a terrible misfortune for poor , " say the old lady , nodd she head at . sigh and say nothing . certainly a terrible misfortune , and one which affec more or less the whole family of Whartons ! " do you mean to say that he be go to attack with a whip ? " ask . " I only know that he be stand there with a whip in he hand , " say . " I think he would have have the worst of that . " " you would have laugh , " say , " to see I walk majestically along the with a cudgel which have just buy for I as be of the proper medium size . I do not doubt he mean to have a fight . and then you should have see the policeman slop over and put himself in the way . I never quite understand where that policeman come from . " " they be very well off for policeman in , " say . " they have always get they go about . " " he must be mad , " say . " poor unfortunate young woman ! " say , hold up both she hand . " I must say that I can not but blame . if he have be firm , it never would have come to that . I wonder whether he ever see he . " " of course he do , " say . " why should not he see he ? you would see he if he would marry a daughter of yours . " " never ! " exclaim the old woman . " if I have have a child so lost to all respect as that , I do not say that I would not have see she . human nature might have prevail . but I would never willingly have put myself into contact with one who have so degrad I and mine . " " I shall be very anxious to know what do about he money , " say . yoArthu allow himself but a couple of day among he friend , and then hurrie up to to take he seat . when there he be astonished to find how many question be ask he about " the row , " and how much be know about it , -- and at the same time how little be really kny . everybody have hear that there have be a row , and everybody know that there have be a lady in the case . but there seem to be a general idea that the lady have be in some way misuse , and that have come forward like a to protect she . a letter have be write , and the husband , ogre - like , have intercept the letter . the lady be the most unfortunate of human being , -- or would have be but for that consolation which she must have in the constancy of she old lover . as to all these matter the story vari ; but everybody be agree on one point . all the world know that have go to , have stood for the borough , and have take the seat away from he rival , -- because that rival have rob he of he bride . how the robbery have be effect the world could not quite say . the world be still of opinion that the lady be violently attach to the man she have not marry . but explain it all clearly to major Pountney by assert that the poor girl have be coerce into the marriage by she father . and thus find himself almost as much a hero in as at . have not be above a week in town , and have become heartily sick of the rumour which in various shape make they way round to he own ears , when he receive a invitation from to go and dine with he at a tavern call the . the invitation surprise he , -- that he should be ask by such a man to dine at such a place , -- but he accept it as a matter of course . he be indeed much interested in a for the drainage of common land which be to be discuss in the house that night ; there be a good deal of common land round , and he have some idea of make he first speech , -- but he calculate that he might get he dinner and yet be back in time for the debate . so he go to the , -- a very quaint , old - fashioned law dining - house in the neighbourhood of , which
which have manage not to get itself pull down a dozen year ago on behalf of the law court which be to bless some come generation . yoArthu have never be there before and be surprised at the black wainscoting , the black table , the old - fashioned grate , the two candle on the table , and the silent waiter . " I want to see you , , " say the old man , press he hand in a melancholy way , " but I could not ask you to . they come in sometimes in the evening , and it might have be unpleasant . at you young man 's club they let stranger dine . we have not anything of that kind at the . you will find they will give you a very good bit of fish here , and a fairish steak . " yoArthu declare that he think it a capital place , -- the best fun in the world . " and they have a very good bottle of claret ; -- better than we get at the , I think . I do not know that I can say much for they champagne . we will try it . you young fellow always drink champagne . " " I hardly ever touch it , " say . " Sherry and claret be my wine . " " very well ;-- very well . I do want to see you , my boy . thing have not turn out just as we wish -- have they ? " " not exactly , sir . " " no indeed . you know the old say , ' dispose it all . ' I have to make the best of it , -- and so no doubt do you . " " there be no doubt about it , sir , " say , speak in a low but almost angry voice . they be not in a room by themselves , but in a recess which separate they from the room . " I do not know that I want to talk about it , but to I it be one of those thing for which there be no remedy . when a man lose he leg , he hobble on , and sometimes have a good time of it at last ; -- but there he be , without a leg . " " it be not my fault , . " " there have be no fault but my own . I go in for the running and get distanced . that be simply all about it , and there be no more to be say . " " you be not surprise that I should wish to see you . " " I be ever so much oblige . I think it be very kind of you . " " I can not go in for a new life as you can . I can not take up politics and parliament . it be too late for I . " " I be go to . there be a come on this very night that I be interested about . you must not be angry if I rush off a little before ten . we be go to lend money to the parish on the security of the rate for drain bit of common land . then we shall sell the land and endow the union , so as to lessen the poor rate , and increase the cereal product of the country . we think we can bring 300,000 acre under the plough in three year , which now produce almost nothing , and in five year would pay all the expense . put the value of the land at L25 a acre , which be low , we shall have create property to the value of seven million and a half . that be something , you know . " " oh , yes , " say , who feel himself quite unable to follow with any interest the aspiration of the young legislator . " of course it be complicated , " continue , " but when you come to look into it it come out clear enough . it be one of the instance of the omnipotence of capital . parliament can do such a thing , not because it have any creative power of its own , but because it have the command of unlimited capital . " look at he , sigh inwardly as he reflect that unrequited love should have bring a clear - head young barrister into mist so thick and labyrinth so mazy as these . " a very good beefsteak indeed , " say . " I do not know when I eat a better one . thank you , no ;--I will stick to the claret . " have offer he . " Claret and bry meat always go well together . pancake ! I do not object to a pancake . a pancake be a very good thing . now would you believe it , sir ; they can not make a pancake at the House . " " and yet they sometimes fall very flat too , " say the lawyer , make a real lawyer 's joke . " it be all in the mixing , sir , " say , carry it on . " we have mixture enough just at present , but it be not of the proper sort ; -- too much of the flour , and not enough of the egg . " but have still something to say , though he hardly know how to say it . " you must come and see we in the after a bit . " " oh ; -- of course . " " I would not ask you to dine there to
to - day , because I think we should be less melancholy here ; -- but you must not cut we altogether . you have not see since you have be in town ? " " no , sir . I believe he live a good deal , -- a good deal with -- . there be a little row down at . of course it will wear off , but just at present he line and my line do not converge . " " I be very unhappy about he , . " " there be nothing the matter ? " " my girl have marry that man . I have nothing to say against he ; -- but of course it be not to my taste ; and I feel it as a separation . and now have quarrell with I . " " Quarrell with you ! " then the father tell the story as well as he know how . he son have lose some money , and he have call he son a gambler ; -- and consequently he son would not come near he . " it be bad to lose they both , . " " that be so unlike . " " it seem to I that everybody have change ,-- except myself . who would have dream that she would have marry that man ? not that I have anything to say against he except that he be not of we sort . he have be very good about , and be very good about he . but will not come to I unless I -- withdraw the word ; --say that I be wrong to call he a gambler . that be a proposition that no son should make to a father . " " it be very unlike , " repeat the other . " have he write to that effect ? " " he have not write a word . " " why do not you see he yourself , and have it out with he ? " " be I to go to that club after he ? " say the father . " write to he and bid he come to you . I will give up my seat if he do not come to you . be always a quaint fellow , a little idle , you know , -- moo about after idea -- " " he be no fool , you know , " say the father . " not at all ; -- only vague . but he be the last man in the world to have nasty vulgar idea of he own importance as distinguished from yours . " " say -- " " I would not quite trust . " " he be not a bad fellow in he way , . of course he be not what I would have like for a son - in - law . I need not tell you that . but he be kind and gentle - mannered , and have always be attach to . you know he save 's life at the risk of he own . " yoArthu could not but smile as he perceive how the old man be be win round by the son - in - law , whom he have treat so violently before the man have become he son - in -law . " by - the - way , what be all that about a letter you write to he ? " " Emily , -- I mean , -- will tell you if you ask she . " " I do not want to ask she . I do not want to appear to set the wife against the husband . I be sure , my boy , you would write nothing that could affront she . " " I think not , . if I know myself at all , or my own nature , it be not probable that I should affront you daughter . " " no ; no ; no . I know that , my dear boy . I be always sure of that . take some more wine . " " no more , thank you . I must be off because I be so anxious about this . " " I could not ask Emily about this letter . now that they be marry I have to make the best of it , -- for she sake . I could not bring myself to say anything to she which might seem to accuse he . " " I think it right , sir , to explain to she that be I not in the hand of other people I would not do anything to interfere with she happiness by oppos she husband . my language be most guard . " " he destroy the letter . " " I have a copy of it , if it come to that , " say . " it will be best , perhaps , to say nothing further about it . well ; -- good night , my boy , if you must go . " then go off to the house , wonder as he go at the change which have apparently come over the character of he old friend . have always be a strong man , and now he seem to be as weak as water . as to , be sure that there be something wrong , but he could not see he way to interfere himself . for the present he be divide from the family . nevertheless he tell himself again and again that that division should not be permanent . of all the world she must always be to he the dearest . the the first month of the go on very much as the last session have go . the ministry
ministry do nothing brilliant . as far as the outer world could see , they seem to be firm enough . there be no opposing party in the strong enough to get a vote against they on any subject . outsider , who only study politics in the column of they newspaper , imagine the to be very strong . but they who be inside , member themselves , and the club quidnunc who be always rub they shoulders against member , know better . the opposition to the be within the itself . have not be allow to build he four ship , and be consequently eager in he fear that the country would be invade by the combine force of and , that would be sell by those power to , that would be annex to the , that a great independent hierarchy would be establish in , and that and would be take away from we ; -- all which evils would be avert by the building of four big ship . a wet blanket of so terrible a size be in itself pernicious to the cabinet , and heartrend to the poor . but could do worse even than this . as he be not to build he four ship , neither should be allow to readjust the county suffrage . when the skeleton of 's scheme be discuss in the cabinet , would not agree to it . the gentleman , he say , who have join the present government with he , would never consent to a measure which would be so utterly destructive of the county interest . if insist on he measure in its propose form , he must , with very great regret , place he resignation in the 's hand , and he believe that he friend would find themselves compelle to follow the same course . then we consult the old . the old 's advice be the same as ever . the 's government be the main object . the present ministry enjoy the support of the country , and he consider it the duty of the of the to remain at he post . the country be in no hurry , and the question of suffrage in the county might be well delay . then he add a little counsel which might be call quite private , as it be certainly intend for no other ear than those of he younger friend . " rope enough and he will hang himself . he own party be become tired of he . if you quarrel with he this session , , and , and , would go out with he , and the government would be break up ; but next you may get rid of he safely . " " I wish it be break up , " say the . " you have you duty to do by the country and by the Queen , and you must not regard you own wish . next session let Monk be ready with he again , -- the same measure exactly . let resign then if he will . should he do so I doubt whether any one would go with he . do not like he much better than you and I do . " the poor be force to obey . the old be he only trust counsellor , and he find himself constrain by he conscience to do as that counsellor counsel he . when , however , , in he place as of the , in answer to some question from a hot and disappointed , averr that the whole of she Majesty 's government have be quite in unison on this question of the county suffrage , he be hardly able to restrain himself . " if there be difference of opinion they must be keep in the background , " say the of . " nothing can justify a direct falsehood , " say the of . thus it come to pass that the only real measure which the government have in hand be one by which hope so to increase the power of irish municipality as to make the believe that a certain amount of be be conceded to they . it be not a great measure , and poor Phinea himself hardly believe in it . and thus the 's ministry come to be call the Faineant . but the Duchess , though she have be much snub , still persever . now and again she would declare herself to be break - heart , and would say that thing might go they own way , that she would send in she resignation , that she would retire into private life and milk cow , that she would shake hand with no more parliamentary cad and " caddess , " -- a word which she condescende to coin for she own use ; that she would spend the next three year in travel about the world ; and lastly , that , let there come of it whatever might , should never again be invite into any house of which she be the mistress . this last threat , which be perhaps the most indiscreet of they all , she absolutely make good ,-- thereby add very greatly to she husband 's difficulty . but by the middle of the party at the house in be as frequent and as large as ever . indeed it be all party with she . the Duchess possess a pretty little villa down at , on the river , call the Horns , and give party there when there be none in . she have picnic , and flower party , and tea party , and afternoon , and evening , on the lawn , -- till half be always on its way to or back again . how she work ! and yet
yet from day to day she swore that the world be ungrateful , and that she would work no more ! I think that the world be ungrateful . everybody go . she be so far successful that nobody think of despise she party . it be quite the thing to go to the Duchess 's , whether at or in . but people abuse she and laugh at she . they say that she intrigue to get political support for she husband , -- and , worse than that , they say that she fail . she do not fail altogether . the world be not take captive as she have intend . young member of parliament do not become hotly enthusiastic in support of she and she husband as she have hope that they would do . she have not become a institution of granite , as she dream have fondly tell she might be possible ; -- for there have be moment in which she have almost think that she could rule by give dinner and supper party , by ex and champagne . but in a dull , phlegmatic way , they who eat the ex and drank the champagne be true to she . there be a feeling abroad that " " be a " good sort of fellow " and ought to be support . and when the ridicule become too strong , or the abuse too sharp , man would take up the cudgel for she , and fight she battle ; -- a little too openly , perhaps , as they would do it under she eye , and in she hearing , and would tell she what they have do , mistak on such occasion she good humour for sympathy . there be just enough of success to prevent that abandonment of she project which she so often threaten , but not enough to make she triumphant . she be too clever not to see that she be ridicule . she know that man call she among themselves . she be herself quite alive to the fact that she herself be want in dignity , and that with all the means at she disposal , with all she courage and all she talent , she do not quite play the part of the really great lady . but she do not fail to tell herself that labou continue would at last be successful , and she be strong to bear the buffet of the ill - natured . she do not think that she bring first - class material to she work , but she believe , -- a belief as erroneous as , ala , it be common , -- that first - rate result might be achieve by second - rate means . " we have such a battle about you Grace last night , " say to she . " and be you my knight ? " " indeed I be . I never hear such nonsense . " " what be they say ? " " oh , the old story ; -- that you be like , busy yourself about many thing . " " why should not I busy myself about many thing ? it be a pity , , that some of you man have not someth to busy yourselves about . " all this be unpleasant . she could on such a occasion make up she mind to drop any who have venture to take too much upon himself ; but she feel that in the effort which she have make after popularity , she have submit herself to unpleasant familiarity ; -- and though persistent in she course , she be still angry with herself . when she have begin she campaign as the 's wife , one of she difficulty have be with regard to money . a abnormal expenditure become necessary , for which she husband 's express sanction must be obtained , and step take in which he personal assistance would be necessary ; -- but this have be do , and there be now no further impediment in that direction . it seem to be understand that she be to spend what money she please . there have be various contests between they , but in every contest she have gain something . he have be majestically indignant with she in reference to the candidature at , -- but , as be usual with many of we , have be unable to maintain he anger about two thing at the same time . or , rather , in the majesty of he anger about she interference , he have disdain to descmend to the smaller fault of she extravagance . he have seem to concede everything else to she , on condition that he should be allow to be imperious in reference to the borough . in that matter she have give way , never have open she mouth about it after that one unfortunate word to . but , have do so , she be entitle to squander she thousand without remorse , -- and she squander they . " it be you five - and - twenty thousand pound , my dear , " she once say to . , who often take upon herself to question the prudence of all this expenditure . this refer to a certain sum of money which have be leave by the old to , as she be then call , -- a legacy which that lady have repudiate . the money have , in truth , be give away to a relation of the 's by the joint consent of the lady and of the himself , but the Duchess be pleased to refer to it occasionally as a still exist property . " my five - and - twenty thousand pound , as you call it , would not
not go very far . " " what be the use of money if you do not spend it ? the would go on collect it and buy more property , which always mean more trouble , -- not because he be avaricious , but because for the time that come easier than spend . Suppose he have marry a woman without a shilling , he would still have be a rich man . as it be , my property be more even than he own . if we can do any good by spend the money , why should not it be spend ? " " if you can do any good ! " " it all come round to that . it be not because I like always to live in a windmill ! I have come to hate it . at this moment I would give worlds to be down at matching with no one but the child , and to go about in a straw hat and a muslin gown . I have a fancy that I could sit under a tree and read a sermon , and think it the sweetest recreation . but I have make the attempt to do all this , and it be so mean to fail ! " " but where be to be the end of it ? " " there shall be no end as long as he be Prime . he be the first man in . some people would say the first in , -- or in the world . a should entertain like a . " " he need not be always entertaine . " " hospitality should run from a man with he wealth and he position , like water from a fountain . as he hand be know to be full , so it should be know to be open . when the delight of he friend be in question he should know nothing of cost . Pearl should drop from he as from a fairy . but I do not think you understand I . " " not when the pearl be to be pick up by , . " " I can not make the man any better , -- nor yet the woman . they be poor mean creature . the world be make up of such . I do not know that be worse than or . people see by the mind be exactly different to thing see by the eye . they grow smaller and smaller as you come nearer down to they , whereas thing become bigger . I remember when I use to think that member of the cabinet be almost gods , and now they seem to be no bigger than the shoeblack , -- only less picturesque . he tell I the other day of the time when he give up go into power for the sake of take I abroad . ah I ! how much be happen then , -- and how much have happene since that ! we do not know you then . " " he have be a good husband to you . " " and I have be a good wife to he ! I have never have he for a hour out of my heart since that , or ever for a moment forget he interest . I can not live with he because he shut himself up read blue - book , and be always at he office or in the house ; -- but I would if I could . be I not do it all for he ? you do not think that the be particularly pleasant to I ! think of you life and of mine . you have have lover . " " one in my life , -- when I be quite entitled to have one . " " well ; I be of , and I be the wife of the , and I have a larger property of my own than any other young woman that ever be bear ; and I be myself too ,-- that be , and I have make for myself a character that I be not asham of . but I would be the curate 's wife to - morrow , and make pudding , if I could only have my own husband and my own child with I . what be the use of it all ? I like you better than anybody else , but you do nothing but scold I . " still the party go on , and the Duchess laboure hard among she guest , and wear she jewel , and stand on she foot all the night , night after night , be civil to one person , bright to a second , confidential to a third , and sarcastic to a unfortunate fourth ; -- and in the morning she would work hard with she list , see who have come to she and who have stay away , and arrange who should be ask and who should be omit . in the meantime the altogether avoid these thing . at first he have be content to show himself , and escape as soon as possible ; -- but now he be never see at all in he own house , except at certain heavy dinner . to he never go at all , and in he own house in town very rarely even pass through the door that lead into the reception room . he have not time for ordinary society . so say the Duchess . and many , perhaps the majority of those who frequent the house , really believe that he official duty be too onerous to leave he time for conversation . but in truth the hour go heavily with he as he sit alone in he study , sighing for some sweet
sweet parliamentary task , and regret the day in which he be privileged to sit in the of till two o'clock in the morning , in the hope that he might get a clause or two pass in he for decimal coinage . it be at the at a afternoon party , give there in the garden by the Duchess , early in , that first see Emily after she marriage , and after the occurrence in . as it happen he come out upon the lawn close after they , and find they speak to the Duchess as they pass on . she have put herself out of the way to be civil to and , feel that she have in some degree injure he in reference to the election , and have therefore invite both he and he wife on more than one occasion . be there as a young man well know in the world , and as a supporter of the 's . the Duchess have take up , -- as she be will not to take up new man , and have personally become tired of . of course she have hear of the election , and have be tell that have behave badly . of she do not know enough to care anything , one way or the other ; -- but she still encourage he because she have cause he disappointment . she have now detain they a minute on the terrace before the window while she say a word , and become one of the little party before he know whom he be meet . " I be delight , " she say , " that you two Silverbridge heroe should meet together here as friend . " it be almost incumbent on she to say something , though it would have be better for she not to have allude to they heroism . put out she hand , and of course take it . then the two man bow slightly to each other , raise they hat . yoArthu pause a moment with they , as they pass on from the Duchess , think that he would say something in a friendly tone . but he be silence by the frown on the husband 's face , and be almost constrain to go away without a word . it be very difficult for he even to be silent , as she greeting have be kind . but yet it be impossible for he to ignore the displeasure display in the man 's countenance . so he touche he hat , and ask she to remember he affectionately to she father , turn off the path and go away . " why do you shake hand with that man ? " say . it be the first time since they marriage that he voice have be than of a angry man and a offended husband . " why not , ? he and I be very old friend , and we have not quarrell . " " you must take up you husband 's friendship and you husband 's quarrel . do I not tell you that he have insult you ? " " he never insult I . " " Emily , you must allow I to be the judge of that . he insult you , and then he behave like a poltroon down at , and I will not have you know he any more . when I say so I suppose that will be enough . " he wait for a reply , but she say nothing . " I ask you to tell I that you will obey I in this . " " of course he will not come to my house , nor should I think of go to he , if you disapprove . " " go to he house ! he be unmarried . " " Suppose he have a wife ! , perhaps it will be better that you and I should not talk about he . " " by g ----, " say , " there shall be no subject on which I will be afraid to talk to my own wife . I insist on you assure I that you will never speak to he again . " he have take she along one of the upper walk because it be desolate , and he could there speak to she , as he think , without be hear . she have , almost unconsciously , make a faint attempt to lead he down upon the lawn , no doubt feel averse to private conversation at the moment ; but he have persever , and have resent the little effort . the idea in he mind that she be unwilling to hear he abuse , unwilling to renounce the man , anxious to escape he order for such renunciation , add fuel to he jealousy . it be not enough for he that she have reject this man and have accept he . the man have be she lover , and she should be make to denounce the man . it might be necessary for he to control he feeling before old ; -- but he know enough of he wife to be sure that she would not speak evil of he or betray he to she father . she loyalty to he , which he could understand though not appreciate , enable he to be a tyrant to she . so now he repeat he order to she , pause in the path , with a voice unintentionally loud , and frown down upon she as he speak . " you must tell I , Emily , that you will never speak to he again . " she be silent , look up into he face , not with tremulous eye , but with infinite woe write in they , have
have he be able to read the writing . she know that he be disgrac himself , and yet he be the man whom she love ! " if you bid I not to speak to he , I will not ; -- but he must know the reason why . " " he shall know nothing from you . you do not mean to say that you would write to he ? " " must tell he . " " I will not have it so . in this matter , Emily , I will be master , -- as it be fit that I should be . I will not have you talk to you father about . " " why not , ? " " because I have so decide . he be a old family friend . I can understand that , and do not therefore wish to interfere between he and you father . but he have take upon himself to write a insolent letter to you as my wife , and to interfere in my affair . as to what should be do between you and he I must be the judge , and not you father . " " and must I not speak to papa about it ? " " no ! " " , you make too little , I think , of the associations and affection of a whole life . " " I will hear nothing about affection , " he say angrily . " you can not mean that -- that -- you doubt I ? " " certainly not . I think too much of myself and too little of he . " it do not occur to he to tell she that he think too well of she for that . " but the man who have offend I must be hold to have offend you also . " " you might say the same if it be my father . " he pause at this , but only for a moment . " certainly I might . it be not probable , but no doubt I might do so . if you father be to quarrel with I , you would not , I suppose , hesitate between we ? " " nothing on earth could divide I from you . " " I from you . in this very matter I be only take you part , if you do but know it . " they have now pass on , and have meet other person , have make they way through a little shrubbery on to a further lawn ; and she have hope , as they be surround by people , that he would allow the matter to drop . she have be unable as yet to make up she mind as to what she would say if he press she hard . but if it could be pass by , -- if nothing more be demand from she , -- she would endeaavor to forget it all , say to herself that it have come from sudden passion . but he be too resolute for such a termination as that , and too keenly alive to the expediency of make she thoroughly subject to he . so he turn she round and take she back through the shrubbery , and in the middle of it stop she again and renew he demand . " promise I that you will not speak again to . " " then I must tell papa . " " no ; -- you shall tell he nothing . " " , if you exact a promise from I that I will not speak to or bow to he should circumstance bring we together as they do just now , I must explain to my father why I have do so . " " you will wilfully disobey I ? " " in that I must . " he glar at she , almost as though he be go to strike she , but she bear he look without flinching . " I have leave all my old friend , , and have give myself heart and soul to you . no woman do so with a truer love or more devoted intention of do she duty to she husband . you affair shall be my affair . " " well ; yes ; rather . " she be endeavour to assure he of she truth , but could understand the sneer which be convey in he acknowledgement . " but you cannot , nor can I for you sake , abolish the thing which have be . " " I wish to abolish nothing that have be . I speak of the future . " " between we family and that of there have be old friendship which be still very dear to my father , -- the memory of which be still very dear to I . at you request I be willing to put all that aside from I . there be no reason why I should ever see any of the Fletcher again . we life will be apart . should we meet we greeting would be very slight . the separation can be effect without word . but if you demand a absolute promise , -- I must tell my father . " " we will go home at once , " he say instantly , and aloud . and home they go , back to , without exchange a word on the journey . he be absolutely black with rage , and she be content to remain silent . the promise be not give , nor , indeed , be it exact under the condition which the wife have impos upon it . he be most desirous to make she subject to he will in all thing , and quite prepare to
to exercise tyranny over she to any extent , -- so that she father should know nothing of it . he could not afford to quarrel with . " you have better go to bed , " he say , when he get she back to town ; -- and she go , if not to be , at any rate into she own room . Retires " he be a horrid man . he come here and quarrell with the other man in my house , or rather down at , and make a fool of himself , and then quarrell with he wife and take she away . what fool , what ass , what horror man be ! how impossible it be to be civil and gracious without get into a mess . I be tempt to say that I will never know anybody any more . " such be the complaint make by the to . a few day after the party , and from this it be evident that the latter affair have not pass without notice . " do he make a noise about it ? " ask . " there be not a row , but there be enough of a quarrel to be visible and audible . he walk about and talk loud to the poor woman . of course it be my own fault . but the man be clever and I like he , and people tell I that he be of the right sort . " " the heard of it ? " " no ; -- and I hope he will not . it would be such a triumph for he , after all the fuss at . but he never hear of anything . if two man fight a duel in he own dining - room he would be the last man in to know it . " " then say nothing about it , and do not ask the man any more . " " you may be sure I will not ask the man with the wife any more . the other man be in parliament and can not be throw over so easily -- and it be not he fault . but I be get so sick of it all ! I be tell that have complain to Plantagenet that he be not ask to the dinner . " " impossible ! " " do not you mention it , but he have . have tell I so . " be one of the 's private secretary . " what do the say ? " " I do not quite know . be one of my familiars , but I do not like to ask he for more than he choose to tell I . suggest that I should invite at once ; but there I be obdurate . of course , if tell I I will ask the man to come every day of the week ; -- but it be one of those thing that I shall need to be tell directly . my idea be , you know , that they have better get rid of , -- and that if choose to kick over the trace , he may be turn loose without any danger . one have little bird that give one all manner of information , and one little bird have tell I that and do not speak . be not very much himself , but he be a good straw to show which way the wind blow . certainly send no message about , and I be afraid the gentleman must look for he dinner elsewhere . " the have in truth express himself very plainly to ; but with so much indiscreet fretfulness that the discreet private secretary have not tell it even to the Duchess . " this kind of thing argue a want of cordiality that may be fatal to we , " have say somewhat grandiloquently to the , and the have make -- almost no reply . " I suppose I may ask my own guest in my own house , " he have say afterwards to , " though in public life I be everybody be slave . " , anxious of course to maintain the unity of the party , have tell the Duchess so much as would , he think , induce she to give way ; but he have not repeat the 's own observation , which be , think , hostile to the interest of the party . the Duchess have only smiled and make a little grimace , with which the private secretary be already well acquaint . and receive no invitation . in those day be unhappy and irritable , doubtful of further success as regard the , but quite resolve to pull the house down about the ear of the inhabitant rather than to leave it with gentle resignation . to he it seem to be impossible that the should exist without he . he too have have moment of high - vaulting ambition , in which he have almost feel himself to be the great man require by the country , the one ruler who could gather together in he grasp the reins of government and drive the coach single - hand safe through its difficulty for the next half - dozen year . there be man who can not conceive of themselves that anything should be difficult for they , and again other who can not bring themselves so to trust themselves as to think that they can ever achieve anything great . Sample of each sort from time to time rise high in political life , carry thither apparently by concourse of atom ; and it often happen that the more confident samples be by no means the most capable . the concourse of atom have carry so high that he could
could not but think himself intend for something higher . but the , who have really be waft to the very top , have always doubt himself , believe himself capable of do some one thing by dint of industry , but with no further confidence in he own power . have perceive something of he leader 's weakness , and have think that he might profit by it . he be not only a distinguished member of the cabinet , but even the recognised leader of the of . he look out the fact and find that for five - and - twenty year out of the last thirty the leader of the of have be the of the government . he feel that he would be mean not to stretch out he hand and take the prize destin for he . the be a poor timid man who have very little to say for himself . then come the little episode about the dinner . it have become very evident to all the world that the Duchess of have cut , -- that the 's wife , who be great in hospitality , would not admit the of the into she house . the doings at , and in , and at the be watch much too closely by the world at large to allow such omission to be otherwise than conspicuous . since the commencement of the there have be a sery of article in the " 's " violently abusive of the , and in one or two of these the indecency of these exclusion have be expose with great strength of language . and the editor of the " 's " have discover that be the one man in parliament fit to rule the nation . till parliament should discover this fact , or at least acknowledge it , -- the discovery have be happily make by the " 's , " -- the editor of the " 's " think that there could be no hope for the country . of course see all these article , and in he very heart believe that a man have at length spring up among they fit to conduct a newspaper . the also unfortunately see the " 's . " in he old happy day two papers a day , one in the morning and the other before dinner , suffice to tell he all that he want to know . now he feel it necessary to see almost every rag that be publish . and he would skim through they all till he find the line in which he himself be malign , and then , with sore heart and irritate nerve , would pause over every contumelious word . he would have bite he tongue out rather than have speak of the torture he endure , but he be torture and do endure . he know the cause of the bitter personal attack make on he , -- of the abuse with which he be load , and of the ridicule , infinitely more painful to he , with which he wife 's social splendour be bespatter . he remember well the attempt which have make to obtain a entrance into he house , and he own scornful rejection of that gentleman 's overture . he know , -- no man know better , -- the real value of that able editor 's opinion . and yet every word of it be gall and wormwood to he . in every paragraph there be a scourge which hit he on the raw and open wound which he could show to no kind surgeon , for which he could find solace in no friendly treatment . not even to he wife could he condescmend to say that have hurt he . then have come himself . explain himself gracefully . he of course could understand that no gentleman have a right to complain because he be not ask to another gentleman 's house . but the affair of the country be above private consideration ; and he , actuate by public feeling , would condescmend to do that which under other circumstance would be impossible . the public press , which be ever vigilant , have suggest that there be some official estrangement , because he , , have not be include in the list of guest invite by he . do not he think that there might be seed of , -- he would not quite say decay for the , in such a state of thing ? the pause a moment , and then say that he think there be no such seed . bow haughtily and withdraw -- swear at the moment that the should be make to fall into a thousand shiver . this have all taken place a fortnight before the party at the from which poor have be withdrawn so hastily . but , when he commence the proceedings consequent on this resolution , do not find all that support which he have expect . unfortunately there have be a uncomfortable word or two between he and , the political Secretary at the Admiralty . have never quite seconded 's ardour in that matter of the four ship , and in he pride of place have venture to snub . now could bear a snubbing perhaps as well as any other official subordinate , -- but he be one who would study the question and assure himself that it be , or that it be not , worth he while to bear it . he , too , have discuss with he friend the condition of the , and have come to conclusion rather adverse to than otherwise . when , therefore , the sound he as to the expediency of some step in the direction of a firmer political combination than that at present exist , -- by which of
of course be mean the dethronement of the present ,-- have snub he ! then there have be slight official crimination and recrimination , till a state of thing have come to pass which almost justifi the statement make by the to . the have many component part , some coalescing without difficulty , but with no special cordiality . such be the condition of thing between the very conservative - of and he somewhat radical , , -- between probably the larger number of those who be contente with the duty of they own office and the pleasure and profit arise therefrom . some by this time hardly coalesce at all , as be the case with and , the Attorney - General and Solicitor- General ; -- and be especially the case with the and . but in one or two happy case the be sincere and loyal , -- and in no case be this more so than with regard to and . and have throughout they long parliamentary life belong to opposite party , and have be accustom to regard each other with mutual jealousy and almost with mutual hatred . but now they have come to see how equal , how alike , and how sympathetic be they taste , and how well each might help the other . as long as could keep he old place at the Treasury , -- and he ambition never stir he to atch higher , -- he be quite contente that he old rival should be happy at the Admiralty . and that old rival , when he look about he and feel he present comfort , when he remember how short - lived have be the good thing which have hitherto come in he way , and how little probable it be that long - liv good thing should be he when the be break up , manfully determined that loyalty to the present head of the government be he duty . he have sit for too many year on the same bench with to believe much in he power of govern the country . therefore , when drop he hint do not take it . " I wonder whether it be true that complain to the that he be not ask to dinner ? " say to . " I should hardly think so . I can not fancy that he would have the pluck , " say . " the be not the easiest man in the world to speak to about such a thing as that . " " it would be a monstrous thing for a man to do ! but 's head be quite turn . you can see that . " " we never think very much about he , you know , on we side . " " it be what you side think about he , " rejoin , " that put he where he be now . " " it be the fate of accident , , which put so many of we in we place , and arrange we work for we , and make we little man or big man . there be other man besides who have be toss up in a blanket till they do not know whether they head or they heel be highest . " " I quite believe in the , " say , almost alarme by the suggestion which he new friend have seem to make . " so do I , . he have not the obduracy of , nor the ineffable manner of , nor the brilliant intellect of . " " the picturesque imagination of , " say , feel himself bound to support the character of he late chief . " he audacity , " say . " but he have peculiar gift of he own , and gift fit for the peculiar combination of circumstance , if he will only be content to use they . he be a just , unambitious , intelligent man , in whom after a while the country would come to have implicit confidence . but he be thin - skinned and ungenial . " " I have get into he boat , " say , enthusiastically , " and he will find that I shall be true to he . " " there be no better boat to be in at present , " say the slightly sarcastic . " as to the pinnace , it will be more difficult to get it afloat than the four ship themselves . to tell the truth honestly , , we have to ry ourselves of . I have a great regard for the man . " " I can not say I ever like he , " say . " I do not talk about liking , -- but he have achieve success , and be to be regarde . now he have lose he head , and he be bound to get a fall . the question be , -- who shall fall with he ? " " I do not feel myself at all bound to sacrifice myself . " " I do not know who do . , I suppose , will resent the injury do to he . but I can hardly think that a strong government can be form by and . any secession be a weakness , -- of course ; but I think he may survive it . " and so and make up they minds that the of the might be throw overboard without much danger to the 's ship . , however , be quite in earnest . the man have spirit enough to feel that no alternative be left to he after he have condescende to suggest that he should be ask to dinner and have be refuse . he try , and find that be a mean fellow , wedde ,
, as he tell himself , to he salary . then he sound , urge various reason . the country be not safe without more ship . be altogether wrong about revenue . 's idea about be revolutionary . but think that , upon the whole , the present serve the country well , and consider himself bound to adhere to it . " he can not bear the idea of be out of power , " say to himself . he next say a word to ; but be not the man to be lead by the nose by . have he grievance and mean to have he revenge , but he know how to choose he own time . " the be not a bad fellow , " say , -- " perhaps a little weak , but well - mean . I think we ought to stand by he a little longer . as for 's , I have not troublead myself about it . " then declare to himself that be a coward , and resolve that he would act alone . about the middle of he go to the at the , be close with he , and in a very long narration of he own difference , difficulty , opinion , and grievance , explain to the that he conscience call upon he to resign . the listen and bow he head , and with one or two very gently - uttered word express he regret . then , in another long speech , laid bear he bosom to the whom he be leave , declare the inexpressible sorrow with which he have find himself call upon to take a step which he fear might be prejudicial to the political status of a man whom he honoure so much as he do the of . then the bow again , but say nothing . the man have be guilty of the impropriety of question the way in which the 's private hospitality be exercise , and the could not bring himself to be genially civil to such a offender . go on to say that he would of course explain he view in the cabinet , but that he have think it right to make they know to the as soon as they be form . " the best friend must part , , " he say as he take he leave . " I hope not , ; I hope not , " say the . but have be too full of himself and of the word he be to speak , and of the thing he be about to do , to understand either the 's word or he silence . and so resign , and thus supply the only morsel of political interest which the session produce . " take no more notice of he than if you footman be go , " have be the advice of the old . of course there be a cabinet meeting on the occasion , but even there the commotion be very slight , as every member knew before enter the room what it be that intend to do . say that the step be one to be much lamented . " very much , indeed , " say the of . he word themselves be false and hypocritical , but the tone of he voice take away all the deceit . " I be afraid , " say the , " from what have say to I privately , that we can not hope that he will change he mind . " " that I certainly can not do , " say , with all the dignify courage of a modern martyr . on the next morning the papers be full of the political fact , and be bless with a subject on which they could excercise they prophetical sagacity . the remark make be generally favourable to the government . three or four of the morning papers be of opinion that though have be a strong man , and a good public servant , the might exist without he . but the " 's " be able to expound to the people at large that the only grain of salt by which the have be keep from putrefaction have be now cast out , and that mortification , death , and corruption , must ensue . it be one of 's greatest effort . " get " maintain he anger against he wife for more than a week after the scene at , feed it with reflection on what he call she disobedience . be it a make - believe anger . she have declare she intention to act in opposition to he expressed order . he feel that he present condition be prejudicial to he interest , and that he must take he wife back into favour , in order that he might make progress with she father , but could hardly bring himself to swallow he wrath . he think that it be she duty to obey he in everything , -- and that disobedience on a matter touch she old lover be a abominable offence , to be visit with severest marital displeasure , and with a succession of scowl that should make she miserable for a month at least . nor on she behalf would he have hesitate , though the misery might have continue for three month . but then the old man be the main hope of he life , and must be make its mainstay . Brilliant prospect be before he . he have use to think that be a hale man , with some terribly vexatious term of life before he . but now , now that he be see more closely , he appear to be very old . he would sit half bent in the arm -chair in , and look as though
though he be near a hundred . and from day to day he seem to lean more upon he son - in - law , whose visit to he be continue , and always well take . the constant subject of discourse between they be , who have not yet see he father since the misfortune of they quarrel . have declare to a dozen time that he would go to he father if he father wish it , and as often report to the father that would not go to he unless the father express such a wish . and so they have be keep apart . do not suppose that the old man would disinherit he son altogether , -- do not , perhaps , wish it . but he think that the condition of the old man 's mind would affect the partition of he property , and that the old man would surely make some new will in the present state of he affair . the old man always ask after he daughter , begge that she would come to he , and at last it be necessary that a evening should be fix . " we shall be delighted to come to - day or to - morrow , " say . " we have better say to - morrow . there would be nothing to eat to - day . the house be not now what it use to be . " it be therefore expedient that should drop he anger when he get home , and prepare he wife to dine in in a proper frame of mind . she misery have be extreme ;-- very much more bitter than he have imagine . it be not only that he displeasure make she life for the time wearisome , and rob the only society she have of all its charms . it be not only that she heart be wound by he anger . those evil might have be short - liv . but she have see , -- she could not fail to see , -- that he conduct be unworthy of she and of she deep love . though she struggle hard against the feeling , she could not but despise the meanness of he jealousy . she know thoroughly well that there have be no grain of offence in that letter from , -- and she know that no man , no true man , would have take offence at it . she try to quench she judgment , and to silence the verdict which she intellect give against he , but she intellect be too strong even for she heart . she be begin to learn that the god of she idolatry be but a little human creature , and that she should not have worship at so poor a shrine . but nevertheless the love should be continue , and , if possible , the worship , though the idol have be already find to have foot of clay . he be she husband , and she would be true to he . as morning after morning he leave she , still with that harsh , unmanly fry upon he face , she would look up at he with entreating eye , and when he return would receive he with she fondest smile . at length he , too , smile . he come to she after that interview with and tell she , speak with the soft yet incisive voice which she use to love so well , that they be to dine in the on the follow day . " let there be a end of all this , " he say , take she in he arm and kiss she . of course she do not tell he that " all this " have sprung from he ill - humour and not from hers . " I own I have be angry , " he continue . " I will say nothing more about it now ; but that man do vex I . " " I have be so sorry that you should have be vex . " " well ; -- let it pass away . I do not think you father be look very well . " " he be not ill ? " " oh no . he feel the loss of you society . he be so much alone . you must be more with he . " " have he not see yet ? " " no . be not behave altogether well . " Emily be make unhappy by this and show it . " he be the best fellow in the world . I may safely say there be no other man whom I regard so warmly as I do you brother . but he take wrong idea into he head , and nothing will knock they out . I wonder what you father have do about he will . " " I have not a idea . nothing you may be sure will make he unjust to Everett . " " ah !-- you do not happen to know whether he ever make a will ? " " not at all . he would be sure to say nothing about it to I , -- or to anybody . " " that be a kind of secrecy which I think wrong . it lead to so much uncertainty . you would not like to ask he ? " " no ;-- certainly . " " it be astonish to I how afraid you be of you father . he have not any land , have he ? " " land ! " " real estate . you know what i mean . he could not well have land property without you know it . " she shook she head . " it might make a immense difference
difference to we , you know . " " why so ? " " if he be to die without a will , any land ,-- house and that kind of property , -- would go to . I never know a man who tell he child so little . I want to make you understand these thing . you and I will be badly off if he do not do something for we . " " you do not think he be really ill ? " " no ; -- not ill . above seventy be apt to die , you know . " " oh , , -- what a way to talk of it ! " " well , my love , the thing be so seriously matter - of - fact , that it be better to look at it in a matter - of - fact way . I do not want you father to die . " " I hope not . I hope not . " " but I should be very glad to learn what he mean to do while he life . I want to get you into sympathy with I in this matter ; -- but it be so difficult . " " indeed I sympathise with you . " " the truth be he have take a aversion to . " " forbid ! " " I be do all I can to prevent it . but if he do throw over we ought to have the advantage of it . there be no harm in say as much as that . think what it would be if he should take it into he head to leave he money to hospitals . my g ----; fancy what my condition would be if I be to hear of such a will as that ! if he destroy a old will , partly because he do not like we marriage , and partly in anger against , and then die without make another , the property would be divide ,-- unless he have buy land . you see how many dangers there be . oh dear ! I can look forward and see myself mad , -- or else see myself so proudly triumphant ! " all this horrify she , but he do not see she horror . he know that she dislike it , but think that she dislike the trouble , and that she dread she father . " now I do think that you could help I a little , " he continue . " what can I do ? " " get round he when he be a little down in the mouth . that be the way in which old man be conquer . " how utterly ignorant he be of the very nature of she mind and disposition ! to be tell by she husband that she be to " get round " she father ! " you should see he every day . he would be deligh if you would go to he at he chamber . or you could take care to be in the when he come home . I do not know whether we have not better leave this and go and live near he . would you mind that ? " " I would do anything you would suggest as to live anywhere . " " but you will not do anything I suggest as to you father . " " as to be with he , if I think he wish it ,-- though I have to walk my foot off , I would go to he . " " there be no need of hurt you foot . there be the brougham . " " I do so wish , , you would discontinue the brougham . I do not at all want it . I do not at all dislike cab . and I be only joke about walking . I walk very well . " " certainly not . you fail altogether to understand my idea about thing . if thing be go bad with we , I would infinitely prefer get a pair of horse for you to put down the one you have . " she certainly do not understand he idea . " whatever we do we must hold we head up . I think he be come round to cotton to I . he be very close , but I can see that he like my go to he . of course , as he grow older from day to day , he will constantly want some one to lean on more than heretofore . " " I would go and stay with he if he want I . " " I have think of that too . now that would be a saving ,-- without any fall . and if we be both there we could hardly fail to know what he be do . you could offer that , could not you ? you could say as much as that ? " " I could ask he if he wish it . " " just so . say that it occur to you that he be lonely by himself , and that we will both go to the at a moment 's notice if he think it will make he comfortable . I feel sure that that will be the best step to take . I have already have a offer for these room , and could get rid of the thing we have buy to advantage . " this , too , be terrible to she , and at the same time altogether unintelligible . she have be invite to buy little treasure to make they home comfortable , and have already learn to take that delight in she belonging which be one of the greatest pleasure of a
a young married woman 's life . a girl in she old home , before she be give up to a husband , have many source of interest , and probably from day to day see many people . and the man just marry go out to he work , and occupy he time , and have he thickly - peopled world around he . but the bride , when the bridal honour of the honeymoon be over , when the sweet care of the first cradle have not yet come to she , be apt to be lonely and to be drive to the contemplation of the pretty thing with which she husband and she friend have surround she . it have certainly be so with this young bride , whose husband leave she in the morning and only return for they late dinner . and now she be tell that she household gods have have a price put upon they and that they be to be sell . she have intend to suggest that she would pay she father a visit , and she husband immediately propose that they should quarter themselves permanently on the old man ! she be ready to give up she brougham , though she like the comfort of it well enough ; but to that he would not consent because the possession of it give he a air of wealth ; but without a moment 's hesitation he could catch at the idea of throw upon she father the burden of maintain both she and himself ! she understand the meaning of this . she could read he mind so far . she endeavoure not to read the book too closely , -- but there it be , open to she wider day by day , and she know that the lesson which it teach be vulgar and damnable . and yet she have to hide from he she own perception of himself ! she have to sympathise with he desire and yet to abstain from do that which he desire demand from she . Alas , poor girl ! she soon know that she marriage have be a mistake . there be probably no one moment in which she make the confession to herself . but the conviction be there , in she mind , as though the confession have be make . then there would come upon she unbidden , unwelcome reminiscence of ,-- thought that she would struggle to banish , accuse herself of some heinous crime because the thought would come back to she . she remembe he light wavy hair , which she have love as one love the beauty of a dog , which have see to she young imagination , to she in the ignorance of she early year , to lack something of a dream - of manliness . she remembe he eager , boyish , honest entreaty to herself , which to she have be without that dignity of a superior be which a husband should possess . she become aware that she have think the less of he because he have think the more of she . she have worship this other man because he have assume superiority and have tell she that he be big enough to be she master . but now , -- now that it be all too late , -- the veil have fall from she eyes . she could now see the difference between manliness and " deportment . " ah , -- that she should ever have be so blind , she who have give herself credit for see so much clearer than they who be she elder ! and now , though at last she do see clearly , she could not have the consolation of tell any one what she have see . she must bear it all in silence , and live with it , and still love this god of clay that she have choose . and , above all , she must never allow herself even to think of that other man with the wavy light hair , -- that man who be rise in the world , of whom all people say all good thing , who be show himself to be a man by the work he do , and whose true tenderness she could never doubt . she father be leave to she . she could still love she father . it might be that it would be best for he that she should go back to she old home , and take care of he old age . if he should wish it , she would make no difficulty of part with the thing around she . of what concern be the prettiness of life to one whose inner soul be hamper with such ugliness ? it might be better that they should live in , -- if she father wish it . it be clear to she now that she husband be in urgent want of money , though of he affair , even of he way of make money , she know nothing . as that be the case , of course she would consent to any practicable retrenchment which he would propose . and then she think of other come joys and come trouble , -- of how in future year she might have to teach a girl falsely to believe that she father be a good man , and to train a boy to honest purpose whatever parental lesson might come from the other side . but the mistake she have make be acknowledge . the man who could enjoin she to " get round " she father could never have be worthy of the love she have give he . chapter XL " come and try it " the husband be almost jovial when he come home just in time to take he
he young wife to dine with they father . " I have have such a day in the city , " he say , laugh . " I wish I could introduce you to my friend , . " " can not you do so ? " " well , no ; not exactly . of course you would like he because he be such a wonderful character , but he would hardly do for you drawing - room . he be the vulgarest little creature you ever put you eye on ; and yet in a certain way he be my partner . " " then I suppose you trust he ? " " indeed I do not ; -- but I make he useful . poor little Sexty ! I do trust he to a degree , because he believe in I and think he can do best by stick to I . the old say of ' honour among thief ' be not without a dash of truth in it . when two man be in a boat together they must be true to each other , else neither will get to the shore . " " you do not attribute high motive to you friend . " " I be afraid there be not very many high motive in the world , my girl , especially in the city ;-- nor yet at . it can hardly be from high motive when a lot of man , think differently on every possible subject , come together for the sake of pay and power . I do not know whether , after all , may not have as high motive as the of . I do not suppose any one ever have lower motive than the Duchess when she chisell I about . never mind ;-- it will all be one a hundred year hence . get ready , for I want you to be with you father a little before dinner . " then , when they be in the brougham together , he begin a course of very plain instruction . " look here , dear ; you have better get he to talk to you before dinner . I dare say . will be there , and I will get she on one side . at any rate you can manage it because we shall be early , and I will take up a book while you be talk to he . " " what do you wish I to say to he , ? " " I have be think of you own proposal , and I be quite sure that we have better join he in the . the thing be , I be in a little mess about the room , and can not stay on without pay very dearly for they . " " I think you have pay for they . " " well ; -- yes ; in one sense I have ; but you do not understand about business . you have better not interrupt I now as I have get a good deal to say before we get to the . it will suit I to give up the room . I do not like they , and they be very dear . as you yourself say , it will be a capital thing for we to go and stay with you father . " " I mean only for a visit . " " it will be for a visit , -- and we will make it a long visit . " it be odd that the man should have be so devoid of right feel himself as not to have know that the idea which he express be revolt ! " you can sound he . begin by say that you be afraid he be desolate . he tell I himself that he be desolate , and you can refer to that . then tell he that we be both of we prepared to do anything that we can to relieve he . put you arm over he , and kiss he , and all that sort of thing . " she shrink from he into the corner of the brougham , and yet he do not perceive it . " then say that you think he would be happier if we be to join he here for a time . you can make he understand that there would be no difficulty about the apartment . but do not say it all in a set speech , as though it be prepare , -- though of course you can let he know that you have suggest it to I and that I be willing . be sure to let he understand that the idea begin with you . " " but it do not . " " you propose to go and stay with he . tell he just that . and you should explain to he that he can dine at the club just as much as he like . when you be alone with he here , of course he have to come home ; but he need not do that now unless he choose . of course the brougham would be my affair . and if he should say anything about share the house expense , you can tell he that I would do anything he might propose . " she father to share the household expense in he own house , and with he own child ! " you say as much as you can of all this before dinner , so that when we be sit below he may suggest it if he please . it would suit I to get in there next week if possible . " and so the lesson have be give . she have say little or nothing in reply , and he have only
only finish as they enter the . she have hardly a minute allow she to think how far she might follow , and in what she must ignore , she husband 's instruction . if she might use she own judgment she would tell she father at once that a residence for a time beneath he roof would be a service to they pecuniarily . but this she might not do . she understand that she duty to she husband do forbid she to proclaim he poverty in opposition to he wish . she would tell nothing that he do not wish she to tell , -- but then no duty could require she to say what be false . she would make the suggestion about they change of residence , and would make it with proper affection ; -- but as regard themselves she would simply say that it would suit they view to give up they room if it suit he . be all alone when they enter the drawing - room , -- but , as have surmise , have ask he sister - in - law round the corner to come to dinner . " always like a excuse to get to he club , " say the old man , " and like a excuse to go anywhere . " it be not long before begin to play he part by seating himself close to the open window and look out into the ; and Emily when she find herself close to she father , with she hand in he , could hardly divest herself of a feeling that she also be play she part . " I see so very little of you , " say the old man plaintively . " I would come up oftener if I think you would like it . " " it be not like , my dear . of course you have to live with you husband . be not this sad about ? " " very sad . but have not live here for ever so long . " " I do not know why he should not . he be a fool to go away when he do . do he go to you ? " " yes ;-- sometimes . " " and what do he say ? " " I be sure he would be with you at once if you would ask he . " " I have ask he . I have send word by over and over again . if he mean that I be to write to he and say that I be sorry for offend he , I will not . do not talk of he any more . it make I so angry that I sometimes feel inclined to do thing which I know I should repent when die . " " not anything to injure , papa ! " " I wonder whether he ever think that I be a old man and all alone , and that he brother - in - law be daily with I . but he be a fool , and think of nothing . I know it be very sad be here night after night by myself . " forget , no doubt , at the moment , that he pass the majority of he evening at the ,-- though , have he be remind of it , he might have declare with perfect truth that the delight of he club be not satisfactory . " , " say Emily , " would you like we to come and live here ? " " what , -- you and ;--here , in the ? " " yes ; -- for a time . he be think of give up the place in . " " I think he have they for -- for ever so many month . " " he do not like they , and they be expensive , and he can give they up . if you would wish it , we would come here , -- for a time . " he turn round and look at she almost suspiciously ; and she , -- she blush as she remember how accurately she be obey she husband 's order . " it would be such a joy to I to be near you again . " there be something in she voice which instantly reassure he . " well -- ; " he say ; " come and try it if it will suit he . the house be big enough . it will ease he pocket and be a comfort to I . come and try it . " it astonish she that the thing should be do so easily . here be all that she husband have propose to arrange by deep diplomacy settle in three word . and yet she feel asham of herself , -- as though she have take she father in . that terrible behest to " get round he " still grate on she ear . have she get round he ? have she cheat he into this ? " , " she say , " do not do this unless you feel sure that you will like it . " " how be anybody to feel sure of anything , my dear ? " " but if you doubt , do not do it . " " I feel sure of one thing , that it will be a great saving to you husband , and I be nearly sure that that ought not to be a matter of indifference to he . there be plenty of room here , and it will at any rate be a comfort to I to see you sometimes . " just at this moment Mr . come in , and the old man begin to tell he news aloud . " Emily
Emily have not go away for long . she be come back like a bad shilling . " " not to live in the ? " say , look round at . " why not ? there be room here for they , and it will be just as well to save expense . when will you come , my dear ? " " whenever the house may be ready , papa . " " it be ready now . you ought to know that . I be not go to refurnish the room for you , or anything of that kind . can come in and hang up he hat whenever it please he . " during this time have hardly know how to speak or what to say . he have be very anxious that he wife should pave the way , as he would have call it . he have be urgent with she to break the ice to she father . but it have not occur to he that the matter would be settle without any reference to himself . of course he have hear every word that have be speak , and be aware that he own poverty have be suggest as the cause for such a proceeding . it be a great thing for he in every way . he would live for nothing , and would also have almost unlimited power of be with as old age grow on he . this ready compliance with he wish be a benefit far too precious to be lose . but yet he feel that he own dignity require some reference to himself . it be distasteful to he that he father - in - law should regard he , -- or , at any rate , that he should speak of he , -- as a pauper , unable to provide a home for he own wife . " 's notion in suggest it , sir , " he say , " have be she care for you comfort . " the barrister turn round and look at he , and do not quite like the look . " it be she think of it first , and she certainly have no other idea than that . when she mention it to I , I be delighted to agree . " Emily hear it all and blush . it be not absolutely untrue in word , -- this assertion of she husband 's , -- but altogether false in spirit . and yet she could not contradict he . " I do not see why it should not do very well , indeed , " say . " I hope it may , " say the barrister . " come , Emily , I must take you down to dinner to - day . you be not at home yet , you know . as you be to come , the sooner the better . " during dinner not a word be say on the subject . exert himself to be pleasant , and tell all that he have hear as to the difficulty of the cabinet . have resign , and the general opinion be that the be go to piece . have see the last article in the " 's " about the ? be strongly of the opinion that ought to see that article . " I never have the ' 's ' within my finger in my life , " say the barrister angrily , " and I certainly never will . " " ah , sir ; this be a exception . you should see this . when really mean to cut a fellow up , he can do it . there be no one like he . and the have deserve it . he be a poor , vacillat creature , lead by the Duchess ; and she ,-- accord to all that one hear , -- she be not much better than she should be . " " I think the be a great friend of yours , " say . " I do not care much for such friendship . she throw I over most shamefully . " " and therefore , of course , you be justifi in take away she character . I never see the Duchess of in my life , and should probably be very uncomfortable if I find myself in she society ; but I believe she to be a good sort of woman in she way . " Emily sit perfectly silent , knowe that she husband have be rebuk , but feel that he have deserve it . he , however , be not abash ; but change the conversation , dashing into city rumour , and legal reform . the old man from time to time say sharp little thing , show that he intellect be not senile , all of which he son - in - law bore imperturbably . it be not that he like it , or be indifferent , but that he know that he could not get the good thing which could do for he without make some kind of payment . he must take the sharp word of the old man , -- and take all that he could get besides . when the two man be alone together after dinner , use a different tone . " if you be to come , " he say , " you might as well do it as soon as possible . " " a day or two will be enough for we . " " there be one or two thing you should understand . I shall be very happy to see you friend at any time , but I shall like to know when they be come before they come . " " of course , sir . " " I dine out a
a good deal . " " at the club , " suggest . " well ; -- at the club or elsewhere . it do not matter . there will always be dinner here for you and , just as though I be at home . I say this , so that there need be no questionings or doubt about it hereafter . and do not let there ever be any question of money between we . " " certainly not . " " have a allowance , and this will be tantamount to a allowance to . you have also have . I hope it have be well expend ;-- except the L500 at that election , which have , of course , be throw away . " " the other be brotch into the business . " " I do not know what the business be . but you and must understand that the money have be give as she fortune . " " oh , quite so ; -- part of it , you mean . " " I mean just what I say . " " I call it part of it , because , as you observe just now , we live here will be the same as though you make Emily a allowance . " " ah ;-- well ; you can look at it in that light if you please . have the key of the cellar . he be a man I can trust . as a rule I have port and sherry at table every day . if you like claret I will get some a little cheaper than what I use when friend be here . " " what wine I have be quite indifferent to I . " " I like it good , and I have it good . I always breakfast at 9.30 . you can have yours earlier if you please . I do not know that there be anything else to be say . I hope we shall get into the way of understanding each other , and be mutually comfortable . shall we go upstairs to and ? " and so it be determine that be to come back to she old house about eight month after she marriage . himself sit late into the night , all alone , think about it . what he have do , he have do in a morose way , and he be aware that it be so . he have not beam with smile , and open he arm lovingly , and , bid bless he dearest child , tell they that if they would only come and sit round he hearth he should be the happiest old man in . he have say little or nothing of he own affection even for he daughter , but have speak of the matter as one of which the pecuniary aspect alone be important . he have find out that the saving so effect would be material to , and have resolve that there should be no shirking of the truth in what he be prepare to do . he have be almost ask to take the young marry couple in , and feed they , -- so that they might live free of expense . he be willing to do it , -- but be not willing that there should be any soft -word , high - ton false pretension . he almost read to the bottom , -- not , however , give the man credit for dishonesty so deep or cleverness so great as he possess . but as regard , he be also actuate by a personal desire to have she back again as a element of happiness to himself . he have pin for she since he have be leave alone , hardly know what it be that he have want . and now as he think of it all , he be angry with himself that he have not be more loving and softer in he manner to she . she at any rate be honest . no doubt of that cross he mind . and now he have be bitter to she , -- bitter in he manner ,-- simply because he have not wish to appear to have be take in by she husband . think of all this , he get up , and go to he desk , and write she a note , which she would receive on the follow morning after she husband have leave she . it be very short . . I be so overjoy that you be come back to I . a . w . he have judge she quite rightly . the manner in which the thing have be arrange have make she very wretched . there have be no love in it ;-- nothing apparently but assertion on one side that much be be give , and on the other acknowledgment that much be to be receive . she be aware that in this she father have condemne she husband . she also have condemne he ; -- and feel , alas , that she also have be condemn . but this little letter take away that sting . she could read in she father 's note all the action of he mind . he have know that he be bound to acquit she , and he have do so with one of the old long - value expression of he love . the of a skin must have feel bitterly the quiescence with which he sank into obscurity on the second bench on the opposite side of the house . one great occasion he have on which it be he privilege to explain to four or five hundred gentleman the insuperable reason which cause he to break away from those right honourable friend to act with whom have be he
he comfort and he duty , he great joy and he unalloyed satisfaction . then he occupy the best part of a hour in abuse those friend and all they measure . this no doubt have be a pleasure , as practice have make the manipulation of word easy to he , -- and he be able to revel in that absence of responsibility which must be as a fresh perfume bath to a minister just free from the trammel of office . but the pleasure be surely follow by much suffering when ,-- . who be to assume he place as of the , -- only take five minute to answer he , say that he and he colleague regret much the loss of the 's service , but that it would hardly be necessary for he to defend the on all those point on which it have be attack , as , be he to do so , he would have to repeat the argument by which every measure bring forward by the present have be support . then sit down , and the business of the go on just as if have not move he seat at all . " what make everybody and everything so dead ? " say to he old friend as they walk home together from the house that night . they have in former day be staunch friend , sit night after night close together , united in opposition , and sometimes , for a few halcyon month , in the happier bond of office . but when have join the , and when the sterner spirit of have prefer principle to place , -- to use the language in which he be will not to speak to himself and to he wife and family of he own abnegation , -- there have come a coolness between they . , who be not a rich man , nor by any means indifferent to the comfort of office , have felt keenly the injury do to he when he be leave hopelessly in the cold by the desertion of he old friend . it have come to pass that there have be no salt leave in the opposition . in all he parliamentary experience have know nothing like it . have be sure that british honour be go to the dog and that british greatness be at a end . but the secession of give a little fillip to he life . at any rate he could walk home with he old friend and talk of the horror of the present day . " well , , if you ask I , you know , I can only speak as I feel . everything must be dead when man hold different opinion on every subject under the sun come together in order that they may carry on a government as they would a trade business . the work may be do , but it must be do without spirit . " " but it may be all important that the work should be do , " say the Baronet , apologise for he past misconduct . " no doubt ;-- and I be very far from judge those who make the attempt . it have be make more than once before , and have , I think , always fail . I do not believe in it myself , and I think that the death - like torpor of which you speak be one of its worst consequence . " after that admit back into he heart of heart . then the end of the come , very quietly and very early . by the end of there be nothing leave to be do , and the world of be allow to go down into the country almost a fortnight before its usual time . with many man , both in and out of parliament , it become a question whether all this be for good or evil . the have of course much to say for themselves . everything be torpid . there be no interest in the newspaper ,-- except when take the tomahawk into he hand . a member of parliament this session have not be by half so much bigger than another man as in time of hot political warfare . one of the most move source of we national excitement seem to have vanish from life . we all know what happen to stagnant water . so say the , and so also now say . but the government be carry on and the country be prosperous . a few useful measure have be pass by unambitious man , and the of declare that he have never know a session of parliament more thoroughly satisfactory to the ministers . but the old in so say have speak as it be he public opinion ,-- give , truly enough , to a few of he colleague , such as , and other , the result of he general experience ; but in he own bosom and with a private friend he be compelle to confess that there be a cloud in the heaven . the have become so moody , so irritable , and so unhappy , that the old be force to doubt whether thing could go on much longer as they be . he be will not to talk of these thing to he friend , who be not a member of the government , but who have be a colleague of both the Duke , and whom the old regard with peculiar confidence . " I can not explain it to you , " he say to . " there be nothing that ought to give he a moment 's uneasiness . since he take office there have not once be a majority against he in either house on any question that the government have make its
its own . I do not remember such a state of thing , -- so easy for the , -- since the day of . he have one thorn in he side , we friend who be at the Admiralty , and that thorn like other thorn have work itself out . yet at this moment it be impossible to get he to consent to the nomination of a successor to . " this be say a week before the session have close . " I suppose it be he health , " say . " he be well enough as far as I can see ; -- though he will be ill unless he can relieve himself from the strain on he nerve . " " do you mean by resign ? " " not necessarily . the fault be that he take thing too seriously . if he could be get to believe that he might eat , and sleep , and go to bed , and amuse himself like other man , he might be a very good . he be over troublead by he conscience . I have see a good many , , and I have teach myself to think that they be not very different from other man . one want in a a good many thing , but not very great thing . he should be clever but need not be a genius ; he should be conscientious but by no means strait - lace ; he should be cautious but never timid , bold but never venturesome ; he should have a good digestion , genial manners , and , above all , a thick skin . these be the gift we want , but we can not always get they , and have to do without they . for my own part , I find that though Smith be a very good , the best perhaps to be have at the time , when he break down do nearly as well . " " there will be a , then , if you do break down ? " " no doubt . would not come to a end because the of shut himself up at . but I love the man , and , with some few exception , be contente with the party . we can not do better , and it cut I to the heart when I see he suffer , know how much I do myself to make he undertake the work . " " be he go to ? " " no ; -- to . there be some discomfort about that . " " I suppose , " say ,-- speak almost in a whisper , although they be close together ,-- " I suppose the Duchess be a little troublesome . " " she be the dearest woman in the world , " say the of . " I love she almost as I do my own daughter . and she be most zealous to serve he . " " I fancy she overdo it . " " no doubt . " " and that he suffer from perceive it , " say . " but a man have not a right to suppose that he shall have no annoyance . the best horse in the world have some fault . he pull , or he shy , or be slow at he fence , or do not like heavy ground . he have no right to expect that he wife shall know everything and do everything without a mistake . and then he have such fault of he own ! he skin be so thin . do you remember dear old Brock ? by heaven ; -- there be a cover , a hide impervious to fire or steel ! he would not have go into tantrum because he wife ask too many people to the house . nevertheless , I will not give up all hope . " " a man 's skin may be thicken , I suppose . " " no doubt ; -- as a blacksmith 's arm . " but the of , though he declare that he would not give up hope , be very uneasy on the matter . " why will not you let I go ? " the other have say to he . " what ; -- because such a man as throw up he office ? " but in truth the of have not be instigate to ask the question by the resignation of . at that very moment the " 's " have be put out of sight at the bottom of a heap of other newspaper behind the 's chair , and he present misery have be produce by . to have a festering wound and to be able to show the wound to no surgeon , be wretchedness indeed ! " it be not , but a sense of general failure , " say the . then he old friend have make use of that argument of the ever - recurr majority to prove that there have be no failure . " there seem to have come a lethargy upon the country , " say the poor victim . then the of know that he friend have read that pernicious article in the " 's , " for the have also read it and remember that phrase of a " lethargy on the country , " and understand at once how the poison have rank . it be a week before he would consent to ask any man to fill the vacancy make by . he would not allow suggestion to be make to he and yet would name no one himself . the old , indeed , do make a suggestion , and anything come from he be of course borne with patience . , he think , would
would do for the Admiralty . but the shook he head . " in the first place he would refuse , and that would be a great blow to I . " " I could sound he , " say the old . but the again shook he head and turn the subject . with all he timidity he be become autocratic and peevishly imperious . then he go to , and when , with all the kindness which he could throw into he word , state the reason which induce he at present to decline office , he be again in despair . at last he ask to move to the Admiralty , and , when we old friend somewhat reluctantly obey , of course he have the same difficulty in fill the office have hold . other change and other complication become necessary , and , who hat even worse than the poor , find ample scope for he patriotic indignation . this all take place in the closing week of the session , fill we poor with trouble and dismay , just when other people be complain that there be nothing to think of and nothing to do . men do not really like leave before the grouse call they , -- the grouse , or rather the fashion of the grouse . and some lady be very angry at be separate so soon from they swain in the city . the tradesman too be displease , -- so that there be voice to re-echo the abuse of the " 's . " the Duchess have do she best to prolong the session by another week , tell she husband of the evil consequence above suggest , but he have throw wide he arm and ask she with affect dismay whether he be to keep parliament sit in order that more ribbon might be sell ! " there be nothing to be do , " say the almost angrily . " then you should make something to be do , " say the Duchess , mimick he . the Duchess have be at work with she husband for the last two month in the hope of renew she autumnal festivity , but have be lamentably unsuccessful . the have declare that there should be no more rural crowd , no repetition of what he call turn loose on he own grounds . he could not forget the necessity which have be impos upon he of turn major out of he house , or the change that have be make in he garden , or he wife 's attempt to conquer he at . " do you mean , " she say , " that we be to have nobody ? " he reply that he think it would be best to go to . " and live a and life ? " say the Duchess . " I say nothing of and . whatever may be my feeling I hardly think that you be fitte for that kind of thing . be not so big as , but it be not a cottage . of course you can ask you own friend . " " I do not know what you mean by my own friend . I endeaavor always to ask yours . " " I do not know that , and , and be ever among the number of my friend . " " I suppose you mean ? " say the Duchess . " I shall be happy to have she at matching if you wish it . " " I should like to see at very much . " " and be there to be nobody else ? I be afraid I should find it rather dull while you two be open you heart to each other . " here he look at she angrily . " can you think of anybody besides ? " " I suppose you will wish to have ? " " what a arrangement ! for you to flirt with , and . for I to grumble to . " " that be a odious word , " say the . " what ;--flirt ? I do not see anything bad about the word . the thing be dangerous . but you be quite at liberty if you do not go beyond . I should like to know whether you would wish anybody else to come ? " of course he make no become answer to this question , and of course no becoming answer be expect . he know that she be try to provoke he because he would not let she do this year as she have do last . the house , he have no doubt , would be full to overflow when he get there . he could not help that . but as compare with the house at be small , and he domestic authority suffice at any rate for shut up for the time . I do not know whether at time she suffering be not as acute as he own . he , at any rate , be , and it seem to she that she be to be reduce to nothing . at the beginning of it all he have , with unwonted tenderness , ask she for she sympathy in he undertaking , and , accord to she power , she have give it to he with she whole heart . she have think that she have see a way by which she might assist he in he great employment , and she have work at it like a slave . every day she tell herself that she do not , herself , love the and major Pountneys , nor the , nor , indeed , the . she have not follow the bent of she own inclination when she have descende to sheet and towel , and busy herself
herself to establish a archery - ground . she have not shoot a arrow during the whole season , nor have she car who have win and who have lose . it have not be for she own personal delight that she have keep open house for forty person throughout four month of the year , in do which he have never take a ounce of the labour off she shoulders by any single word or deed ! it have all be done for he sake , -- that he reign might be long and triumphant , that the world might say that he hospitality be noble and full , that he name might be in man 's mouth , and that he might prosper as a british . such , at least , be the assertion which she make to herself , when she think of she own grievance and she own trouble . and now she be angry with she husband . it be very well for he to ask for she sympathy , but he have none to give she in return ! he could not pity she failure ,-- even though he have himself cause they ! if he have a grain of intelligence about he he must , she think , understand well enough how sore it must be for she to descmend from she princely entertainment to solitude at , and thus to own before all the world that she be beat . then when she ask he for advice , when she be really anxious to know how far she might go in fill she house without offend he , he tell she to ask ! if he choose to be ridiculous he might . she would ask . in she active anger she do write to a formal letter , in which she say that the hope to have the pleasure of she ladyship 's company at on the 1st of . it be a absurd letter , somewhat long , write very much in the 's name , with overwhelm expression of affection , instigate in the writer 's mind partly by the fun of the supposition that such a man as she husband should flirt with such a woman as . there be something too of anger in what she write , some touch of revenge . she send off this invitation , and she send no other . take it all in good part , and replie say that she should have the greatest pleasure in go to . she have declare to herself that she would ask none but those he have name , and in accordance with she resolution she send out no other write invitation . he have also tell she to ask . now this have become almost a matter of course . there have grow up from accidental circumstance so strong a bond between these two woman , that it be take for grant by both they husband that they should be nearly always within reach of one another . and the two husband be also on kindly , if not affectionate , term with each other . the nature of the 's character be such that , with a most loving heart , he be hardly capable of that open out of himself to another which be necessary for positive friendship . there be a stiff reserve about he , of which he be himself only too conscious , which almost prohibit friendship . but he like both as a man and a member of he party , and be always satisfied to have he as a guest . the Duchess , therefore , have take it for grant that . would come to she , -- and that would come also during any time that he might be able to escape from . but , when the invitation be verbally conveyed , have go to the Admiralty , and have already make he arrangement for go to sea , as a gallant sailor should . " we be go away in the ' ' for a couple of month , " say . now the " " be the Admiralty yacht . " Heavens and earth ! " ejaculate the Duchess . " it be always done . the would have he epaulet stripp if he do not go to sea in . " " and must you go with he ? " " I have promise . " " I think it very unkind , -- very hard upon I . of course you know that I should want you . " " but if my husband want I too ? " " bother you husband ! I wish with all my heart I have never help to make up the match . " " it would have be make up just the same , . " " you know that I can not get on without you . and he ought to know it too . there be not another person in the world that I can really say a thing to . " " why do not you have ? " " she be go to after she husband . and then she be not wick enough . she always lecture I , and she do it still . what do you think be go to happen ? " " nothing terrible , I hope , " say , mindful of she husband 's new honour at the Admiralty , and hope that the might not have repeat he threat of resigning . " we be go to . " " so I suppose . " " and whom do you think we be go to have ? " " not major ? " " no ; -- not at my asking . " " ? " " yet . guess again . " " I suppose there will be
be a dozen to guess . " " no , " shriek the Duchess . " there will only be one . I have ask one , -- at he special desire , -- and as you will not come I shall ask nobody else . when I press he to name a second he name you . I will obey he to the letter . now , my dear , who do you think be the chosen one , -- the one person who be to solace the pertur spirit of the for the three month of the autumn ? " " , I should say . " " oh , ! no doubt will come as a part of he luggage , and possibly half - a - dozen Treasury clerk . he declare , however , that there be nothing to do , and therefore 's strength may alone suffice to help he to do it . there be to be one unnecessary guest ,-- unnecessary , that be , for official purpose ; though , -- oh ,--so much need for he social happiness . guess once more . " " know the spirit of mischief that be in you , -- perhaps it be . " " of course it be , " say the Duchess , clapp she hand together . " and I should like to know what you mean by a spirit of mischief ! I ask he , and he himself say that he particularly wish to have at . now , I be not a jealous woman , -- be I ? " " not of . " " I do not think they will do any harm together , but it be particular , you know . however , she be to come . and nobody else be to come . I do count upon you . " then . counsell she very seriously as to the bad taste of such a joke , explain to she that the have certainly not intend that she invitation should be confine to . but it be not all joke with the Duchess . she have be drive almost to despair , and be very angry with she husband . he have bring the thing upon himself , and must now make the best of it . she would ask nobody else . she declare that there be nobody whom she could ask with propriety . she be tired of ask . let she ask whom she would , he be dissatisfie . the only two people he care to see be and the old . she have ask for he sake . let he ask he old friend himself if he please . the and with all the family go down together , and go with they . the Duchess have say not a word more to she husband about he guest , nor have he allude to the subject . but each be labour under a conviction that the other be misbehave , and with that feel it be impossible that there should be confidence between they . he busy himself with book and papers ,-- always turn over those pile of newspaper to see what evil be say of himself , -- and speak only now and again to he private secretary . she engage herself with the child or pretend to read a novel . she heart be sore within she . she have wish to punish he , but in truth she be punish herself . on the day of they arrival , the father and mother , with , the eldest son , who be home from , and the private Secretary dine together . as the sit at table , he begin to think how long it be since such a state of thing have happene to he before , and he heart soften towards she . instead of be make angry by the strangeness of she proceeding , he take delight in it , and in the course of the evening speak a word to signify he satisfaction . " I be afraid it will not last long , " she say , " for come to - morrow . " " oh , indeed . " " you bid I ask she yourself . " then he perceive it all ; -- how she have take advantage of he former answer to she and have act upon it in a spirit of contradictory petulance . but he resolve that he would forgive it and endeavou to bring she back to he . " I think we be both joke , " he say good - humouredly . " oh , no ! I never suspect you of a joke . at any rate she be come . " " she will do neither of we any harm . and ? " " you have send she to sea . " " she may be at sea , -- and he too ; but it be without my send . the , I believe , usually do go a cruise . be there nobody else ? " " nobody else ,-- unless you have ask any one . " " not a creature . well ; --so much the better . I dare say will get on very well . " " you will have to talk to she , " say the Duchess . " I will do my best , " say the . come and no doubt do think it odd . but she do not say so , and it really do seem to the Duchess as though all she vengeance have be blow away by the wind . and she too laugh at the matter -- to herself , and begin to feel less cross and less perverse . the world do not come to a end because she and
and she husband with and she boy and the private Secretary sit down to dinner every day together . the parish clergyman with the neighbour squire and he wife and daughter do come one day , -- to the relief of , who have begin to feel that the world have collapse . and every day at a certain hour the and walk together for a hour and a half in the park . the Duchess would have enjoy it , instead of suffer , could she only have have she friend , , to hear she joke . " now , , " she say , " do tell I one thing . what do she talk about ? " " the trouble of she family generally , I think . " " that can not last for ever . " " she wear cork soles to she boot and she think a good deal about they . " " and you listen to she ? " " why not ? I can talk about cork soles as well as anything else . anything that may do material good to the world at large , or even to yourself privately , be a fit subject for conversation to rational people . " " I suppose I never be one of they . " " but I can talk upon anything , " continue the , " as long as the talker talk in good faith and do not say thing that should not be say , or deal with matter that be offensive . I could talk for a hour about banker ' account , but I should not expect a stranger to ask I the state of my own . she have almost persuade I to send to of and get some cork soles myself . " " do not do anything of the kind , " say the Duchess with animation ; -- as though she have secret knowledge that cork soles be specially fatal to the family of the Palliser . " why not , my dear ? " " he be the man who especially , above all other , throw I over at . " then again there come upon he brow that angry frown which during the last few day have be dissipate by the innocence of 's conversation . " of course I do not mean to ask you to take any interest in the borough again . you have say that you would not , and you be always as good as you word . " " I hope so . " " but I certainly would not employ a tradesman just at you elbow who have directly oppose what be generally understood in the town to be you interest . " " what do do ? this be the first I have hear of it . " " he get Boung to stand against . " " I be very glad for the sake of the borough that do not get in . " " so be I . but that be nothing to do with it . know at any rate what my wish be , and go directly against they . " " you be not entitle to have wish in the matter , . " " that be all very well ; -- but I have , and he know it . as for the future , of course , the thing be over . but you have do everything for the borough . " " you mean that the borough have do much for I . " " I know what i mean very well ; -- and I shall take it very ill if a shilling out of the ever go into 's pocket again . " it be needless to trouble the reader at length with the sermon which he preach she on the occasion , -- show the utter corruption which must come from the mixing up of politics with trade , or with the scorn which she throw into the few word with which she interrupt he from time to time . " whether a man make good shoe , and at a reasonable price , and charge for they honestly , -- that be what you have to consider , " say the impressively . " I would rather pay double for bad shoe to a man who do not thwart I . " " you should not condescmend to be thwart in such a matter . you lower yourself by admit such a feeling . " and yet he writh himself under the lash of ! " I know a enemy when I see he , " say the Duchess , " and as long as I live I will treat a enemy as a enemy . " there be ever so much of it , in the course of which the declare he purpose of send at once to for ever so many cork soles , and the Duchess , -- most imprudently , -- declare she purpose of ruin . there be something in this threat which grate terribly against the 's sense of honour ; -- that he wife should threaten to ruin a poor tradesman , that she should do so in reference to the political affair of the borough which he all but owned , -- that she should do so in declare opposition to he ! of course he ought to have know that she sin consist simply in she determination to vex he at the moment . a more good - natured woman do not live ; -- or one less prone to ruin any one . but any reference to the election bring back upon he the remembrance of the cruel attack which have be make upon he , and render he for the time moody , morose , and wretch . so
so they again parte ill friend , and hardly speak when they meet at dinner . the next morning there reach match a letter which greatly add to he bitterness of spirit against the world in general and against she in particular . the letter , though mark " private , " have be open , as be all he letter , by , but the private think it necessary to show the letter to the . he , when he have read it , tell that it do not signify , and maintain for half - a - hour a attitude of quiescence . then he walk forth , have the letter hide in he hand , and find he wife alone , give it she to read . " see what you have bring upon I , " he say , " by you interference and disobedience . " the letter be as follow :-- , 3 , 187--. my Lord , I consider myself entitle to complain to you of the conduct with which I be treat at the last election at , whereby I be lead into very heavy expenditure without the least chance of be return for the borough . I be aware that I have no direct conversation with you on the subject , and that you can plead that , as between man and man , I have no authority from yourself for supposing that I should receive you 's support . but I be distinctly ask by the Duchess to stand , and be assure by she that if I do so I should have all the assistance that you 's influence could procure for I ; -- and it be also explain to I that you 's official position make it inexpedient that you on this special occasion should have any personal conference with you own candidate . under these circumstance I submit to you that I be entitle to complain of the hardship I have suffer . I have not be long in the borough before I find that my position be hopeless . influential man in the town who have be represent to I as be altogether devote to you 's interest start a third candidate ,-- a as myself , -- and the natural consequence be that neither of we succeed , though my return as you 's candidate would have be certain have not this be do . that all this be preconcert there can be no doubt , but , before the mine be spring on I ,--immediately , indeed , on my arrival , if I remember rightly , -- a application be make to I for , so that the money might be exact before the truth be know to I . of course I should not have pay the have I know that you 's usual agent in the town , -- I may name especially , -- be prepare to act against I . but I do pay the money , and I think you will agree with I that a very opprobrious term might be apply without injustice to the transaction . my , I be a poor man ;--ambitious I will own , whether that be a sin or a virtue , -- and willing , perhaps , to incur expenditure which can hardly be justified in pursuit of certain public object . but I must say , with the most lively respect for you personally , that I do not feel inclined to sit down tamely under such a loss as this . I should not have dream of interfering in the election at have not the exhort I to do so . I would not even have run the risk of a doubtful contest . but I come forward at the suggestion of the Duchess , back by she personal assurance that the seat be certain as be in you 's hand . it be no doubt understand that you would not yourself interfere , but it be equally well understand that you 's influence be for the time depute to the Duchess . the Duchess herself will , I be sure , confirm my statement that I have she direct authority for regard myself as you 's candidate . I can of course bring a action against , the gentleman to whom I pay the money , but I feel that as a gentleman I should not do so without reference to you , as circumstance might possibly be bring out in evidence ,-- I will not say prejudicial to you , -- but which would be unbecoming . I cannot , however , think that you will be willing that a poor man like myself , in he search for a entrance into public life , should be mulct to so heavy a extent in consequence of a error on the part of the Duchess . should you be able to assist I in my view of get into parliament for any other seat I shall be willing to abide the loss I have incur . I hardly , however , dare to hope for such assistance . in this case I think you ought to see that I be reimburse . I have the honour to be , my , you 's very faithful servant , FERDINAND . the stand over she in she own room upstairs , with he back to the fireplace and he eye fix upon she while she be read this letter . he give she ample time , and she do not read it very quickly . much of it indeed she peruse twice , turn very red in the face as she do so . she be thus studious partly because the letter astounde even she , and partly because she want time to consider how she would meet he wrath . " well , " say he , "
" what do you say to that ? " " the man be a blackguard , -- of course . " " he be so ; -- though I do not know that I wish to hear he call such a name by you lip . let he be what he may he be you friend . " " he be my acquaintance . " " he be the man whom you select to be you candidate for the borough in opposition to my wish , and whom you continue to support in direct disobedience to my order . " " surely , , we have have all that about disobedience out before . " " you can not have such thing ' out , ' -- as you call it . - do will not bury itself out of the way and be do with . do you feel no shame at have you name mention a score of time with reprobation as that man mention it ; -- at be write about by such a man as that ? " " do you want to make I roll in the gutter because I mistake he for a gentleman ? " " that be not all , -- nor half . in you eagerness to serve such a miserable creature as this you forget my entreaty , my command , my position ! I explain to you why I , of all man , and you , of all woman , as a part of I , should not do this thing ; and yet you do it , mistaking such a cur as that for a man ! what be I to do ? how be I to free myself from the impediment which you make for I ? my enemy I can overcome , -- but I can not escape the pitfall which be make for I by my own wife . I can only retire into private life and hope to conseal myself with my child and my book . " there be a reality of tragedy about he which for the moment overcome she . she have no joke ready , no sarcasm , no feminine counter-grumble . little as she agree with he when he speak of the necessity of retire into private life because a man have write to he such a letter as this , incapable as she be of understanding fully the nature of the irritation which torment he , still she know that he be suffer , and acknowledge to herself that she have be the cause of the agony . " I be sorry , " she ejaculate at last . " what more can I say ? " " what be I to do ? what can be say to the man ? read the letter , and give it I in silence . he could see the terrible difficulty . " " tear it in piece , and then let there be a end of it . " " I do not feel sure but that he have right on he side . he be , as you say , certainly a blackguard , or he would not make such a claim . he be take advantage of the mistake make by a good - natured woman through she folly and she vanity ; " -- as he say this the give a absurd little pout , but luckily he do not see it , -- " and he know very well that he be do so . but still he have a show of justice on he side . there be , I suppose , no chance for he at Silverbridge after I have make myself fully understand . the money be absolutely waste . it be you persuasion and then you continue encouragement that lead he on to spend the money . " " pay it then . the loss will not hurt you . " " ah ;-- if we could but get out of we difficulty by pay ! suppose that I do pay it . I begin to think that I must pay it ; -- that after all I can not allow such a plea to remain unanswered . but when it be pay ; -- what then ? do you think such a payment make by the 's will not be know to all the newspaper , and that I shall escape the charge of have bribe the man to hold he tongue ? " " it will be no bribe if you pay he because you think you ought . " " but how shall I excuse it ? there be thing do which be holy as the heaven , -- which be clear before as the light of the sun , which leave no stain on the conscience , and which yet the malignity of man can invest with the very blackness of hell ! I shall know why I pay this L500 . because she who of all the world be the nearest and the dearest to I , " -- she look up into he face with amazement , as he stand stretch out both he arm in he energy , --" have in she impetuous folly commit a grievous blunder , from which she would not allow she husband to save she , this sum must be pay to the wretch craven . but I can not tell the world that . I can not say abroad that this small sacrifice of money be the justest means of retrieve the injury which you have do . " " say it abroad . say it everywhere . " " no , . " " do you think that I would have you spare I if it be my fault ? and how would it hurt I ? will it be new to any one that I have
have do a foolish thing ? will the newspaper disturb my peace ? I sometimes think , , that I should have be the man , my skin be so thick ; and that you should have be the woman , yours be so tender . " " but it be not so . " " take the advantage , nevertheless , of my toughness . send he the L500 without a word , -- or make do so , or . make no secret of it . then if the papers talk about it -- " " a question might be ask about it in the . " " or if question in any way , -- say that I do it . tell the exact truth . you be always say that nothing but truth ever serve . let the truth serve now . I shall not blench . you say it all in the house of Lords will not wound I half so much as you look at I as you do just now . " " do I wound you ? know I would not hurt you willingly . " " never mind . go on . I know you think that I have bring it all on myself by my own wickedness . pay this man the money , and then if anything be say about it , explain that it be my fault , and say that you pay the money because I have do wrong . " when he come in she have be seat on a sofa , which she constantly use herself , and he have stand over she , masterful , imperious , and almost tyrannical . she have feel he tyranny , but have resent it less than usual , -- or rather have be less determined in hold she own against he and assert herself as he equal , -- because she confess to herself that she have injure he . she have , she think , do but little , but that which she have do have produce this injury . so she have sit and endure the oppression of he stand posture . but now he sit down by she , very close to she , and put he hand upon she shoulder ,-- almost round she waist . " , " he say , " you do not quite understand it . " " I never understand anything , I think , " she answer . " not in this case , -- perhaps never , -- what it be that a husband feel about he wife . do you think that I could say a word against you , even to a friend ? " " why not ? " " I never do . I never could . if my anger be at the hottest I would not confess to a human being that you be not perfect ,-- except to yourself . " " oh , thank you ! if you be to scold I vicariously I should feel it less . " " do not joke with I now , for I be so much in earnest ! and if I could not consent that you conduct should be call in question even by a friend , do you suppose it possible that I could contrive a escape from public censure by lay the blame publicly on you ? " " to the truth ; -- that be what you always say . " " I certainly shall stick to the truth . a man and he wife be one . for what she do he be responsible . " " they could not hang you , you know , because I commit a murder . " " I should be willing that they should do so . no ;--if I pay this money I shall take the consequence . I shall not do it in any way under the rose . but I wish you would remember -- " " remember what ? I know I shall never forget all this trouble about that dirty little town , which I never will enter again as long as I live . " " I wish you would think that in all that you do you be deal with my feeling , with my heartstring , with my reputation . you can not divide yourself from I ; nor , for the value of it all , would I wish that such division be possible . you say that I be thin - skinned . " " certainly you be . what people call a delicate organisation ,-- whereas I be rough and thick and monstrously commonplace . " " then should you too be thin - skinned for my sake . " " I wish I could make you thick - skinned for you own . it be the only way to be decently comfortable in such a coarse , rough - and - tumble world as this be . " " let we both do we best , " he say , now put he arm round she and kiss she . " I think I shall send the man he money at once . it be the least of two evil . and now let there never be a word more about it between we . " then he leave she and go back , -- not to the study in which he be wont , when at , to work with he private Secretary , -- but to a small inner closet of he own , in which many a bitter moment be spend while he think over that abortive system of decimal coinage by which he have once hope to make himself one of the great benefactor of he nation , revolve in he mind the trouble which he wife bring upon he , and regret the golden
golden inanity of the coronet which in the very prime of life have expel he from the of . here he seat himself , and for a hour neither stir from he seat , nor touch a pen , nor open a book . he be try to calculate in he mind what might be the consequence of pay the money to . but when the calculation slip from he , -- as it do , -- then he demand of himself whether strict high - minded justice do not call upon he to pay the money let the consequence be what they might . and here he mind be truer to he , and he be able to fix himself to a purpose , -- though the resolution to which he come be not , perhaps , wise . when the hour be over he go to he desk , draw a cheque for L500 in favour of , and then cause he Secretary to send it in the follow note :-- , 4 , 187-- . ,-- the of have read the letter you have address to he , date the 3rd instant . the of , feel that you may have be induce to undertake the late contest at Silverbridge by misrepresentation make to you at , direct I to enclose a cheque for , that be the sum state by you to have be expend in carry on the contest at . I be , sir , you obedient servant , . , the reader will no doubt think that must have be very hardly drive indeed by circumstance before he would have make such a appeal to the as that give in the last chapter . but it be not want of money only that have bring it about . it may be remember that the L500 have already be once repay he by he father - in - law , -- that special sum have be give to he for that special purpose . and , when he write to the , assure himself that if , by any miracle , he letter should produce pecuniary result in the shape of a payment from the , he would refund the money so obtain to . but when he write the letter he do not expect to get money , -- nor , indeed , do he expect that aid towards another seat , to which he allude at the close of he letter . he expect probably nothing but to vex the , and to drive the into a correspondence with he . though this man have live nearly all he life in , he have not quite acquire that knowledge of the way in which thing be do which be so general among man of a certain class , and so rare among those beneath they . he have not understand that the Duchess 's promise of she assistance at might be take by he for what it be worth , and that she aid might be use as far as it go , -- but , that in the event of its fail he , he be bound in honou to take the result without complain , whatever that result might be . he feel that a grievous injury have be do he , and that it behove he to resent that injury ,-- even though it be against a woman . he just know that he could not very well write to the Duchess herself , -- though there be sometimes present to he mind a plan for attack she in public , and tell she what evil she have do he . he have half resolve that he would do so in she own garden at the ; -- but on that occasion the apparition of have disturb he , and he have vent he anger in another direction . but still he wrath against the and remain , and he be will not to indulge it with very violent language as he sit upon one of the chair in 's office , talk somewhat loudly of he own position , of the thing that he would do , and of the injury do he . sympathise with he to the full , -- especially as that first L500 , which he have receive from , have go into 's coffer . at that time and be together commit to large speculation in the guano trade , and 's mind be by no means easy in the early period of the day . as he go into town by he train , he would think of he wife and family and of the terrible thing that might happen to they . but yet , up to this period , money have always be forthcome from when absolutely want , and be quite alive to the fact that he be live with a freedom of expenditure in he own household that he have never know before , and that without apparent damage . whenever , therefore , at some critical moment , a much - need sum of money be produce , would become light - hear , triumphant , and very sympathetic . " well ;-- I never hear such a story , " he have say when be insist on he wrongs . " that be what the and call honou among thief ! well , , my boy , if you stand that you will stand anything . " in these latter day have become very intimate indeed with he partner . " I do not mean to stand it , " have reply , and then on the spot have write the letter which he have date from . he have certainly contrive to make that letter as oppressive as possible . he have be clever enough to put into it word which be sure to wound the
the poor and to confound the Duchess . and have write it he be very careful to keep the first draft , so that if occasion come he might use it again and push he vengeance farther . but he certainly have not expect such a result as it produce . when he receive the private 's letter with the money he be sit opposite to he father - in - law at breakfast , while he wife be make the tea . not many of he letter come to . 's office or he club be more convenient address ; but in this case he have think that would have a better sound and appearance . when he open the letter the cheque of course appear bear the 's own signature . he have see that and the amount before he have read the letter , and as he see it he eye travel quickly across the table to he father - in - law 's face . might certainly have see the cheque and even the amount , probably also the signature , without the slightest suspicion as to the nature of the payment make . as it be , he be eat he toast , and have think nothing about the letter . , have conceal the cheque , read the few word which the private have write , and then put the document with its contents into he pocket . " so you think , sir , of go down to on the 15th , " he say in a very cheery voice . the cheery voice be still pleasant to the old man , but the young wife have already come to distrust it . she have learn , though she be hardly conscious how the lesson have come to she , that a certain tone of cheeriness indicate , if not deceit , at any rate the concealment of something . it grate against she spirit ; and when this tone reach she ear a frown or look of sorrow would cross she brow . and she husband also have perceive that it be so , and know at such time that he be rebuk . he be hardly aware what doings , and especially what feeling , be impute to he as fault , -- not understand the line which separate right from wrong ; but he know that he be often condemn by he wife , and he live in fear that he should also be condemn by he wife 's father . have it be he wife only , he think that he could soon have quench she condemnation . he would soon have make she tired of show she disapproval . but he have put himself into the old man 's house , where the old man could see not only he but he treatment of he wife , and the old man 's good - will and good opinion be essential to he . yet he could not restrain one glance of anger at she when he see that look upon she face . " I suppose I shall , " say the barrister . " I must go somewhere . my go need not disturb you . " " I think we have make up we mind , " say , " to take a cottage at . it be not a very lively place , nor yet fashionable . but it be very healthy , and I can run up to town easily . unfortunately my business will not let I be altogether away this autumn . " " I wish my business would keep I , " say the barrister . " I do not understand that you have make up you mind to go to , " say Emily . he have speak to of they jous not action in the matter , and as the place have only once be name by he to she , she resent what seem to be a falsehood . she know that she be to be take or leave as it suit he . if he have say boldly , -- " we will go to . that be what I have settle on . that be what will suit I , " she would have be contente . she quite understand that he mean to have he own way in such thing . but it seem to she that he want to be a tyrant without have the courage necessary for tyranny . " I think you seem to like it , " he say . " I do not dislike it at all . " " then , as it suit my business , we might as well consider it settle . " so say , he leave the room and go off to the city . the old man be still sipp he tea and linger over he breakfast in a way that be not usual with he . he be generally anxious to get away to 's , and on most morning have leave the house before he son - in - law . Emily of course remain with he , sit silent in she place opposite to the teapot , meditat perhaps on she prospect of happiness at , -- a place of which she have never hear even the name two day ago , and in which it be hardly possible that she should find even a acquaintance . in former year these autumn month , pass in , have be the delight of she life . also have see the cloud on he daughter 's face , and have understand the nature of the little dialogue about . and he be aware , -- have be aware since they have both come into he house , -- that the young wife 's manner and tone to she husband be not that of
of perfect conjugal sympathy . he have already say to himself more than once that she have make she be for herself , and must lie upon it . she be the man 's wife , and must take she husband as he be . if she suffer under this man 's mode and manner of life , he , as she father , could not assist she , -- could do nothing for she , unless the man should become absolutely cruel . he have settle that within he own mind already ; but yet he heart year towards she , and when he think that she be unhappy he longe to comfort she and tell she that she still have a father . but the time have not come as yet in which he could comfort she by sympathising with she against she husband . there have never fall from she lip a syllable of complaint . when she have speak to he a chance word respect she husband , it have always carry with it some tone of affection . but still he longe to say to she something which might tell she that he heart be soft towards she . " do you like the idea of go to this place ? " he say . " I do not at all know what it will be like . say it will be cheap . " " be that of such vital consequence ? " " ah ;-- yes ; I fear it be . " this be very sad to he . have already have from he a considerable sum of money , have not yet be marry twelve month , and be now live in almost free of expense . before he marriage he have always spoken of himself , and have contrive to be speak of , as a wealthy man , and now he be oblige to choose some small English seaside place to which to retreat , because thus he might live at a low rate ! have they marry as poor people there would have be nothing to regret in this ; -- there would be nothing that might not be do with entire satisfaction . but , as it be , it tell a bad tale for the future ! " do you understand he money matter , Emily ? " " not at all , . " " I do not in the least mean to make inquiry . perhaps I should have ask before ; -- but if I do make inquiry now it would be of he . but I think a wife should know . " " I know nothing . " " what be he business ? " " I have no idea . I use to think he be connect with and with Messr . and . " " be he not connect with 's house ? " " I think not . he have a partner of the name of Parker , who be , -- who be not , I think , quite -- quite a gentleman . I never see he . " " what do he do with ? " " I believe they buy . " " ah ;-- that , I fancy , be only one affair . " " I be afraid he lose money , papa , by that election at . " " I pay that , " say sternly . surely he should have tell he wife that he have receive that money from she family ! " do you ? that be very kind . I be afraid , papa , we be a great burden on you . " " I should not mind it , my dear , if there be confidence and happiness . what matter would it be to I whether you have you money now or hereafter , so that you might have it in the manner that would be most beneficial to you ? I wish he would be open with I , and tell I everything . " " shall I let he know that you say so ? " he think for a minute or two before he answer she . perhaps the man would be more impressed if the message come to he through he wife . " if you think that he will not be annoyed with you , you may do so . " " I do not know why he should , -- but if it be right , that must be borne . I be not afraid to say anything to he . " " then tell he so . tell he that it will be better that he should let I know the whole condition of he affair . bless you , dear . " then he stoop over she , and kiss she , and go he way to . it be not as he sit at the breakfast table that make up he mind to pocket the 's money and to say nothing about it to . he have be careful to conceal the cheque , but he have do so with the feeling that the matter be one to be consider in he own mind before he take any step . as he leave the house , already consider it , he be inclin to think that the money must be surrender . have very generously pay he electioneering expense , but have not do so simply with the view of make he a present of money . he wish the have not take he at he word . in hand this cheque over to he would be force to tell the story of he letter to the , and he be sure that would not approve of he have write such a letter . how could any one approve of he have apply for a
a sum of money which have already be pay to he ? how could such a one as , -- a old - fashioned English gentleman ,-- approve of such a application be make under any circumstance ? would very probably insist on have the cheque send back to the , -- which would be a sorry end to the triumph as at present achieve . and the more he think of it the more sure he be that it would be imprudent to mention to he application to the . the old man of the present day were , he say to himself , such fools that they understand nothing . and then the money be very convenient to he . he be intent on obtain 's consent to a large speculation , and know that he could not do so without a show of fund . by the time , therefore , that he have reach the city he have resolve that at any rate for the present he would use the money and say nothing about it to . be it not spoil get from the enemy by he own courage and cleverness ? when he be write he acknowledgement for the money to he have teach himself to look upon the sum extract from the as a matter quite distinct from the payment make to he by he father - in - law . it be evident on that day to that he partner be a man of great resource . though thing sometimes look very bad , yet money always " turn up . " some of they buying and sellings have answer pretty well . some have be great failure . no great stroke have be make as yet , but then the great stroke be always be expect . 's fear be greatly exaggerate by the feeling that the coffee and guano be not always real coffee and guano . he partner , indeed , be of opinion that in such a trade as this they be follow there be no need at all of real coffee and real guano , and explain he theory with considerable eloquence . " if i buy a ton of coffee and keep it six week , why do i buy it and keep it , and why do the seller sell it instead of keep it ? the seller sell it because he think he can do best by part with it now at a certain price . I buy it because I think I can make money by keep it . it be just the same as though we be to back we opinion . he back the fall . I back the rise . you need not have coffee and you need not have guano to do this . indeed the possession of the coffee or the guano be only a very clumsy addition to the trouble of you profession . I make it my study to watch the market ; -- but I need not buy everything I see in order to make money by my labour and intelligence . " before he lunch always think that he partner be wrong , but after that ceremony he almost daily become a convert to the great doctrine . and still have to be buy because the world be dull and would not learn the trick of trade as teach by ,-- also possibly because somebody might want such article , -- but we enterprise hero look for a time in which no such dull burden should be impos on he . on this day , when the 's be turn into the business , yield in a large matter which he partner have be press upon he for the last week . they buy a cargo of gum , come from . have reason for think that must have a great rise . there be a immense demand for amber , and might be use as a substitute , and in six month ' time would be double its present value . this unfortunately be a real cargo . he could not find a individual so enterprising as to venture to deal in a cargo of gum after he fashion . but the next best thing be done . the real cargo be buy , and he name and 's name be on the bill give for the goods . on that day he return home in high spirit , for he do believe in he own intelligence and good fortune . intend to make a on that afternoon , immediately on the husband 's return to the house , he wife speak to he as she father have desire . on that evening be dine at he club , and therefore there be the whole evening before they ; but the thing to be do be disagreeable , and therefore she do it at once , -- rush into the matter almost before he have seat himself in the arm -chair which he have appropriate to he use in the drawing - room . " be talk about we affair after you leave this morning , and he think that it would be so much better if you would tell he all about they . " " what make he talk of that to - day ? " he say , turn at she almost angrily and think at once of the 's cheque . " I suppose it be natural that he should be anxious about we , ; -- and the more natural as he have money to give if he choose to give it . " " I have ask he for nothing lately ; -- though , by , I intend to ask he and that very roundly . three thousand pound be not much of a sum of money for you father to have give you . " "
" and he pay the election bill ; -- do not he ? " " he have be complain of that behind my back , -- have he ? I do not ask he for it . he offer it . I be not such a fool as to refuse , but he need not bring that up as a grievance to you . " " it be not bring up as a grievance . I be say that you standing have be a heavy expenditure -- " " why do you say so ? what make you talk about it at all ? why should you be discuss my affair behind my back ? " " to my own father ! and that too when you be tell I every day that I be to induce he to help you ! " " not by complain that I be poor . but how do it all begin ? " she have to think for a moment before she could recollect how it do begin . " there have be something , " he say , " which you be asham to tell I . " " there be nothing that I be asham to tell you . there never have be and never will be anything . " and she stand up as she speak , with open eye and extend nostril . " whatever may come , however wretch it may be , I shall not be asham of myself . " " but of I ! " " why do you say so ? why do you try to make unhappiness between we ? " " you have be talk of -- my poverty . " " my father ask why you should go to , -- and whether it be because it would save expense . " " you want to go somewhere ? " " not at all . I be contente to stay in . but I say that I think the expense have a good deal to do with it . of course it have . " " where do you want to be take ? I suppose be not fashionable . " " I want nothing . " " if you be think of travel abroad , I can not spare the time . it be not a affair of money , and you have no business to say so . I think of the place because it be quiet and because I can get up and down easily . I be sorry that I ever come to live in this house . " " why do you say that , ? " " because you and you father make cabal behind my back . if there be anything I hate it be that kind of thing . " " you be very unjust , " she say to he sobb . " I have never caball . I have never do anything against you . of course papa ought to know . " " why ought he to know ? why be you father to have the right of inquiry into all my private affair ? " " because you want he assistance . it be only natural . you always tell I to get he to assist you . he speak most kindly , say that he would like to know how the thing be . " " then he will not know . as for want he assistance , of course I want the fortune which he ought to give you . he be man of the world enough to know that as I be in business capital must be useful to I . I should have think that you would understand as much as that yourself . " " I do understand it , I suppose . " " then why do not you act as my friend rather than he ? why do not you take my part ? it seem to I that you be much more he daughter than my wife . " " that be most unfair . " " if you have any pluck you would make he understand that for you sake he ought to say what he mean to do , so that I might have the advantage of the fortune which I suppose he mean to give you some day . if you have the slightest anxiety to help I you could influence he . instead of that you talk to he about my poverty . I do not want he to think that I be a pauper . that be not the way to get round a man like you father , who be rich himself and who think it a disgrace in other man not to be rich too . " " I can not tell he in the same breath that you be rich and that you want money . " " money be the means by which man make money . if he be confident of my business he would shell out he cash quick enough ! it be because he have be teach to think that I be in a small way . he will find he mistake some day . " " you will not speak to he then ? " " I do not say that at all . if I find that it will answer my own purpose I shall speak to he . but it would be very much easier to I if I could get you to be cordial in help I . " Emily by this time quite know what such cordiality mean . he have be so free in he word to she that there could be no mistake . he have instruct she to " get round " she father . and now again he speak of she influence over she father . although she illusion be all
all melt away , -- oh , so quickly vanish ,-- still she know that it be she duty to be true to she husband , and to be he wife rather than she father 's daughter . but what could she say on he behalf , knowe nothing of he affair ? she have no idea what be he business , what be he income , what amount of money she ought to spend as he wife . as far as she could see , -- and she common sense in see such thing be good , -- he have no regular income , and be justified in no expenditure . on she own account she would ask for no information . she be too proud to request that from he which should be give to she without any request . but in she own defence she must tell he that she could use no influence with she father as she know none of the circumstance by which she father would be guid . " I can not help you in the manner you mean , " she say , " because I know nothing myself . " " you know that you can trust I to do the best with you money if I could get hold of it , I suppose ? " she certainly do not know this , and hold she tongue . " you could assure he of that ? " " I could only tell he to judge for himself . " " what you mean be that you would see I would ---- d before you would open you mouth for I to the old man ! " he have never swear at she before , and now she burst out into a flood of tear . it be to she a terrible outrage . I do not know that a woman be very much the worse because she husband may forget himself on a occasion and " rap out a oath at she , " as he would call it when make the best of he own sin . such a offence be compatible with uniform kindness and most affectionate consideration . I have know lady who would think little or nothing about it , -- who would go no farther than the mildest protest , -- " do remember where you be ! " or , " my dear ! " -- if no stranger be present . but then a wife should be initiate into it by degree ; and there be different tone of bad language , of which by far the most general be the good - humoure tone . we all of we know man who never damn they servants , or any inferior , or stranger , or woman , -- who in fact keep it all for they bosom friend ; and if a little do sometimes flow over in the freedom of domestic life , the wife be apt to remember that she be the bosomest of she husband 's friend , and so to pardon the transgression . but here the word have be utter with all its foulest violence , with virulence and vulgarity . it seem to the victim to be the sign of a terrible crisis in she early married life , -- as though the man who have so spoken to she could never again love she , never again be kind to she , never again be sweetly gentle and like a lover . and as he speak it he look at she as though he would like to tear she limb asunder . she be frightene as well as horrified and astounded . she have not a word to say to he . she do not know in what language to make she complaint of such treatment . she burst into tear , and throw herself on the sofa hide she face in she hand . " you provoke I to be violent , " he say . but still she could not speak to he . " I come away from the city , tired with work and trouble with a thousand thing , and you have not a kind word to say to I . " then there be a pause , during which she still sob . " if you father have anything to say to I , let he say it . I shall not run away . but as to go to he of my own accord with a story as long as my arm about my own affair , I do not mean to do it . " then he pause a moment again . " come , old girl , cheer up ! do not pretend to be break - hear because I use a hard word . there be worse thing than that to be borne in the world . " " I -- I -- I be so start , . " " a man can not always remember that he be not with another man . do not think anything more about it ; but do bear this in mind , -- that , situate as we be , you influence with you father may be the making or the marring of I . " and so he leave the room . she sit for the next ten minute think of it all . the word which he have speak be so horrible that she could not get they out of she mind , -- could not bring herself to look upon they as a trifle . the darkness of he countenance still dwelt with she , -- and that absence of all tenderness , that coarse un-marital and yet marital roughness , which should not at any rate have come to he so soon . the whole man too be so different from what she have
have think he to be . before they marriage no word as to money have ever reach she ear from he lip . he have talk to she of book , -- and especially of poetry . and , and , have be or have seem to be dear to he . and he have be full of fine idea about woman , and about man in they intercourse with woman . for he sake she have separate herself from all she old friend . for he sake she have hurry into a marriage altogether distasteful to she father . for he sake she have close she heart against that other lover . Truste altogether in he she have venture to think that she have know what be good for she better than all those who have be she counsellor , and have give herself to he utterly . now she be awake ; she dream be over , and the natural language of the man be still ring in she ear ! they meet together at dinner and pass the evening without a further allusion to the scene which have be ac . he sit with a magazine in he hand , every now and then make some remark intend to be pleasant but which grate on she ear as be fictitious . she would answer he , -- because it be she duty to do so , and because she would not condescmend to sulk ; but she could not bring herself even to say to herself that all should be with she as though that horrid word have not be speak . she sit over she work till ten , answer he when he speak in a voice which be also fictitious , and then take herself off to she be that she might weep alone . it would , she know , be late before he would come to she . on the next morning there come a message to he as he be dress . wish to speak to he . would he come down before breakfast , or would he call on in ? he send down word that he would do the latter at a hour he fix , and then do not show himself in the breakfast - room till be gone . " I have get to go to you father to - day , " he say to he wife , " and I think it best not to begin till we come to the regular business . I hope he do not mean to be unreasonable . " to this she make no answer . " of course you think the want of reason will be all on my side . " " I do not know why you should say so . " " because I can read you mind . you do think so . you have be in the same boat with you father all you life , and you can not get out of that boat and get into mine . I be wrong to come and live here . of course it be not the way to withdraw you from he influence . " she have nothing to say that would not anger he , and be therefore silent . " well ; I must do the best I can by myself , I suppose . good - bye , " and so he be off . " I want to know , " say , on whom be throw by premeditation on the part of the task of begin the conversation ,-- " I want to know what be the nature of you operation . I have never be quite able to understand it . " " I do not know that I quite understand it myself , " say , laugh . " no man alive , " continue the old barrister almost solemnly , " have a greater objection to thrust himself into another man 's affair than I have . and as I do not ask the question before you marriage , -- as perhaps I ought to have do , -- I should not do so now , be it not that the disposition of some part of the earning of my life must depend on the condition of you affair . " immediately perceive that it behove he to be very much on the alert . it might be that if he show himself to be very poor , he father - in - law would see the necessity of assist he at once ; or , it might be , that unless he could show himself to be in prosperous circumstance , he father - in - law would not assist he at all . " to tell you the plain truth , I be minded to make a new will . I have of course make arrangement as to my property before 's marriage . those arrangement I think I shall now alter . I be greatly distress with ; and from what I see and from a few word which have drop from , I be not , to tell you the truth , quite happy as to you position . if I understand rightly you be a general merchant , buy and sell goods in the market ? " " that be about it , sir . " " what capital have you in the business ? " " what capital ? " " yes ; -- how much do you put into it at starting ? " pause a moment . he have get he wife . the marriage could not be undone . have money enough for they all , and would not certainly discard he daughter . could place he on a really firm footing , and might not improbably do so if he could be make to feel some confidence in
in he son - in - law . at this moment there be much doubt with the son - in - law whether he have better not tell the simple truth . " it have go in by degree , " he say . " altogether I have have about in it . " in truth he have never be possess of a shilling . " do that include the L3000 you have from I ? " " yes ; it do . " " then you have marry my girl and start into the world with a business base on , and which have so far miscarry that within a month or two after you marriage you be drive to apply to I for fund ! " " I want money for a certain purpose . " " have you any partner , ? " this address be feel to be very ominous . " yes . I have a partner who be possess of capital . he name be . " " then he capital be you capital . " " well ;-- I can not explain it , but it be not so . " " what be the name of you firm ? " " we have not a register name . " " have you a place of business ? " " Parker have a place of business in . " turn to a directory and find out 's name . " be a stockbroker . be you also a stockbroker ? " " no ,-- I be not . " " then , sir , it seem to I that you be a commercial adventurer . " " I be not at all asham of the name , . accord to you manner of reckoning , half the business in the of be do by commercial adventurer . I watch the markets and buy goods , -- and sell they at a profit . be a moneyed man , who happen also to be a stockbroker . we can very easily call ourselves merchant , and put up the name of and over the door . " " do you sign bill together ? " " yes . " " and ? " " no . I sign they and he sign they . I trade also by myself , and so , I believe , do he . " " one other question , . on what income have you pay income - tax for the last three year ? " " on L2000 a - year , " say . this be a direct lie . " can you make out any schedule show you exact asset and liability at the present time ? " " certainly I can . " " then do so , and send it to I before I go into . my will as it stand at present would not be to you advantage . but I can not change it till I know more of you circumstance than I do now . " and so the interview be over . though and meet every day for the next week , nothing more be say about the schedule . the old man be think about it every day , and so also be . but have make he demand , and , as he think , nothing more be to be say on the subject . he could not continue the subject as he would have do with he son . but as day after day pass by he become more and more convinced that he son - in - law 's affair be not in a state which could bear to see the light . he have declare he purpose of altering he will in the man 's favour , if the man would satisfy he . and yet nothing be do and nothing be say . have come among they and rob he of he daughter . since the man have become intimate in he house he have not know a hour 's happiness . the man have destroy all the plan of he life , break through into he castle , and violate he very hearth . no doubt he himself have vacillate . he be aware of that , and in he present mood be severe enough in judge himself . in he desolation he have try to take the man to he heart , -- have be kind to he , and have even open he house to he . he have tell himself that as the man be the husband of he daughter he have better make the best of it . he have endeavoure to make the best of it , but between he and the man there be such difference that they be pole asunder . and now it become clear to he that the man be , as he have declare to the man 's face , no better than a adventurer ! by he will as it at present stood he have leave two - third of he property to , and one - third to he daughter , with arrangement for settle she share on she child , should she be marry and have child at the time of he death . this will have be make many year ago , and he have long since determined to alter it , in order that he might divide he property equally between he child ; -- but he have postpone the matter , intend to give a large portion of 's share to she directly on she marriage with . she have not marry ; -- but still it be necessary that a new will should be make . when he leave town for he have not yet make up he mind how this should be do . he have at one time think that he would give
give some considerable sum to at once , know that to a man in business such assistance would be useful . and he have not altogether abandon that idea , even when he have ask for the schedule . he do not relish the thought of give he hard - earn money to , but , still , the man 's wife be he daughter , and he must do the best that he could for she . she taste in marry the man be inexplicable to he . but that be done ; -- and now how might he best arrange he affair so as to serve she interest ? about the middle of he go to and she to the seaside in , -- to the little place which have select . before the end of the month the father - in - law write a line to he son - in - law . , [ not without premeditation have he depart from the sternness of that " , " which in he anger he have use at he chamber ] -- when we be discuss you affair I ask you for a schedule of you asset and liability . I can make no new arrangement of my property till I receive this . should I die leave my present will as the instrument under which my property would be convey to my heir , 's share would go into the hand of trustee for the use of herself and she possible child . I tell you this that you may understand that it be for you own interest to comply with my requisition . , . . of course question be ask he as to how the newly marry couple be get on . at these question be mild and easily put off . be contente with a slight shake of he head , and only remark for the fifth or sixth time that " it be a pity . " but when they all go to , the difficulty become greater . yoArthu be not there , and old be in full strength . " so the have come to live with you in ? " acknowledge that it be so with a affirmative grunt . " I hope he be a pleasant inmate . " there be a scorn in the old woman 's voice as she say this , which ought to have provoke any man . " more so than most man would be , " say . " oh , indeed ! " " he be courteous and forbear , and do not think that everything around he should be suit to he own peculiar fancie . " " I be glad that you be contente with the marriage , . " " who have say that I be contente with it ? no one ought to understand or to share my discontent so cordially as yourself , ; -- and no one ought to be more chary of speaking of it . you and I have hope other thing , and old people do not like to be disappoint . but I need not paint the blacker than he be . " " I be afraid that , as usual , he be rather black . " " mother , " say , " the thing have be do and you might as well let it be . we be all sorry that have not come nearer to we ; but she have have a right to choose for herself , and I for one wish , -- as do my brother also , -- that she may be happy in the lot she have choose . " " he conduct to Arthur at be so nice ! " say the pertinacious old woman . " never mind he conduct , mother . what be it to we ? " " that be all very well , ; but accord to that nobody be to talk about anybody . " " I would much prefer , at any rate , " say , " that you would not talk about in my hearing . " " oh ; if that be to be so , let it be so . and now I understand where I be . " then the old woman shook herself , and endeavoure to look as though 's soreness on the subject be a injury to she as rob she of a useful topic . " I do not like , you know , " say to afterwards . " how would it be possible that I should like such a man ? but there can be no good get by complaint . it be not what you mother suffer , or what even I may suffer , -- or worse again , what yoArthu may suffer , that make the sadness of all this . what will be she life ? that be the question . and it be too near I , too important to I , for the endurance either of scorn or pity . I be glad that you ask you mother to be silent . " " I can understand it , " say . " I do not think that she will trouble you again . " in the mean time receive 's letter at , and have to consider what answer he should give to it . no answer could be satisfactory ,--unless he could impose a false answer on he father - in - law so as to make it credible . the more he think of it , the more he believe that this would be impossible . the cautious old lawyer would not accept unverified statement . a certain sum of money , -- by no means illiberal as a present , -- he have already extract from the old man . what he want be
be a further and a much larger grant . though be old he do not want to have to wait for the death even of a old man . the next two or three year , -- probably the very next year ,-- might be the turning - point of he life . he have marry the girl , and ought to have the girl 's fortune , -- down on the nail ! that be he idea ; and the old man be robb he in not act up to it . as he think of this he curse he ill luck . the husband of other girl have they fortune convey to they immediately on they marriage . what would not L20,000 do for he , if he could get it into he hand ? and so he teach himself to regard the old man as a robber and himself as a victim . who among we be there that do not teach himself the same lesson ? and then too how cruelly , how damnably he have be use by the Duchess of ! and now , whose fortune he be make for he , whose fortune he at any rate intend to make , be trouble he in various way . " we be in a boat together , " have say . " you have have the use of my money , and by heaven you have it still . I do not see why you should be so stiff . do you bring you missus to Dovercourt , and I will take mine , and let th'ey know each other . " there be a little argument on the subject , but have the best of it , and in this way the trip to be arrange . be in a very good humour when he take he wife down , and he walk she round the terrace and esplanade of that not sufficiently well - know marine paradise , now bid she admire the sea and now laugh at the finery of the people , till she become gradually fill with a idea that as he be make himself pleasant , she also ought to do the same . of course she be not happy . the gilding have so completely and so rapidly be wash off she idol that she could not be very happy . but she also could be good - humoured . " and now , " say he , smile , " I have get something for you to do for I , -- something that you will find very disagreeable . " " what be it ? it will not be very bad , I be sure . " " it will be very bad , I be afraid . my excellent but horribly vulgar partner , , when he find that I be come here , insist on bring he wife and child here also . I want you to know they . " " be that all ? she must be very bad indeed if I can not put up with that . " " in one sense she be not bad at all . I believe she to be a excellent woman , intent on spoil she child and give she husband a good dinner every day . but I think you will find that she be ,-- well , -- not quite what you call a lady . " " I sha not mind that in the least . I will help she to spoil the child . " " you can get a lesson there , you know , " he say , look into she face . the little joke be one which a young wife might take with pleasure from she husband , but she life have already be too much embitter for any such delight . yes ; the time be come when that trouble also would be add to she . she dread she know not what , and have often tell herself that it would be better that she should be childless . " do you like he ? " she say . " like he . no ;--i can not say I like he . he be useful , and in one sense honest . " " be he not honest in all sensis ? " " that be a large order . to tell you the truth , I do not know any man who be . " " Everett be honest . " " he lose money at play which he can not pay without assistance from he father . if he father have refuse , where would then have be he honesty ? Sexty be as honest as other , I dare say , but I should not like to trust he much farther than I can see he . I sha not go up to town to - morrow , and we will both look in on they after luncheon . " in the afternoon the call be make . the Parker , have child , have dine early , and he be sit out in a little porch smoke he pipe , drink whisky and water , and look at the sea . he eldest girl be stand between he leg , and he wife , with the other three child round she , be sit on the doorstep . " I have bring my wife to see you , " say , hold out he hand to , as she rise from the ground . " I tell she that you would be come , " say , " and she want I to put off my pipe and little drop of drink ; but I say that if be the lady I take she to be she would not begrudge a hard - work fellow he pipe and glass on
on a holiday . " there be a soundness of sense in this which mollify any feeling of disgust which Emily might have felt at the man 's vulgarity . " I think you be quite right , . I should be very sorry if , -- if -- " " if I be to put my pipe out . well , I will not . you will take a glass of sherry , ? though I be drink spirit myself , I bring down a hamper of sherry wine . oh , nonsense ; -- you must take something . that be right , . let we have the stuff and the glass , and then they can do as they like . " lit a cigar , and allow he host to pour out for he a glass of " sherry wine , " while go into the house with and the child . open herself out to she new friend immediately . she hope that they two might see " a deal of each other ; -- that be , if you do not think I too push . " , she say , be so much away , come down to only every other day ! and then , within the half hour which be consume by with he cigar , the poor woman get upon the general trouble of she life . do think that " all this speckelation be just the right thing ? " " I do not think that I know anything about it , . " " but you ought ;-- ought not you , now ? do not you think that a wife ought to know what it be that she husband be after ;-- specially if there be child ? a good bit of the money be mine , ; and though I do not begrudge it , not one bit , if any good be to come out of it to he or they , a woman do not like what she father have give she should be make duck and drake of . " " but be they make duck and drake ? " " when he do not tell I I be always afeard . and I will tell you what I know just as well as two and two . when he come home a little flustered , and then take more than he regular allowance , he be be at something as do not quite satisfy he . he be never that way when he be do a good day 's work at he regular business . he take to the child then , and have one glass after he dinner , and tell I all about it , -- down to the shilling and pence . but it be very seldom he be that way now . " " you may think it very odd , , but I do not in the least know what my husband be -- in business . " " and you never ask ? " " I have not be very long marry , you know ; -- only about ten month . " " I would have my fust by that time . " " only nine month , I think , indeed . " " well ; I be not very long after that . but I take care to know what it be he be a - do of in the city long before that time . and I do use to know everything , till -- " she be go to say , till have come upon the scene . but she do not wish , at any rate as yet , to be harsh to she new friend . " I hope it be all right , " say Emily . " sometimes he be as though the of be all he own . and there be be more money come into the house ; -- that I must say . and there be not a open - handeder one than anywhere . he would like to see I in a silk gow every day of my life ; -- and as for the child , there be nothing smart enough for they . only I would sooner have a little and safe , than anything ever so fine , and never be sure whether it be not go to come to a end . " " there I agree with you , quite . " " I do not suppose man feel it as we do ; but , oh , , give I a little , safe , so that I may know that I sha not see my child want . when I think what it would be to have they darling ' little belly empty , and nothing in the cupboard , I get that low that I be nigh fit for . " in the mean time the two man outside the porch be discuss they affair in somewhat the same spirit . at last show he friend 's letter , and tell he of the expect schedule . " schedule be d ---- , you know , " say . " how be I to put down a rise of 12 . 6d . a ton on gum in a schedule ? but when you come to 2000 ton it be . " " he be very old ; -- be not he ? " " but as strong as a horse . " " he have get the money ? " " yes ; -- he have get it safe enough . there be no doubt about the money . " " what he talk about be only a will . now you want the money at once . " " of course I do ; -- and he talk to I as if I be
be some old fogy with a estate of my own . I must concoct a letter and explain my view ; and the more I can make he understand how thing really be the better . I do not suppose he want to see he daughter come to grief . " " then the sooner you write it the better , " say . " he want to get " as they stroll home tell he wife that he have accept a invitation to dine the next day at the Parker 's cottage . in do this he manner be not quite so gentle as when he have ask she to call on they . he have be a little ruffle by what have be say , and now exhibit he temper . " I do not suppose it will be very nice , " he say , " but we may have to put up with worse thing than that . " " I have make no objection . " " but you do not seem to take to it very cordially . " " I have think that I get on very well with . if you can eat you dinner with they , I be sure that I can . you do not seem to like he altogether , and I wish you have get a partner more to you taste . " " taste , indeed ! when you come to this kind of thing it be not a matter of taste . the fact be that I be in that fellow 's hand to a extent I do not like to think of , and do not see my way out of it unless you father will do as he ought to do . you altogether refuse to help I with you father , and you must , therefore , put up with and he wife . it be quite on the card that worse thing may come even than . " to this she make no immediate answer , but walk on , increase she pace , not only unhappy , but also very angry . it be become a matter of doubt to she whether she could continue to bear these repeat attack about she father 's money . " I see how it be , " he continue . " you think that a husband should bear all the trouble of life , and that a wife should never be make to hear of they . " " , " she say , " I declare I do not think that any man could be so unfair to a woman as you be to I . " " of course ! because I have not get thousands a year to spend on you I be unfair . " " I be content to live in any way that you may direct . if you be poor , I be satisfied to be poor . if you be even ruin , I be content to be ruin . " " who be talk about ruin ? " " if you be in want of everything , I also will be in want and will never complain . whatever we joint lot may bring to we I will endure , and will endeaavor to endure with cheerfulness . but I will not ask my father for money , either for you or for myself . he know what he ought to do . I trust he implicitly . " " and I not at all . " " he be , I know , in communication with you about what should be do . I can only say , -- tell he everything . " " my dear , that be a matter in which it may be possible that I understand my own interest best . " " very likely . I certainly understand nothing , for I do not even know the nature of you business . how can I tell he that he ought to give you money ? " " you might ask he for you own . " " I have get nothing . do I ever tell you that I have ? " " you ought to have know . " " do you mean that when you ask I to marry you I should have refuse you because I do not know what money papa would give I ? why do you not ask papa ? " " have I know he then as well as I do now you may be quite sure that I should have do so . " " , it will be better that we should not speak about my father . I will in all thing strive to do as you would have I , but I can not hear he abuse . if you have anything to say , go to . " " yes ; -- when he be such a gambler that you father will not even speak to he . you father will be find dead in he bed some day , and all he money will have be leave to some curse hospital . " they be at they own door when this be say , and she , without further answer , go up to she bedroom . all these bitter thing have be say , not because have think that he could further he own view by say they ; -- he know indeed that he be injure himself by every display of ill - temper ; -- but she be in he power , and be rebel . he think a good deal that day on the delight he would have in " kick that ill - condition cur , " if only he could afford to kick he . but he wife be he own , and she must be teach to endure
endure he will , and must be make to know that though she be not to be kick , yet she be to be torment and ill - use . and it might be possible that he should so cow she spirit as to bring she to act as he should direct . still , as he walk alone along the sea -shore , he know that it would be better for he to control he temper . on that evening he do write to , -- as follow , -- and he date he letter from , so that might suppose that that be really he own place of business , and that he be there , at he work :-- my , you have ask for a schedule of my affair , and I have find it quite impossible to give it . as it be with the merchants whom Shakespeare and the other dramatist describe , -- so it be with I . my caravel be out at sea , and will not always come home in time . my property at this moment consist of certain share of cargoe of jute , gum , guano , and sulphur , worth altogether at the present moment something over , of which possess the half ; -- but then of this property only a portion be pay for , -- perhaps something more than a half . for the other half we bills be in the market . but in next these article will probably be sell for considerably more than L30,000 . if I have place to my credit now , I should be worth about L15,000 by the end of next . I be engage in sundry other smaller venture , all return profit ; -- but in such a condition of thing it be impossible that I should make a schedule . I be undoubtedly in the condition of a man trade beyond he capital . I have be tempt by fair offer , and what I think I may call something beyond a average understanding of such matter , to go into venture beyond my means . I have stretch my arm out too far . in such a position it be not perhaps unnatural that I should ask a wealthy father - in - law to assist I . it be certainly not unnatural that I should wish he to do so . I do not think that I be a mercenary man . when I marry you daughter I raise no question as to she fortune . be embark in trade I no doubt think that she mean ,-- whatever they might be , -- would be join to my own . I know that a sum of , with my experience in the use of money , would give we a noble income . but I would not condescmend to ask a question which might lead to a supposition that I be marry she for she money and not because I love she . you now know , I think , all that I can tell you . if there be any other question I would willingly answer they . it be certainly the case that 's , whatever you may choose to give she , would be of infinitely greater use to I now , -- and consequently to she , -- than at a future date which I sincerely pray may be very long deferred . believe I to be , you affectionate son - in - law , FERDINAND . . , . this letter he himself take up to town on the follow day , and there post , address it to . he do not expect very great result from it . as he read it over , he be painfully aware that all he trash about caravel and cargoe of yosulphu would not go far with . but it might go farther than nothing . he be bound not to neglect 's letter to he . when a man be in difficulty about money , even a lie , -- even a lie that be sure to be find out to be a lie , -- will serve he immediate turn better than silence . there be nothing that the court hate so much as contempt ;-- not even perjury . and feel that be the judge before whom he be bound to plead . he return to on that day , and he and he wife dine with the Parker . no woman of she age have know better what be the manners of lady and gentleman than . she have thoroughly understand that when in she be surround by people of that class , and that when she be with she aunt , . , she be not quite so happily place . no doubt she have be terribly deceive by she husband , -- but the deceit have come from the fact that he manners give no indication of he character . when she find herself in 's little sitting - room , with make florid speech to she , she know that she have fall among people for whose society she have not be intend . but this be a part , and only a very trifling part , of the punishment which she feel that she deserv . if that , and thing like that , were all , she would bear they without a murmur . " now I call a dooce nice little place , " say , as he help she to the " bit of fish , " which he tell she he have bring down with he from . " it be very healthy , I should think . " " just the thing for the child , ma 'am . you have none of you own , , but there be a good time come
come . you be up to - day , be not you , ? any news ? " " thing seem to be very quiet in the city . " " too quiet , I be afraid . I hate have 'em quiet . you must come and see I in some of these day , . we can give you a glass of cham . and the wing of a chicken ;-- can not we , ? " " I do not know . it be more than you ever give I , " say , try to look good - humoured . " but you be not a lady . " " or I , " say . " you be only a wife . if will make a day of it we will treat she well in the city ; -- will not we , ? " a black clould come across " 's " face , but he say nothing . Emily of a sudden drew herself up , unconsciously , -- and then at once relax she feature and smile . if she husband choose that it should be so , she would make no objection . " upon my honour , Sexty , you be very familiar , " say . " it be a way we have in the city , " say . know what he be about . he partner call he , and why should not he call he partner ? " he will call you Emily before long , " say . " when you call my wife , I shall , -- and I have no objection in life . I do not see why people be not to call each other by they Christian name . take a glass of champagne , . I bring down half - a - dozen to - day so that we might be jolly . kill a cat . whatever we call each other , I be very glad to see you here , , and I hope it be the first of a great many . here be you health . " it be all he ordering , and if he bade she dine with a crossing - sweeper she would do it . but she could not but remember that not long since he have tell she that he partner be not a person with whom she could fitly associate ; and she do not fail to perceive that he must be go down in the world to admit such association for she after he have so spoken . and as she sip the mixture which call champagne , she think of and the bank of the , and , -- ala , ala , -- she think of . nevertheless , come what might , she would do she duty , even though it might call upon she to sit at dinner with three day in the week . be she husband , and would be the father of she child , and she would make herself one with he . it matter not what people might call he , -- or even she . she have act on she own judgment in marry he , and have be a fool ; and now she would bear the punishment without complaint . when dinner be over . help the servant to remove the dinner thing from the single sitting - room , and the two man go out to smoke they cigar in the covered porch . herself take out the whisky and hot water , and sugar and lemon , and then return to have a little matronly discourse with she guest . " do ever take a drop too much ? " she ask . " never , " say . " perhaps it do not affect he as it do . he be not a drinker ; -- certainly not . and he be one that work hard every day of he life . but he be get fond of it these last twelve month , and though he do not take very much it hurrie he and flurry he . if I speak at night he get cross ;-- and in the morning when he get up , which he always do regular , though it be ever so bad with he , then I have not the heart to scold he . it be very hard sometimes for a wife to know what to do , . " " yes , indeed . " Emily could not but think how soon she herself have learn that lesson . " of course I would do anything for , -- the father of my bairn , and have always be a good husband to I . you do not know he , of course , but I do . a right good man at bottom ; -- but so weak ! " " if he , -- if he ,-- injure he health , should not you talk to he quietly about it ? " " it be not the drink as be the evil , , but that which make he drink . he be not one as go a mucker merely for the pleasure . when thing be go right he will sit out in we arbour at home , and smoke pipe after pipe , play with the child , and one glass of gin and water could will see he to bed . , dry , do agree with he , I think . but when he come to three or four go of hot toddy , I know it be not as it should be . " " you should restrain he , . " " of course I should ; -- but how ? be I to walk off with the bottle and disgrase he before the servant girl ?
? or be I to let the child know as they father take too much ? if I be as much as to make one fight of it , it would be all over 's that he be a drunkard ; -- which he be not . restrain he ; -- oh , yes ! if I could restrain that gambl instead of regular business ! that be what I would like to restrain . " " do he gamble ? " " what be it but gambl that he and be a - do together ? of course , ma 'am , I do not know you , and you be different from I . I be not foolish enough not to know all that . my father stand in and sell hay , and you father be a gentleman as have be high up in the all he life . but it be you husband be a - do this . " " oh , ! " " he be then . and if he bring and my little one to the workhouse , what will be the good then of he guano and he gum ? " " be it not all in the fair way of commerce ? " " I be sure I do not know about commerce , , because I be only a woman ; but it can not be fair . they go and buy thing that they have not get the money to pay for , and then wait to see if they will turn up trump . be not that gambl ? " " I can not say . I do not know . " she feel now that she husband have be accuse , and that part of the accusation have be level at herself . there be something in she manner of say these few word which the poor complaining woman perceive , feel immediately that she have be inhospitable and perhaps unjust . she put out she hand softly , touch the other woman 's arm , and look up into she guest 's face . " if this be so , it be terrible , " say Emily . " perhaps I ought not to speak so free . " " oh , yes ; -- for you child , and yourself , and you husband . " " it be they , -- and he . of course it be not you do , and , I be sure , be a very fine gentleman . and if he get wrong one way , he will get himself right in another . " upon hear this Emily shook she head . " you papa be a rich man , and will not see you and yours come to want . there be nothing more to come to I or let it be ever so . " " why do he do it ? " " why do who do it ? " " you husband . why do not you speak to he as you do to I , and tell he to mind only he proper business ? " " now you be angry with I . " " ! no ;--indeed I be not angry . every word that you say be good , and true , and just what you ought to say . I be not angry , but I be terrify . I know nothing of my husband 's business . I can not tell you that you should trust to it . he be very clever , but -- " " but -- what , ma 'am ? " " perhaps I should say that he be ambitious . " " you mean he want to get rich too quick , ma 'am . " " I be afraid so . " " then it be just the same with . he be ambitious too . but what be the good of be ambitious , , if you never know whether you be on you head or you heel ? and what be the good of be ambitious if you be to get into the workhouse ? I know what that mean . there be one or two of they sort of man get into parliament , and have house as big as the 's palace , while hundred of they have they wife and child in the gutter . who ever hear of they ? nobody . it do not become any man to be ambitious who have get a wife and family . if he be a bachelor , why , of course , he can go to the Colony . there be and the two little one right down on the sea , with they foot in the salt water . shall we put on we hat , , and go and look after they ? " to this proposition Emily assent , and the two lady go out after the child . " mix yourself another glass , " say to he partner . " I would rather not . do not ask I again . you know I never drink , and I do not like be presse . " " by ! -- you be particular . " " what be the use of tease a fellow to do a thing he do not like ? " " you will not mind I have another ? " " fifty if you please , so that I be not force to join you . " " forc ! it be liberty ' all here , and you can do as you please . only when a fellow will take a drop with I he be better company . " " then I be d ---- bad company , and you would better get somebody else to be jolly with . to tell you the truth
truth , Sexty , I suit you better at business than at this sort of thing . I be like , you know . " " I do not know about , but I be bless if I think you suit I very well at anything . I be put up with a deal of ill - usage , and when I try to be happy with you , you will not drink , and you tell I about Shylock . he be a , be not he ? " " that be the general idea . " " then you be not very much like he , for they be a sort of people that always have money about th'ey . " " how do you suppose he make he money to begin with ? what a ass you be ! " " that be true . I be . ever since I begin put my name on the same bit of paper with yours I have be a ass . " " you will have to be one a bit longer yet ; -- unless you mean to throw up everything . at this present moment you be six or seven thousand pound richer than you be before you first meet I . " " I wish I could see the money . " " that be like you . what be the use of money you can see ? how be you to make money out of money by look at it ? I like to know that my money be fructifying . " " I like to know that it be all there , -- and I do know it before I ever see you . I be bless if I know it now . go down and join the lady , will you ? you be not much of a companion up here . " shortly after that tell . Parker that he have already bade adieu to she husband , and then he take he wife to they own lodging . for ! the time spend by at be by no means one of complete happiness . she husband do not come down very frequently , allege that he business keep he in town , and that the journey be too long . when he do come he annoye she either by moroseness and tyranny , or by a affectation of loving good -humour , which be the more disagreeable alternative of the two . she know that he have no right to be good - humoured , and she be quite able to appreciate the difference between fictitious love and love that be real . he do not while she be at speak to she again directly about she father 's money , -- but he give she to understand that he require from she very close economy . then again she refer to the brougham which she know be to be in readiness on she return to ; but he tell she that he be the best judge of that . the economy which he demand be that comfortless heart - rende economy which nip the practiser at every turn , but do not betray itself to the world at large . he would have she save out of she washerwoman and linendraper , and yet have a smart gown and go in a brougham . he begrudge she postage stamps , and stop the subscription at 's , though he insist on a front seat in the church , pay half a guinea more for it than he would for a place at the side . and then before they sojourn at the place have come to a end he leave she for a while absolutely penniless , so that when the butcher and baker call for they money she could not pay they . that be a dreadful calamity to she , and of which she be hardly able to measure the real worth . it have never happen to she before to have to refuse a application for money that be due . in she father 's house such a thing , as far as she know , have never happen . she have sometimes hear that be impecunious , but that have simply indicate a additional call upon she father . when the butcher come the second time she write to she husband in a agony . should she write to she father for a supply ? she be sure that she father would not leave they in actual want . then he send she a cheque , enclose in a very angry letter . apply to she father ! have she not learn as yet that she be not to lean on she father any longer , but simply on he ? and be she such a fool as to suppose that a tradesman could not wait a month for he money ? during all this time she have no friend , -- no person to whom she could speak ,-- except . be very open and very confidential about the business , really know very much more about it than . there be some sympathy and confidence between she and she husband , though they have latterly be much lessen by 's conduct . talk daily about the business now that she mouth have be open , and be very clearly of opinion that it be not a good business . " Sexty do not think it good himself , " she say . " then why do he go on with it ? " " business be a thing , , as people can not drop out of just at a moment . a man get hisself entangle , and must free hisself as best he can . I know he be terribly afeard ; -- and sometimes he do say such thing of you husband
husband ! " Emily shrink almost into herself as she hear this . " you must not be angry , for indeed it be better you should know all . " " I be not angry ; only very unhappy . surely could separate himself from if he please ? " " that be what I say to he . give it up , though it be ever so much as you have to lose by he . give it up , and begin again . you have always get you experience , and if it be only a crust you can earn , that be sure and safe . but then he declare that he mean to pull through yet . I know what man be at when they talk of pull through , . there should not be no need of pull through . it should all come just of its own accord ,-- little and little ; but safe . " then , when the day of they marine holiday be come to a end , -- in the first week in , -- the day before the return of the Parker to 's , she make a strong appeal to she new friend . " you be not afraid of he ; be you ? " " of my husband ? " say . " I hope not . why should you ask ? " " believe I , a woman should never be afraid of th'ey . I never would give in to be bully and make little of by . I would do a'most anything to make he comfortable , I be that soft -heart . and why not , when he be the father of my child ? but I be not go not to say a thing if I think it right , because I be afeard . " " I think I could say anything if I think it right . " " then tell he of I and my babe , -- as how I can never have a quiet night while this be go on . it be not that they two man be fond of one another . nothing of the sort ! now you ;-- I have get to be downright fond of you , though , of course , you think I common . " would not contradict she , but stoop forward and kiss she cheek . " I be downright fond of you , I be , " continue , snuffl and sobb , " but they two man be only together because want to gamble , and have get a little money to gamble with . " this aspect of the thing be so terrible to that she could only weep and hide she face . " now , if you would tell he just the truth ! tell he what I say , and that I have be a - say it ! tell he it be for my child I be a -speaking , who will not have bread in they very mouth if they father 's squeeze dry like a sponge ! sure , if you would tell he this , he would not go on ! " then she pause a moment , look up into the other woman 's face . " he would have some bowel of compassion ;-- would not he now ? " " I will try , " say . " I know you be good and kind - hear , my dear . I see it in you eye from the very first . but they man , when they get on at money - making , -- or money - lose , which make th'ey worse , -- be like tiger claw one another . they do not care how many they kill , so that they have the least bit for themselves . there be not no fear of in it , nor yet no mercy , nor ere a morsel of heart . it be not what I call manly , -- not that longe after other folk 's money . when it be come by hard work , as I tell Sexty , -- by the very sweat of he brow , -- oh ,-- it be sweet as sweet . when he would tell I that he would make he three pound , or he five pound , or , perhaps , he ten pound in a day , and would calculate it up , how much it would come to if he do that every day , and where we could go to , and what we could do for the child , I love to hear he talk about he money . but now --! why , it be alter the look of the man altogether . it be just as though he be a - thirsting for blood . " Thirst for blood ! yes , indeed . it be the very idea that have occur to herself when she husband have bade she to " get round she father . " no ;--it certainly be not manly . there certainly be neither fear of in it , nor mercy . yes ; -- she would try . but as for bowel of compassion in --; she , the young wife , have already see enough of she husband to think that he be not to be move by any prayer on that side . then the two woman bade each other farewell . " Parker have be talk of my go to , " say , " but I sha not . what would I be in ? and , besides , there would better be a end of it . would turn and I out of the house at a moment 's notice if it be not for the money . " " it
it be 's house , " say , not , however , mean to make a attack on she husband . " I suppose so , but I sha not come to trouble no one ; and we live ever so far away , at 's , -- out of you line altogether , . but I have take to you , and will never think ill of you any way ; --only do as you say you would . " " I will try , " say . in the meantime have receive from a answer to he letter about the missing caravel , which do not please he . here be the letter :-- my , I can not say that you statement be satisfactory , nor can I reconcile it to you assurance to I that you have make a trade income for some year past of L2000 a year . I do not know much of business , but I can not imagine such a result from such a condition of thing as you describe . have you any book ; and , if so , will you allow they to be inspect by any accountant I may name ? you say that a sum of L20,000 would suit you business better now than when I be dead . very likely . but with such a account of the business as that you have give I , I do not know that I feel disposed to confide the savings of my life to assist so very doubtful a enterprise . of course whatever I may do to you advantage will be do for the sake of and she child , should she have any . as far as I can see at present , I shall best do my duty to she , by leave what I may have to leave to she , to trustee , for she benefit and that of she child . yours truly , . . this , of course , do not tend to mollify the spirit of the man to whom it be write , or to make he gracious towards he wife . he receive the letter three week before the lodging at be give up , -- but during these three week he be very little at the place , and when there do not mention the letter . on these occasion he say nothing about business , but satisfy himself with give strict injunction as to economy . then he take she back to town on the day after she promise to Parker that she would " try . " have tell she that no woman ought to be afraid to speak to she husband , and , if necessary , to speak roundly on such subject . be certainly not a highly educated lady , but she have impress Emily with a admiration for she practical good sense and proper feeling . the lady who be a lady have begin to feel that in the trouble of she life she might find a much less satisfactory companion than the lady who be not a lady . she would do as have tell she . she would not be afraid . of course it be right that she should speak on such a matter . she know herself to be a obedient wife . she have borne all she unexpected sorrow without a complaint , with a resolve that she would bear all for he sake , -- not because she love he , but because she have make herself he wife . into whatever calamity he might fall , she would share they . though he should bring she utterly into the dirt , she would remain in the dirt with he . it seem probable to she that it might be so , -- that they might have to go into the dirt ; -- and if it be so , she would still be true to he . she have choose to marry he , and she would be he true wife . but , as such , she would not be afraid of he . have tell she that " a woman should never be afraid of th'ey , " and she believe in . in this case , too , it be clearly she duty to speak , -- for the injury be do be terrible , and might too probably become tragical . how could she endure to think of that woman and she child , should she come to know that the husband of the woman and the father of the child have be ruin by she husband ? yes , -- she would speak to he . but she do fear . it be all very well for a woman to tell herself that she will encounter some anticipat difficulty without fear , -- or for a man either . the fear can not be overcome by will . the thing , however , may be do , whether it be lead a forlorn hope , or speak to a angry husband , -- in spite of fear . she would do it ; but when the moment for do it come , she very heart tremble within she . he have be so masterful with she , so persistent in repudiat she interference , so exact in he demand for obedience , so capable of make she miserable by he moroseness when she fail to comply with he wish , that she could not go to she task without fear . but she do feel that she ought not to be afraid , or that she fear , at any rate , should not be allow to restrain she . a wife , she know , should be prepared to yield , but yet be entitle to be she husband 's counsellor . and it be now the
the case that in this matter she be conversant with circumstance which be unknown to she husband . it be to she that 's appeal have be make , and with a direct request from the poor woman that it should be repeat to she husband 's partner . she find that she could not do it on the journey home from , nor yet on that evening . , who have come back from a sojourn at , be with they in the , and bring she dear friend with she , and also . the reader may remember that have meet these lady at . 's house some month before he daughter 's marriage , but he certainly have never ask they into he own . on this occasion Emily have give they no invitation , but have be tell by she husband that she aunt would probably bring they in with she . " Mrs . and ! " she exclaim with a little shudder . " I suppose you aunt may bring a couple of friend with she to see you , though it be you father 's house ? " he have reply . she have say no more , not da to have a fight on that subject at present , while the other matter be press on she mind . the evening have pass away pleasantly enough , she think , to all except herself . and have talk a great deal , and she husband have borne himself quite as though he have be a wealthy man and the owner of the house in . in the course of the evening come in and , who since the late affair at have become intimate with . so that there be quite a party ; and Emily be astonished to hear she husband declare that he be only watch the opportunity of another vacancy in order that he might get into the house , and expose the miserable duplicity of the of . and yet this man , within the last month , have take away she subscription at 's , and tell she that she should not wear thing that want washing ! but he be able to say ever so many pretty little thing to , and have give a new fan to , and talk of take a box for at the Gaiety . but on the next morning before breakfast she begin . " , " she say , " while I be at Dovercourt I see a good deal of . " " I could not help that . or rather you might have help it if you please . it be necessary that you should meet , but I do not tell you that you be to see a great deal of she . " " I like she very much . " " then I must say you have get a very odd taste . do you like he ? " " no . I do not see so much of he , and I think that the manners of woman be less objectionable than those of man . but I want to tell you what pass between she and I . " " if it be about she husband 's business she ought to have hold she tongue , and you have better hold yours now . " this be not a happy begin , but still she be determined to go on . " it be I think more about you business than he . " " then it be infernal impudence on she part , and you should not have listen to she for a moment . " " you do not want to ruin she and she child ! " " what have I to do with she and she child ? I do not marry she , and I be not they father . he have get to look to that . " " she think that you be entice he into risk which he can not afford . " " be I do anything for he that I be not do for myself ! if there be money make , will not he share it ? if money have to be lost , of course he must do the same . " in sta he case omit to say that whatever capital be now be use belong to he partner . " but woman when they get together talk all manner of nonsense . be it likely that I shall alter my course of action because you tell I that she tell you that he tell she that he be lose money ? he be a half - hear fellow who quail at every turn against he . and when he be cry drunk I dare say he make a poor mouth to she . " " I think , , it be more than that . she say that -- " " to tell you the truth , Emily , I do not care a ---- what she say . now give I some tea . " the roughness of this absolutely quell she . it be not now that she be afraid of he , -- not at this moment , but that she be knock down as though by a blow . she have be altogether so unused to such language that she could not get on with she matter in hand , let the bad word pass by she as a unmeaning expletive . she wearily pour out the cup of tea and sit herself down silent . the man be too strong for she , and would be so always . she tell herself at this moment that language such as that must always absolutely silence she . then , within a few minute , he desire she , quite cheerfully , to ask she uncle
uncle and aunt to dinner the day but one follow , and also to ask and . " I will pick up a couple of man , which will make we all right , " he say . this be in every way horrible to she . she father have be back in town , have not be very well , and have be recommend to return to the country . he have consequently remove himself , -- not to , -- but to , and be now live at a hotel , almost within a hour of . have he be at home he certainly would not have invite and to he house . he have often express a feeling of dislike to the former lady in the hearing of he son - in - law , and have ridicule he sister - in - law for allow herself to be make acquainted with , whose name have at one time be very common in the mouth of people . Emily also feel that she be hardly entitle to give a dinner - party in he house in he absence . and , after all that she have lately hear about she husband 's poverty , she could not understand how he should wish to incur the expense . " you would not ask here ! " she say . " why should we not ask ? " " dislike she . " " but ' papa , ' as you call he , be not go to meet she . " " he have say that he do not know what day he may be home . and he do more than dislike she . he disapprove of she . " " Nonsense ! she be you aunt 's friend . because you father once hear some cock - and - bull story about she , and because he have always take upon himself to criticise you aunt 's friend , I be not to be civil to a person I like . " " but , , I do not like she myself . she never be in this house till the other night . " " look here , my dear , can be useful to I , and I can not ask without ask she friend . you do as I bid you , -- or else I shall do it myself . " she pause for a moment , and then she positively refuse . " I can not bring myself to ask to dine in this house . if she come to dine with you , of course I shall sit at the table , but she will be sure to see that she be not welcome . " " it seem to I that you be determined to go against I in everything I propose . " " I do not think you would say that if you know how miserable you make I . " " I tell you that that other woman can be very useful to I . " " in what way useful ? " " be you jealous , my dear ? " " certainly not of , -- nor of any woman . but it seem so odd that such a person 's service should be require . " " will you do as I tell you , and ask they ? you can go round and tell you aunt about it . she know that I mean to ask they . be a very rich woman , and be dispose to do a little in commerce . now do you understand ? " " not in the least , " say Emily . " why should not a woman who have money buy coffee as well as buy share ? " " do she buy share ? " " by , Emily , I think that you be a fool . " " I dare say I be , . I do not in the least know what it all means . but I do know this , that you ought not , in papa 's absence , to ask people to dine here whom he particularly dislike , and whom he would not wish to have in he house . " " you think that I be to be govern by you in such a matter as that ? " " I do not want to govern you . " " you think that a wife should dictate to a husband as to the way in which he be to do he work , and the partner he may be allow to have in he business , and the person whom he may ask to dinner ! because you have be dictat to I on all these matters . now , look here , my dear . as to my business , you have better never speak to I about it any more . I have endeavoure to take you into my confidence and to get you to act with I , but you have decline that , and have prefer to stick to you father . as to my partner , whether I may choose to have or , I be a better judge than you . and as to ask and or any other person to dinner , as I be oblige to make even the recreation of life subservient to its work , I must claim permission to have my own way . " she have listen , but when he pause she make no reply . " do you mean to do as I bid you and ask these lady ? " " I can not do that . I know that it ought not to be do . this be 's house , and we be live here as he guest . " " d ---- you papa ! "
" he say as he burst out of the room . after a quarter of a hour he put he head again into the room and see she sit , like a statue , exactly where he have leave she . " I have write the note both to and to , " he say . " you can not think it any sin at any rate to ask you aunt . " " I will see my aunt , " she say . " and remember I be not go to be you father 's guest , as you call it . I mean to pay for the dinner myself , and to send in my own wine . you father shall have nothing to complain of on that head . " " could you not ask they to , or to some hotel ? " she say . " what ; in ! if you think that I be go to live in a house in which I can not invite a friend to dinner , you be mistaken . " and with that he take he departure . the whole thing have now become so horrible to she that she feel unable any longer to hold up she head . it seem to she to be sacrilege that these woman should come and sit in she father 's room ; but when she speak of she father she husband have curse he with scorn ! be go to send food and wine into the house , which would be gall and wormwood to she father . at one time she think she would at once write to she father and tell he of it all , -- or perhaps telegraph to he ; but she could not do so without let she husband know what she have do , and then he would have justice on he side in call she disobedient . be she to do that , then it would indeed be necessary that she should take part against she husband . she have bring all this misery on herself and on she father because she have be obstinate in think that she could with certainty read a lover 's character . as for love , -- that of course have die away in she heart , -- imperceptibly , though , alas , so quickly ! it be impossible that she could continue to love a man who from day to day be teach she mean lesson , and who be ever do mean thing , the meanness of which be so little apparent to himself that he do not scruple to divulge they to she . how could she love a man who would make no sacrifice either to she comfort , she pride , or she conscience ? but still she might obey he , -- if she could feel sure that obedience to he be a duty . could it be a duty to sin against she father 's wish , and to assist in profan he house and abuse he hospitality after this fashion ? then she mind again go back to the trouble of , and she absolute inefficiency in that matter . it seem to she that she have give herself over body and soul and mind to some evil genius , and that there be no escape . " of course we will come , " . have say to she when she go round the corner into early in the day . " speak to I about it before . " " what will papa say about it , ? " " I suppose he and understand each other . " " I do not think papa will understand this . " " I be sure would not lend he house to he son - in - law , and then object to the man he have lent it to ask a friend to dine with he . and I be sure that would not consent to occupy a house on those term . if you do not like it , of course we will not come . " " pray do not say that . as these other woman be to come , pray do not desert I . but I can not say I think it be right . " , however , only laugh at she scruple . in the course of the evening Emily get letter address to herself from and , inform she that they would have very much pleasure in dining with she on the day name . and go on to say , with much pleasantry , that she always regard little party , get up without any ceremony , as be the pleasantest , and that she should come on this occasion without any ceremonial observance . then be aware that she husband have not only write the note in she name , but have put into she mouth some study apology as to the shortness of the invitation . well ! she be the man 's wife , and she suppose that he be entitled to put any word that he pleas into she mouth . " have he Ill - treat you ? " relieve he wife from all care as to provision for he guest . " I have be to a shop in , " he say , " and everything will be do . they will send in a cook to make the thing hot , and you father will not have to pay even for a crust of bread . " " do not mind pay for anything , " she say in she indignation . " it be all very pretty for you to say so , but my experience of he go just the other way . at any rate there will be nothing to be pay for . and will
will send in everything , if you will only tell the old fogy downstair not to interfere . " then she make a little request . might she ask , who be now in town ? " I have already get major and , " he say . she plead that one more would make no difference . " but that be just what one more always do . it destroy everything , and turn a pretty little dinner into a awkward feed . we will not have he this time . Pountney will take you , and I will take she ladyship . Dick will take , and will have . Dick will sit opposite to I , and the four lady will sit at the four corner . we shall be very pleasant , but one more would spoil we . " she do speak to the " old fogy " downstair , -- the housekeeper , who have live with she father since she be a child , and the butler , who have be there still longer , and the cook , who , have be in she place only three year , resign impetuously within half - a - hour after the advent of ' head man . the " fogy " be indignant . the butler express he intention of lock himself up in he own peculiar pantry , and the housekeeper take upon herself to tell she young mistress that " master would not like it . " since she have know such a thing as cook food be send into the house from a shop have never be so much as hear of . Emily , who have hitherto be regard in the house as a rather strong - minded young woman , could only break down and weep . why , oh why , have she consent to bring herself and she misery into she father 's house ? she could at any rate have prevent that by explain to she father the unfitness of such a arrangement . the " party " come . there be major Pountney , very fine , rather loud , very intimate with the host , whom on one occasion he call " Ferdy , my boy , " and very full of abuse of the and of . " and yet she be a good creature when I know she , " say . suggest that the Duchess have not then take up politics . " I have get out of she way , " say , " since she do that . " and there be , who defend the Duchess , but who acknowledge that the be the " most consumedly stick - up cox -comb " then exist . " and the most dishonest , " say , who have tell he new friend nothing about the repayment of the election expense . and be there . he like these little party , in which a good deal of wine could be drink , and at which ladie be not suppose to be very stiff . the major and the , and and , be such people as he like , -- all within the pale , but have a piquant relish of fastness and impropriety . be will not to declare that he hate the world in buckram . be triumphant in a manner which disgust Emily , and which she think to be most disrespectful to she father ; -- but in truth do not now care very much for , prefer the friendship of 's son - in - law . come in gorgeous clothes , which , as she be know to be very poor , and to have attach herself lately with almost more than feminine affection to , be at any rate open to suspicious cavil . in former day have take upon herself to say bitter thing about , which Emily could now have repeat , to that lady 's discomfiture , have such a mode of revenge suite she disposition . with there be , pretty as ever , and sharp and witty , with the old passion for some excitement , the old proneness to pretend to trust everybody , and the old incapacity for trust anybody . have lately be at she foot , and have fire she imagination with story of the grand thing to be do in trade . lady do it ? yes ; why not woman as well as man ? any one might do it who have money in he pocket and experience to tell he , or to tell she , what to buy and what to sell . and the experience , luckily , might be vicarious . at the present moment half the jewel wear in , -- if kknow anything about it , -- buy from the proceed of such commerce . of course there be misfortune . but these come from a want of that experience which possess , and which he be quite willing to place at the service of one whom he admire so thoroughly as he do . have be charme , have see she way into a new and most delightful life , -- but have not yet put any of she money into the hand of . I can not say that the dinner be good . it may be a doubt whether such tradesman as Messrs . and do ever produce good food ; -- or whether , with all the will in the world to do so , such a result be within they power . it be certain , I think , that the humblest mutton chop be better eat than any " of chicken after martial manner , " -- as I have see the dish name in a french bill of fare , translate by a french pastrycook for the benefit of
of he English customer , -- when send in from . and even with they best exertion . can it be say that the wine be good , though , when he contract for the whole entertainment , be eager in he assurance that he procure the very best that could produce . but the outside look of thing be handsome , and there be many dish , and enough of servants to hand they , and the wine , if not good , be various . and do not know good wine . do , but be contented on this occasion to drink they bad . and everything go pleasantly , with perhaps a little too much noise ;--everything except the hostess , who be allow by general consent to be sad and silent ; -- till there come a loud double - rap at the door . " there be papa , " say Emily , jump up from she seat . look at , and see at a glance that for a moment he courage have fail he . but he recovere himself quickly . " have not you better keep you seat , my dear ? " he say to he wife . " the servant will attend to , and I will go to he presently . " " oh , no , " say Emily , who by this time be almost at the door . " you do not expect he , -- do you ? " ask . " nobody know when he be come . I think he tell Emily that he might be here any day . " " he be the most uncertain man alive , " say , who be a good deal scare by the arrival , though determined to hold up she head and exhibit no fear . " I suppose the old gentleman will come in and have some dinner , " whisper to he neighbour . " not if he know I be here , " reply , tittering . " he think that I be , -- oh , something a great deal worse than I can tell you . " " be he give to be ? " ask , also affect to whisper . " never see he in my life , " answer the major , " but I should not wonder if he be . old gentleman generally be cross . , and that kind of thing , you know . " for a minute or two the servant stop they ministration , and thing be very uncomfortable ; but , as soon as he have recover himself , direct 's man to proceed with the banquet . " we can eat we dinner , I suppose , though my father - in - law have come back , " he say . " I wish my wife be not so fussy , though that be a kind of thing , , that one have to expect from young wife . " the banquet do go on , but the feeling be general that a misfortune have come upon they , and that something dreadful might possibly happen . Emily , when she rush out , meet she father in the hall , and run into he arm . " oh , papa ! " she exclaim . " what be all this about ? " he ask , and as he speak he pass on through the hall to he own room at the back of the house . there be of course many evidence on all side of the party , -- the strange servants , the dish go in and out , the clatter of glass , and the smell of viand . " you have get a dinner - party , " he say . " have you not better go back to you friend ? " " no , papa . " " what be the matter , ? you be unhappy . " " oh , so unhappy ! " " what be it all about ? who be they ? whose do be it , -- yours or he ? what make you unhappy ? " he be now seat in he arm -chair , and she throw herself on she knee at he foot . " he would have they . you must not be angry with I . you will not be angry with I ; -- will you ? " he put he hand upon she head , and strok she hair . " why should I be angry with you because you husband have ask friend to dinner ? " she be so unlike she usual self that he know not what to make of it . it have not be she nature to kneel and to ask for pardon , or to be timid and submissive . " what be it , , that make you like this ? " " he should not have have the people . " " well ;-- grant . but it do not signify much . be you aunt Harriet there ? " " yes . " " it can not be very bad , then . " " . be there , and , -- and two man I do not like . " " be here ? " " no ; -- he would not have . " " ought not you to go to they ? " " do not make I go . I should only cry . I have be cry all day , and the whole of yesterday . " then she bury she face upon he knee , and sob as though she would break she heart . he could not at all understand it . though he distrust he son - in - law , and certainly do not love he , he have
have not as yet learn to hold he in aversion . when the connection be once make he have determined to make the best of it , and have declare to himself that as far as manners go the man be well enough . he have not as yet see the inside of the man , as it have be the sad fate of the poor wife to see he . it have never occur to he that he daughter 's love have fail she , or that she could already be repent what she have do . and now , when she be weep at he foot and deplor the sin of the dinner - party , -- which , after all , be a trifling sin , -- he could not comprehend the feeling which be actuat she . " I suppose you aunt Harriet make up the party , " he say . " he do it . " " you husband ? " " yes ; -- he do it . he write to the woman in my name when I refuse . " then begin to perceive that there have be a quarrel . " I tell he ought not to come here . " " I do not love , -- nor , for the matter of that , . but they will not hurt the house , my dear . " " and he have have the dinner send in from a shop . " " why could not he let do it ? " as he say this , the tone of he voice become for the first time angry . " have go away . she would not stand it . and be very angry . and would not wait at table . " " what be the meaning of it all ? " " he would have it so . oh , papa , you do not know what I have undergone . I wish , -- I wish we have not come here . it would have be better anywhere else . " " what would have be better , dear ? " " everything . whether we live or die , it would have be better . why should I bring my misery to you ? oh , papa , you do not know , -- you can never know . " " but I must know . be there more than this dinner to disturb you ? " " oh , yes ; -- more than that . only I could not bear that it should be do in you house . " " have he -- ill - treat you ? " then she get up , and stand before he . " I do not mean to complain . I should have say nothing only that you have find we in this way . for myself I will bear it all , whatever it may be . but , papa , I want you to tell he that we must leave this house . " " he have get no other home for you . " " he must find one . I will go anywhere . I do not care where it be . but I will not stay here . I have do it myself , but I will not bring it upon you . I could bear it all if I think that you would never see I again . " " Emily ! " " yes ; -- if you would never see I again . I know it all , and that would be best . " she be now walk about the room . " why should you see it all ? " " see what , my love ? " " see he ruin , and my unhappiness , and my baby . oh , -- oh , -- oh ! " " I think so very differently , Emily , that under no circumstance will I have you take to another home . I can not understand much of all this yet , but I suppose I shall come to see it . if be , as you say , ruin , it be well that I have still enough for we to live on . this be a bad time just now to talk about you husband 's affair . " " I do not mean to talk about they , papa . " " what would you like best to do now , -- now at once . can you go down again to you husband 's friend ? " " no ; -- no ;--no . " " as for the dinner , never mind about that . I can not blame he for make use of my house in my absence , as far as that go , -- though I wish he could have contente himself with such a dinner as my servants could have prepare for he . I will have some tea here . " " let I stay with you , papa , and make it for you . " " very well , dear . I do not mean to be asham to enter my own dining - room . I shall , therefore , go in and make you apology . " Thereupon walk slowly forth and march into the dining - room . " oh , , " say , " we do not expect you . " " have you dine yet , sir ? " ask . " I dine early , " say . " I should not now have come in to disturb you , but that I have find , and she have beg I to ask you to excuse she . " " I will go to she , " say , rise . " it be not necessary , "
" say . " she be not ill , but hardly able to take she place at table . " then . propose to go to she dear niece ; but would not allow it , and leave the room , have succeed in persuade they to go on with they dinner . certainly be not happy during the evening , but he be strong enough to hide he misgiving , and to do he duty as host with see cheerfulness . " where Is ? " though he daughter 's word to he have be very wild they do almost more to convince that he should not give he money to he son - in - law than even the letter which have pass between they . to Emily herself he speak very little as to what have occur that evening . " , " she say , " do not ask I anything more about it . I be very miserable , -- because of the dinner . " do he at that time ask she any question , contente himself with assure she that , at any rate at present , and till after she baby should have be bear , she must remain in . " he will not hurt I , " say , and then add with a smile , " he will not have to have any more dinner - party while I be here . " do he make any complaint to as to what have be do , or even allude to the dinner . but when he have be back about a week he announce to he son - in - law he final determination as to money . " I have better tell you , , what I mean to do , so that you may not be leave in doubt . I shall not intrust any further sum of money into you hand on behalf of . " " you can do as you please , sir , -- of course . " " just so . you have have what to I be a very considerable sum ,-- though I fear that it do not go for much in you large concern . " " it be not very much , . " " I dare say not . opinion on such a matter differ , you know . at any rate , there will be no more . at present I wish Emily to live here , and you , of course , be welcome here also . if thing be not go well with you , this will , at any rate , relieve you from immediate expense . " " my calculation , sir , have never descend to that . " " mine be more minute . the necessity of my life have cause I to think of these little thing . when I be dead there will be provision for Emily make by my will , -- the income go to trustee for she benefit , and the capital to she child after she death . I think it only fair to you that this should be explain . " " and you will do nothing for I ? " " nothing ; -- if that be nothing . I should have think that you present maintenance and the future support of you wife and child would have be regard as something . " " it be nothing ;-- nothing ! " " then let it be nothing . good morning . " two day after that recur to the subject . " you be very explicit with I the other day , sir . " " I mean to be so . " " and I will be equally so to you now . both I and you daughter be absolutely ruin unless you reconsider you purpose . " " if you mean money by reconsideration ,-- present money to be give to you ,-- I certainly shall not reconsider it . you may take my solemn assurance that I will give you nothing that can be of any service to you in trade . " " then , sir , -- I must tell you my purpose , and give you my assurance , which be equally solemn . under those circumstance I must leave , and try my fortune in . there be a opening for I at , though not a very hopeful one . " " ! " " yes ;-- friend of mine have a connection there . I have not break it to yet , but under these circumstance she will have to go . " " you will not take she to ! " " not take my wife , sir ? indeed I shall . do you suppose that I would go away and leave my wife a pensioner on you bounty ? do you think that she would wish to desert she husband ? I do not think you know you daughter . " " I wish you have never kny she . " " that be neither here nor there , sir . if I can not succeed in this country I must go elsewhere . as I have tell you before , L20,000 at the present moment would enable I to surmount all my difficulty , and make I a very wealthy man . but unless I can command some such sum by everything here must be sacrifice . " " never in my life do I hear so base a proposition , " say . " why be it base ? I can only tell you the truth . " " so be it . you will find that I mean what I have say . " " so do I , . " " as to my daughter , she must , of course , do as she think
think fit . " " she must do as I think fit , . " " I will not argue with you . Alas , alas ; poor girl ! " " poor girl , indeed ! she be likely to be a poor girl if she be treat in this way by she father . as I understand that you intend to use , or to try to use , authority over she , I shall take step for remove she at once from you house . " and so the interview be end . have think the matter over , and have determine to " brazen it out , " as he himself call it . nothing further be , he think , to be get by civility and obedience . now he must use he power . he idea of go to be not a invention of the moment , nor be it devoid of a certain basis of truth . such a suggestion have be make to he some time since by . there be mine in which want , or at some future day might want , a resident director . the proposition have be make to before he marriage , and probably have now forgote all about it ; -- but the thing be of service now . he break the matter very suddenly to he wife . " have you father be speak to you of my plan ? " " not lately ; -- not that I remember . " " he could not speak of they without you remember , I should think . have he tell you that I be go to ? " " ! where be , ? " " you can answer my question though you geography be deficient . " " he have say nothing about you go anywhere . " " you will have to go , -- as soon after as you may be fit . " " but where be ; -- and for how long , ? " " be in , and we shall probably settle there for the rest of we life . I have get nothing to live on here . " during the next two month this plan of seek a distant home and a strange country be constantly speak of in , and do receive corroboration from himself . renew he application and receive a letter from that gentleman say that the thing might probably be arrange if he be in earnest . " I be quite in earnest , " say as he show this letter to . " I suppose Emily will be able to start two month after she confinement . they tell I that baby do very well at sea . " during this time , in spite of he threat , he continue to live with in , and go every day into the city ,-- whether to make arrangement and receive instruction as to , or to carry on he old business , neither Emily nor she father knew . he never at this time speak about he affair to either of they , but daily refer to she future expatriation as a thing that be certain . at last there come up the actual question ,-- whether she be to go or not . she father tell she that though she be doubtless bound by law to obey she husband , in such a matter as this she might defy the law . " I do not think that he can actually force you on board the ship , " she father say . " but if he tell I that I must go ? " " stay here with I , " say the father . " stay here with you baby . I will fight it out for you . I will so manage that you shall have all the world on you side . " Emily at that moment come to no decision , but on the follow day she discuss the matter with himself . " of course you will go with I , " he say , when she ask the question . " you mean that I must , whether I wish to go or not . " " certainly you must . good g ----! where be a wife 's place ? be I to go out without my child , and without you , while you be enjoy all the comfort of you father 's wealth at home ? that be not my idea of life . " " , I have be think about it very much . I must beg you to allow I to remain . I ask it of you as if I be ask my life . " " you father have put you up to this . " " no ;-- not to this . " " to what then ? " " my father think that I should refuse to go . " " he do , do he ? " " but I shall not refuse . I shall go if you insist upon it . there shall be no contest between we about that . " " well ; I should hope not . " " but I do implore you to spare I . " " that be very selfish , Emily . " " yes , " -- she say , " yes . I can not contradict that . but so be the man selfish who pray the judge to spare he life . " " but you do not think of I . I must go . " " I shall not make you happier , . " " do you think that it be a fine thing for a man to live in such a country as that all alone ? " " I think he would be better
better so than with a wife he do not -- love . " " who say I do not love you ? " " or with one who do -- not -- love he . " this she say very slowly , very softly , but look up into he eye as she say it . " do you tell I that to my face ? " " yes ; -- what good can I do now by lie ? you have not be to I as I think you would be . " " and so , because you have build up some castle in the air that have fall to piece , you tell you husband to he face that you do not love he , and that you prefer not to live with he . be that you idea of duty ? " " why have you be so cruel ? " " ! what have I do ? tell I what cruelty . have I beat you ? have you be starve ? have I not ask and implor you assistance , -- only to be refuse ? the fact be that you father and you have find out that I be not a rich man , and you want to be ry of I . be that true or false ? " " it be not true that I want to be rid of you because you be poor . " " I do not mean to be rid of you . you will have to settle down and do you work as my wife in whatever place it may suit I to live . you father be a rich man , but you shall not have the advantage of he wealth unless it come to you , as it ought to come , through my hand . if you father would give I the fortune which ought to be yours there need be no go abroad . he can not bear to part with he money , and therefore we must go . now you know all about it . " she be then turn to leave he , when he ask she a direct question . " be I to understand that you intend to resist my right to take you with I ? " " if you bid I go , -- I shall go . " " it will be better , as you will save both trouble and exposure . " of course she tell she father what have take place , but he could only shake he head , and sit groaning over he misery in he chamber . he have explain to she what he be willing to do on she behalf , but she decline he aid . he could not tell she that she be wrong . she be the man 's wife , and out of that terrible destiny she could not now escape . the only question with he be whether it would not be best to buy the man , -- give he a sum of money to go , and to go alone . could he have be quit of the man even for , he would willingly have pay the money . but the man would either not go , or would come back as soon as he have get the money . he own life , as he pass it now , with this man in the house with he , be horrible to he . for , though he have more than once threaten that he would carry he wife to another home , have take no step towards get that other home ready for she . during all this time have not see he son . have go abroad just as he father return to from , and be still on the continent . he receive he allowance punctually , and that be the only intercourse which take place between they . but Emily have write to he , not tell he much of she trouble , -- only say that she believe that she husband would take she to early in the spring , and begge he to come home before she go . just before she baby be bear , but the poor child do not live a couple of day . she herself at the time be so worn with care , so thin and want and wretch , that look in the glass she hardly know she own face . " , " she say to he , " I know he will not live . the Doctor say so . " " nothing thrive that I have to do with , " he answer gloomily . " will you not look at he ? " " well ; yes . I have look at he , have I not ? I wish to that where he be go I could go with he . " " I wish I be ;-- I wish I be go , " say the poor mother . then the father go out , and before he have return to the house the child be dead . " oh , , speak one kind word to I now , " she say . " what kind word can I speak when you have tell I that you do not love I ? do you think that I can forget that because -- because he have go ? " " a woman 's love may always be win back again by kindness . " " ! how be I to kiss and make pretty speech with my mind harass as it be now ? " but he do touch she brow with he lip before he go away . the infant be bury , and then there be not much show of mourn in the house . the poor mother
mother would sit gloomily alone day after day , tell herself that it be perhaps better that she should have be rob of she treasure than have go forth with he into the wide , unknown , harsh world with such a father as she have give he . then she would look at all the preparations she have make , -- the happy work of she finger when she thought of they future use be she sweetest consolation , -- and weep till she would herself feel that there never could be a end to she tear . the second week in have come and yet nothing further have be settle as to this project . talk about it as though it be certain , and even tell he wife that as they would move so soon it would not be now worth while for he to take other lodging for she . but when she ask as to she own preparation , -- the wardrobe necessary for the long voyage and she general outfit , -- he tell she that three week or a fortnight would be enough for all , and that he would give she sufficient notice . " upon my word he be very kind to honour my poor house as he do , " say . " , we will go at once if you wish it , " say he daughter . " Nay , Emily ; do not turn upon I . I can not but be sensible to the insult of he daily presence ; but even that be better than lose you . " then there occur a ludicrous incident , -- or combination of incidents , -- which , in spite of they absurdity , drive almost frantic . first there come to he the bill from Messrs . and for the dinner . at this time he keep nothing back from he daughter . " look at that ! " he say . the bill be absolutely make out in he name . " it be a mistake , papa . " " not at all . the dinner be give in my house , and I must pay for it . I would sooner do so than that he should pay it ,-- even if he have the means . " so he pay . and 9 . 6 . , begge they as he do so never to send another dinner into he house , and observe that he be in the habit of entertain he friend at less than three guinea a head . " but and ! " say . " fiddlestick ! " say , walk out of the house with he receipt . then come the bill for the brougham , -- for the brougham from the very day of they return to town after they wedding trip . this he show to . indeed the bill have be make out to and send to Wharton with a apologetic note . " I do not tell he to send it , " say . " but will you pay it ? " " I certainly shall not ask you to pay it . " but at last do pay it , and he also pay the rent of the room in the , and between L30 and L40 for dress which Emily have get at and 's under she husband 's order in the first day of they married life in . " oh , papa , I wish I have not go there , " she say . " my dear , anything that you may have have I do not grudge in the least . and even for he , if he would let you remain here , I would pay willingly . I would supply all he wants if he would only -- go away . " 's " do you mean to say , my lady , that the pay he electioneering bill down at ? " " I do mean to say so , . " nod she head , and open he mouth . " goodness gracious ! " say , who be sit with they . they be in 's drawing - room , and the patriotic editor of the " 's " be obtain from a new ally information which might be useful to the country . " but 'ow do you know , ? you will pardon the persistency of my inquiry , but when you come to public information accuracy be everything . I never trust myself to mere report . I always travel up to the very fountain ' ead of truth . " " I know it , " say oracularly . " Um -- ! " the editor as he ejaculate the sound look at she ladyship with admiring eye , -- with eye that be intend to flatter . but have be look at so often in so many way , and be so well accustom to admiration , that this have no effect on she at all . " 'e do not tell you himself ; do 'e , now ? " " can you tell I the truth as to trust he with my money ? " " yes , I can . " " shall I be safe if I take the papers which he call bill of sale ? " " one good turn deserve another , my lady . " " I do not want to make a secret of it , . find it out . you know the major ? " " yes , I know major . he be at 's imself , and get a little bit of cold shoulder ; -- do not he ? " " I dare say he do . what have that to do with it ? you may be sure that apply to the
the for he expense at , and that the send he the money . " " there be no doubt about it , , " say . " we get it all from Major . there be some bet between he and , and he have to show the cheque . " " Pountney see the money , " say . strok he hand over he mouth and ching as he sit think of the tremendous national importance of this communication . the man who have pay the money be the of , -- and be , moreover , 's ! " when the right ' and of fellowship have be reject , I never forgive , " have be hear to say . even , who be not particular as to the appearance of people , remark afterwards to she friend that have look like the devil as he be strok he face . " it be very remarkable , " say ; " very remarkable ! " " you will not tell the major that we tell you , " say she Ladyship . " oh dear , no . I only just want to ' ear how it be . and as to embark you money , my lady , with ,-- I would not do it . " " not if I get the bill of sale ? it be for rum , and they say rum will go up to any price . " " do not , . I can not say any more , -- but do not . I never mention name . but do not . " then go at once in search of major , and have find the major at he club extract from he all that he know about the Silverbridge payment . Pountney have really see the 's cheque for . " there be some bet , -- eh , major ? " ask . " no , there be not . I know who have be tell you . that be , and just like she mischief . the way of it be this ;-- , who be very angry , have boast that he would bring the down on he marrow - bone . I be laugh at he as we sit at dinner one day afterwards , and he take out the cheque and show it I . there be the 's own signature for , ' as aplain as letter could make it . " armed with this full information , feel that he have do all that the most punctilious devotion to accuracy could demand of he , and immediately shut himself up in he cage at the " 's " office and go to work . this occur about the first week in . the be then at matching with he wife and a very small party . the singular arrangement which have be effect by the Duchess in the early autumn have pass off without any wonderful effect . it have be do by she in pique , and the result have be apparently so absurd that it have at first frightene she . but in the end it answer very well . the take great pleasure in 's company , and enjoy the comparative solitude which enable he to work all day without interruption . he wife protest that it be just what she like , though it must be fear that she soon become weary of it . to it be of course a Paradise on earth . in , and he wife come to they , and in there be other relaxation and other business . the and he wife visit they , and he make some very useful speech through the country on he old favourite subject of decimal coinage . at , for a fortnight , they go to and entertaine the neighbourhood , -- the nobility and squirearchy dining there on one day , and the tenant and other farmer on another . all this go very smoothly , and the do not become outrageously unhappy because the " 's " make sundry severe remark on the absence of through the autumn . after they return to , and have some of they old friend with they . there be the of and the Duchess , and and he wife , and and , , and one or two other . but at this period there come a great trouble . one morning as the sit in he own room after breakfast he read a article in the " 's , " of which the follow sentence be a part . " we wish to know by whom be pay the expense incur by during the late contest at . it may be that they be pay by that gentleman himself , -- in which case we shall have nothing further to say , not care at the present moment to inquire whether those expense be or be not excessive . it may be that they be pay by subscription among he political friend , -- and if so , again we shall be satisfied . or it be possible that fund be supply by a new political club of which we have lately heard much , and with the action of such a body we of course have nothing to do . if a assurance can be give to we by or he friend that such be the case we shall be satisfied . " but a report have reach we , and we may say more than a report , which make it we duty to ask this question . be those expensis pay out of the private pocket of the present ? if so , we maintain that we have discover a blot in that nobleman 's character which it be we duty to the public to expose . we will go
go farther and say that if it be so , -- if these expense be pay out of the private pocket of the of , it be not fit that that nobleman should any longer hold the high office which he now fill . " we know that a peer should not interfere in election for the house of Commons . we certainly know that a of the should not attempt to purchase parliamentary support . we happen to know also the almost more than public manner , -- be we not justifi in say the ostentation ?--with which at the last election the repudiate all that influence with the borough which he predecessor , and we believe he himself , have so long exercise . he come forward tell we that he , at least , mean to have clean hand ; -- that he would not do as he forefather have do ; -- that he would not even do as he himself have do in former year . what be we to think of the of as a of this country , if , after such assurances , he have out of he own pocket pay the electioneering expense of a candidate at ? " there be much more in the article , but the passage quote will suffice to give the reader a sufficient idea of the accusation make , and which the read in the retirement of he own chamber . he read it twice before he allow himself to think of the matter . the statement make be at any rate true to the letter . he have pay the man 's electioneering expense . that he have do so from the purest motive he know and the reader know ; -- but he could not even explain those motives without expose he wife . since the cheque be send he have never speak of the occurrence to any human being , -- but he have think of it very often . at the time he private Secretary , with much hesitation , almost with trepidation , have counsel he not to send the money . the be a man with whom it be very easy to work , whose courtesy to all dependent on he be almost exaggerate , who never find fault , and be anxious as far as possible to do everything for himself . the comfort of those around he be always matter of interest to he . everything he hold , he hold as it be in trust for the enjoyment of other . but he be a man whom it be very difficult to advise . he do not like advice . he be so thin - skinn that any counsel offer to he take the form of criticism . when caution what shoe he should wear , -- as have be do by , or what wine or what horse he should buy , as be do by he butler and coachman , he be thankful , take no pride to himself for knowledge as to shoe , wine , or horse . but as to he own conduct , private or public , as to any question of politics , as to he opinion and resolution , he be jealous of interference . therefore have almost tremble when ask the whether he be quite sure about send the money to . " quite sure , " the have answer , have at that time make up he mind . have not da to express a further doubt , and the money have be send . but from the moment of send it doubt have repeat themselves in the 's mind . now he sit with the newspaper in he hand think of it . of course it be open to he to take no notice of the matter , -- to go on as though he have not see the article , and to let the thing die if it would die . but he know and he paper well enough to be sure that it would not die . the charge would be repeat in the " 's " till it be copy into other papers ; and then the further question would be ask , -- why have the allow such a accusation to remain unanswered ? but if he do notice it , what notice should he take of it ? it be true . and surely he have a right to do what he like with he own money so long as he disobey no law . he have bribe no one . he have spend he money with no corrupt purpose . he sense of honou have teach he to think that the man have receive injury through he wife 's imprudence , and that he therefore be responsible as far as the pecuniary loss be concerned . he be not asham of the thing he have do ; -- but yet he be asham that it should be discuss in public . why have he allow himself to be put into a position in which he be subject to such grievous annoyance ? since he have hold he office he have not have a happy day , nor ,-- so he tell himself , -- have he receive from it any slightest gratification , nor could he buoy himself up with the idea that he be do good service for he country . after a while he walk into the next room and show the paper to . " perhaps you be right , " he say , " when you tell I not to send that money . " " it will matter nothing , " say the private Secretary when he have read it ,-- think , however , that it might matter much , but wish to spare the . " I be oblige to repay the man
man as the Duchess have -- have encourage he . the Duchess have not quite -- quite understand my wish . " know the whole history now , have discuss it all with the Duchess more than once . " I think you should take no notice of the article . " no notice be take of it , but three day afterwards there appear a short paragraph in large type , -- begin with a question . " do the of intend to answer the question ask by we last ? be it true that he pay the expense of when that gentleman stood for ? the may be assure that the question shall be repeat till it be answer . " this the also see and take to he private secretary . " I would do nothing at any rate till it be noticed in some other paper , " say the private secretary . " the ' 's ' be know to be scandalous . " " of course it be scandalous . and , moreover , I know the motives and the malice of the wretch man who be the editor . but the paper be read , and the foul charge if repeat will become known , and the allegation make be true . I do pay the man 's election expense ; -- and , moreover , to tell the truth openly as I do not scruple to do to you , I be not prepare to state publicly the reason why I do so . and nothing but that reason could justify I . " " then I think you should state it . " " I can not do so . " " the of be here . would it not be well to tell the whole affair to he ? " " I will think of it . I do not know why I should have trouble you . " " oh , my lord ! " " except that there be always some comfort in speak even of one 's trouble . I will think about it . in the meantime you need perhaps not mention it again . " " who ? I ? oh , certainly not . " " I do not mean to other , -- but to myself . I will turn it in my mind and speak of it when I have decide anything . " and he do think about it , -- think of it so much that he could hardly get the matter out of he mind day or night . to he wife he do not allude to it at all . why trouble she with it ? she have cause the evil , and he have caution she as to the future . she could not help he out of the difficulty she have create . he continue to turn the matter over in he thought 's till he so magnify it , and build it up into such proportion , that he again begin to think that he must resign . it be , he think , true that a man should not remain in office as who in such a matter could not clear he own conduct . then there be a third attack in the " 's , " and after that the matter be notice in the " evening . " this notice the of see and mention to . " have the speak to you of some allegation make in the press as to the expense of the late election at ? " the old be at this time , and have be for some months , in a state of nervous anxiety about he friend . he have almost admitted to himself that he have be wrong in recommend a politician so weakly organised to take the office of . he have expect the man to be more manly , -- have perhaps expect he to be less conscientiously scrupulous . but now , as the thing have be do , it must be maintain . who else be there to take the office ? would not . to keep out be the very essence of the of 's life , -- the turning - point of he political creed , the one grand duty the idea of which be always present to he . and he have , moreover , a most true and most affectionate regard for the man whom he now support , appreciate the sweetness of he character , -- believe still in the 's patriotism , intelligence , devotion , and honesty ; though he be force to own to himself that the strength of a man 's heart be want . " yes , " say ; " he do mention it . " " do it trouble he ? " " perhaps you have better speak to he about it . " both the old and the private Secretary be as fearful and nervous about the as a mother be for a weakly child . they could hardly tell they opinion to each other , but they understand one another , and between they they coddle they . they be specially nervous as to what might be do by the 's wife , nervous as to what be do by every one who come in contact with he . it have be once suggest by the private Secretary that should be send for , as she have a soothing effect upon the 's spirit . " have it irritate he ? " ask the . " well ; -- yes , it have ; -- a little , you know . I think you have better speak to he ; -- and not perhaps mention my name . " the of nod he head , and say that he would speak to the great man and would
would not mention any one 's name . and he do speak . " have any one say anything to you about it ? " ask the . " I see it in the ' evening Pulpit ' myself . I have not hear it mention anywhere . " " I do pay the man 's expense . " " you do ! " " yes , -- when the election be over , and , as far as I can remember , some time after it be over . he write to I say that he have incur such and such expense , and ask I to repay he . I send he a cheque for the amount . " " but why ? " " I be bound in honour to do it . " " but why ? " there be a short pause before this second question be answer . " the man have be induce to stand by representation make to he from my house . he have be , I fear , promise certain support which certainly be not give he when the time come . " " you have not promise it ? " " no ; -- not I . " " be it the Duchess ? " " upon the whole , my friend , I think I would rather not discuss it further , even with you . it be right that you should know that I do pay the money , -- and also why I pay it . it may also be necessary that we should consider whether there may be any further probable result from my do so . but the money have be pay , by I myself , -- and be pay for the reason I have state . " " a question might be ask in the . " " if so , it must be answer as I have answer you . I certainly shall not shirk any responsibility that may be attach to I . " " you would not like to write a line to the newspaper ? " " what ; -- to the ' 's ! ' " " it begin there , do it ? no , not to the ' 's , ' but to the ' . ' he could say , you know , that the money be pay by you , and that the payment have be make because you agent have misapprehend you instruction . " " it would not be true , " say the , slowly . " as far as I can understand that be what occur , " say the other . " my instruction be not misapprehend . they be disobey . I think that perhaps we have better say no more about it . " " do not think that I wish to press you , " say the old man , tenderly ; " but I fear that something ought to be do ; -- I mean for you own comfort . " " my comfort ! " say the . " that have vanish long ago ; -- and my peace of mind , and my happiness . " " there have be nothing do which can not be explain with perfect truth . there have be no impropriety . " " I do not know . " " the money be pay simply from a over -nice sense of honour . " " it can not be explain . I can not explain it even to you , and how then can I do it to all the gaping fools of the country who be ready to trample upon a man simply because he be in some way conspicuous among they ? " after that the old again speak to , but be very loyal to he chief . " could one do anything by speak to the Duchess ? " say the old . " I think not . " " I suppose it be she who do it all . " " I can not say . my own impression be that he have better wait till the meet , and then , if any question be ask , let it be answer . he himself would do it in the house of Lords , or or , in we House . it would surely be enough to explain that he have be make to believe that the man have receive encouragement at from he own agent , which he himself have not intend should be give , and that therefore he have think it right to pay the money . after such a explanation what more could any one say ? " " you might do it yourself . " " I never speak . " " but in such a case as that you might do so ; and then there would be no necessity for he to talk to another person on the matter . " so the affair be leave for the present , though the allusion to it in the " 's " be still continue . do any other of the 's colleague dare to speak to he on the subject . and talk of it among themselves , but they do not mention it even to the Duchess . she would have go to she husband at once ; and they be too careful of he to risk such a proceeding . it certainly be the case that among they they coddle the . Coddl the parliament be to meet on the 12th of , and it be of course necessary that there should be a cabinet Council before that time . the , about the end of the third week in , be prepared to name a day for this , and do so , most unwillingly . but he be then ill , and
and talk both to he friend the old and he private Secretary of have the meeting hold without he . " impossible ! " say the old . " if I could not go it would have to be possible . " " we could all come here if it be necessary . " " bring fourteen or fifteen ministers out of town because a poor creature such as I be be ill ! " but in truth the of hardly believe in this illness . the be unhappy rather than ill . by this time everybody in the , -- and almost everybody in the country who read the newspaper , -- have heard of and he election expense ,-- except the Duchess . no one have yet da to tell she . she see the newspaper dailly , but probably do not read they very attentively . nevertheless she know that something be wrong . hover about the more tenderly than usual ; the of be more concerned ; the world around she be more mysterious , and she husband more wretched . " what be it that be go on ? " she say one day to . " everything , -- in the same dull way as usual . " " if you do not tell I , I will never speak to you again . I know there be something wrong . " " the , I be afraid , be not quite well . " " what make he ill ? I know well when he be ill and when he be well . he be troublead by something . " " I think he be , . but as he have not speak to I I be loath to make guesse . if there be anything , I can only guess at it . " then she question , and get a answer which , if not satisfactory , be at any rate explanatory . " I think he be uneasy about that Silverbridge affair . " " what Silverbridge affair ? " " you know that he pay the expense which that man say that he incur . " " yes ;-- I know that . " " and you know that that other man have find it out , and publish it all in the ' 's '? " " no ! " " yes , indeed . and a whole army of accusation have be bring against he . I have never like to tell you , and yet I do not think that you should be leave in the dark . " " everybody deceive I , " say the angrily . " Nay ; -- there have be no deceit . " " everybody keep thing from I . I think you will kill I among you . it be my do . why do they attack he ? I will write to the papers . I encourage the man after have determine that he should not be assist , -- and , because I have do so , he pay the man he beggarly money . what be there to hurt he in that ? let I bear it . my back be broad enough . " " the be very sensitive . " " I hate people to be sensitive . it make they coward . a man when he be afraid of be blame , dare not at last even show himself , and have to be wrap up in lamb 's wool . " " of course man be differently organise . " " yes ; -- but the worst of it be , that when they suffer from this weakness , which you call sensitiveness , they think that they be make of finer material than other people . should not be make of , but of good stone earthenware . however , I do not want to abuse he , poor fellow . " " I do not think you ought . " " I know what that mean . you do want to abuse I . so they have be bully he about the money he pay to that man . how do anybody know anything about it ? " " must have tell of it , " say . " the worst , my dear , of try to know a great many people be , that you be sure to get hold of some that be very bad . now that man be very bad . yet they say he have marry a nice wife . " " that be often the case , . " " and the contrary ; -- be not it , my dear ? but I shall have it out with . if I have to write letter to all the newspaper myself , I will put it right . " she certainly coddle she husband less than the other ; and , indeed , in she heart of heart disapprove altogether of the coddling system . but she be will not at this particular time to be somewhat tender to he because she be aware that she herself have be imprudent . since he have discover she interference at , and have make she understand its pernicious result , she have be , -- not , perhaps , shameface , for that word describe a condition to which hardly any series of misfortune could have reduce the Duchess of , -- but inclin to quiescence by feeling of penitence . she be less disposed than heretofore to attack he with what the world of yesterday call " chaff , " or with what the world of to - day call " cheek . " she would not admit to herself that she be cow ; -- but the greatness of the game and the high interest attach to she husband 's position do in
in some degree dismay she . nevertheless she execute she purpose of " have it out with . " " I have just hear , " she say , have knock at the door of he own room , and have find he alone ,-- " I have just hear , for the first time , that there be a row about the money you pay to . " " who tell you ? " " nobody tell I , -- in the usual sense of the word . I presume that something be the matter , and then I get it out from . why have you not tell I ? " " why should I tell you ? " " but why not ? if anything troublead I I should tell you . that be , if it trouble I much . " " you take it for grant that this do trouble I much . " he be smile as he say this , but the smile pass very quickly from he face . " I will not , however , deceive you . it do trouble I . " " I know very well that something be wrong . " " I have not complain . " " one can see as much as that without word . what be it that you fear ? what can the man do to you ? what matter be it to you if such a one as that pour out he malice on you ? let it run off like the rain from the housetop . you be too big even to be sting by such a reptile as that . " he look into she face , admir the energy with which she speak to he . " as for answer he , " she continue to say , " that may or may not be proper . if it should be do , there be people to do it . but I be speak of you own inner self . you have a shield against you equals , and a sword to attack they with if necessary . have you no armour of proof against such a creature as that ? have you nothing inside you to make you feel that he be too contemptible to be regard ? " " nothing , " he say . " oh , ! " " , there be different nature which have each they own excellency and they own defect . I will not admit that I be a coward , believe as I do that I could dare to face necessary danger . but I can not endure to have my character impugned , -- even by and . " " what matter , -- if you be in the right ? why blench if you conscience accuse you of no fault ? I would not blench even if it do . what ; -- be a man to be put in the front of everything , and then to be judge as though he could give all he time to the picking of he step ? " " just so ! and he must pick they more warily than another . " " I do not believe it . you see all this with jaundiced eye . I read somewhere the other day that the great ship have always little worm attach to they , but that the great ship swim on and know nothing of the worm . " " the worm conquer at last . " " they should not conquer I ! after all , what be it that they say about the money ? that you ought not to have pay it ? " " I begin to think that I be wrong to pay it . " " you certainly be not wrong . I have lead the man on . I have be mistaken . I have think that he be a gentleman . have lead he on at first , before you have speak to I , I do not like to go back from my word . I do go to the man at who sell the pots , and no doubt the man , when thus encourage , tell it all to . when go to the town he do suppose that he would have what the people call the Castle interest . " " and I have do so much to prevent it ! " " what be the use of go back to that now , unless you want I to put my neck down to be trodden on ? I be confess my own sins as fast as I can . " " know I would not have you trodden on . " " I be willing , -- if it be necessary . then come the question ; -- as I have do this evil , how be it to be rectify ? any man with a particle of spirit would have take he rub and say nothing about it . but as this man ask for the money , it be right that he should have it . if it be all make public he will not get very well out of it . " " what do that matter to I ? " " shall I ; -- only luckily I do not mind it . " " but I mind it for you . " " you must throw I to the whale . let somebody say in so many word that the Duchess do so and so . it be very wick no doubt ; but they can not kill I , -- nor yet dismiss I . and I will not resign . in point of fact I sha not be a penny the worse for it . " " but I should resign . " " if all the
the in be to give up as soon as they wife do foolish thing , that question about the 's government would become very difficult . " " they may do foolish thing , dear ; and yet -- " " and yet what ? " " and yet not interfere in politics . " " that be all you know about it , . do not everybody know that get make a bishop , and that get she husband to make that hazy speech about woman 's rights , so that nobody should know which way he mean to go ? there be other just as bad as I , only I do not think they get blow up so much . you do now as I ask you . " " I could not do it , . though the stain be but a little spot , and the thing to be avoid political destruction , I could not ride out of the punishment by fixing that stain on my wife . I will not have you name mention . a man 's wife should be talk about by no one . " " that be high - foluting , . " " , in these matter you must allow I to judge for myself , and I will judge . I will never say that I do not do it ; -- but that it be my wife who do . " " say so , -- because he choose to tell the truth . " " and have be despise ever since , -- not because he eat the apple , but because he impute the eating of it to a woman . I will not do it . we have have enough of this now . " then she turn to go away , -- but he call she back . " kiss I , dear , " he say . then she stoop over he and kiss he . " do not think I be angry with you because the thing vex I . I be dreame always of some day when we may go away together with the child , and rest in some pretty spot , and live as other people live . " " it would be very stupid , " she mutter to herself as she leave the room . he do go up to town for the cabinet meeting . whatever may have be do at that august assembly there be certainly no resignation , or the world would have hear it . it be probable , too , that nothing be say about these newspaper article . thing if leave to themselves will generally die at last . the old and and be all of opinion that the best plan for the present be to do nothing . " have anything be settle ? " the ask when he come back . " oh yes ; -- the 's . but there be not very much in it . " " but about the payment of this money ? " " I have not hear a word about it , " say . " you be just as bad as all the rest , , with you pretend secrecy . a girl with she first sweetheart be not half so fussy as a young . " " the get use to it sooner , I think , " say . parliament have already meet before have quite determined in what way he would carry on the war . he could indeed go on writing pernicious article about the _ad infinitum _, -- from year 's end to year 's end . it be a occupation in which he take delight , and for which he imagine himself to be peculiarly well sui . but reader will become tired even of abuse if it be not varied . and the very continuation of such attack would seem to imply that they be not much heed . other papers have indeed take the matter up , -- but they have take it up only to drop it . the subject have not be they own . the little discovery have be due not to they acuman , and do not therefore bear with they the highest interest . it have almost seem as though nothing would come of it ;-- for in he wildest ambition could have hardly imagine the vexation and hesitation , the nervousness and serious discussion which he word have occasion among the great people at . but certainly the thing must not be allow to pass away as a matter of no moment . have almost work he mind up to real horror as he think of it . what ! a prime minister , a peer , a great duke , -- put a man forward as a candidate for a borough , and , when the man be beat , pay he expense ! be this to be do , -- to be do and find out and then nothing come of it in these day of purity , when a private member of parliament , some mere nobody , lose he seat because he have give away a few bushel of coal or a score or two of rabbit ! 's energetic love of public virtue be scandalise as he think of the probability of such a catastrophe . to he thinking , public virtue consist in carping at man high place , in abusing minister and judge and bishop -- and especially in find out something for which they might be abuse . he own public virtue be in this matter very great , for it be he who have ferret out the secret . for he intelligence and energy in that matter the country owed he much . but the country would pay he nothing , would give he none of the
the credit he desire , would rob he of this special opportunity of declare a dozen time that the " 's " be the surest guardian of the people 's liberty ,-- unless he could succeed in force the matter further into public notice . " how terrible be the apathy of the people at large , " say slide to himself , " when they can not be wake by such a revelation as this ! " know very well what ought to be the next step . proper notice should be give and a question should be ask in parliament . some gentleman should declare that he have notice such and such statement in the public press , and that he think it right to ask whether such and such payment have be make by the . in he meditation go so far as to arrange the very word which the indignant gentleman should utter , among which word be a graceful allusion to a certain public - spirited newspaper . he do even go so far as to arrange a compliment to the editor , -- but in do so he know that he be think only of that which ought to be , and not of that which would be . the time have not come as yet in which the editor of a newspaper in this country receive a tithe of the honour due to he . but the question in any form , with or without a compliment to the " 's , " would be the thing that be now desirable . who be to ask the question ? if public spirit be really strong in the country there would be no difficulty on that point . the crime commit have be so horrible that all the great politician of the country ought to compete for the honour of ask it . what greater service can be trust to the hand of a great man than that of expose the sins of the rulers of the nation ? so think . but he know that he be in advance of the people , and that the matter would not be see in the proper light by those who ought so to see it . there might be a difficulty in get any peer to ask the question in the house in which the himself sit , and even in the other House there be now but little of that acrid , indignant opposition upon which , in 's opinion , the safety of the nation altogether depend . when the statement be first make in the " 's , " have come to at once and have demand he authority for make it . have find the statement to be most injuriious to himself . he have be pay he election expense twice over , make a clear profit of L500 by the transaction ; and , though the matter have at one time trouble he conscience , he have already teach himself to regard it as one of those bygone to which a wise man seldom refer . but now would know that he have be cheat , should this statement reach he . " who give you authority to publish all this ? " ask , who at this time have become intimate with . " be it true , ? " ask the editor . " whatever be done be done in private , -- between I and the . " " Dukes , my dear fellow , can not be private , and certainly not when they be . " " but you have know right to publish these thing about I . " " be it true ? if it be true I have get every right to publish it . if it be not true , I have get the right to ask the question . if you will ' ave to do with you can not ' ide yourself under a bushel . tell I this ; -- be it true ? you might as well go ' and in ' and with I in the matter . you can not ' urt yourself . and if you oppose I , -- why , I shall oppose you . " " you can not say anything of I . " " well ;-- I do not know about that . I can generally ' it pretty ' ard if I feel inclined . but I do not want to ' it you . as regards you I can tell the story one way , -- or the other , just as you please . " Lopez , see it in the same light , at last agreed that the story should be tell in a manner not inimical to himself . the present project of he life be to leave he trouble in ,-- be the worst of they , -- and get away to . in arrange this the good word of might not benefit he , but he ill word might injure he . and then , let he do what he would , the matter must be make public . should hear of it , -- as of course he would , -- it must be brazen out . he could not keep it from 's ear by quarrell with . " it be true , " say . " I know it before just as well as though I have see it . I be not often very wrong in these thing . you ask he for the money , -- and threaten he . " " I do not know about threaten he . " " 'e would not have send it else . " " I tell he that I have be deceive by he people in the borough , and that I have be put to expense through the misrepresentation
misrepresentation of the Duchess . I do not think I do ask for the money . but he send a cheque , and of course I take it . " " of course ; -- of course . you could not give I a copy of you letter ? " " never keep a copy . " he have a copy in he breast coat - pocket at that moment , and do not for a moment believe the statement make . but in such discussion one man hardly expect truth from another . certainly never expect truth from any man . " he send the cheque almost without a word , " say . " he do write a note , I suppose ? " " just a few word . " " could you let I ' ave that note ? " " I destroy it at once . " this be also in he breast - pocket at the time . " do 'e write it ' imself ? " " I think it be he private Secretary , . " " you must be sure , you know . which be it ? " " it be . " " be it civil ? " " yes , it be . if it have be uncivil I should have send it back . I be not the man to take impudence even from a duke . " " if you will give I those two letter , , I will stick to you through thick and thing . by heaven I will ! think what the ' 's ' be . you may come to want that kind of thing some of these day . " remain silent , look into the other man 's eager face . " I should not publish they , you know ; but it would be so much to I to have the evidence in my hand . you might do worse , you know , than make a friend of I . " " you will not publish they ? " " certainly not . I shall only refer to they . " then pull a bundle of papers out of he pocket . " there they be , " he say . " well , " say , when he have read they ; " it be one of the rummest transaction I ever ' eard of . why do 'e send the money ? that be what I want to know . as far as the claim go , you 'ad not a leg to stand on . " " not legally . " " you 'ad not a leg to stand on any way . but that do not much matter . he send the money , and the sending of the money be corrupt . who shall I get to ask the question ? I suppose young would not do it ? " " they be bird of a feather , " say . " bird of a feather do fall out sometimes . or ? I wonder whether would do it . if any man ever ' at another , must ' eat the of . " " I do not think he would let himself down to that kind of thing . " " let ' imself down ! I do not see any letting down in it . but those man who have be in cabinet do stick to one another even when they be enemy . they think themselves so mighty that they ought not to be ' andle like other man . but I will let them know that I will ' andle 'em . a or a cowboy be the same to when he have get he pen in 'is ' and . " on the next morning there come out another article in the " 's , " in which the writer declare that he have in he own possession the damnatory correspondence between the and the late candidate at . " the may deny the fact , " say the article . " we do not think it probable , but it be possible . we wish to be fair and above - board in everything . and therefore we at once inform the noble that the entire correspondence be in we hand . " in say this think that he have quite keep the promise which he make when he say that he would only refer to the letter . " I can sleep here to -night , I Suppose ? " that scheme of go to have be in the first instance propound by with the object of frightening into term . there have , indeed , be some previous thought on the subject , -- some plan project before he marriage ; but it have be resuscitate mainly with the hope that it might be efficacious to extract money . when by degree the son - in - law begin to feel that even this would not be operative on he father - in - law 's purse , -- when under this threat neither nor give way , -- and when , with the view of strengthen he threat , he renew he inquirie as to and find that there might still be a opening for he in that direction , -- the threat take the shape of a true purpose , and he begin to think that he would in real earnest try he fortune in a new world . from day to day thing do not go well with he , and from day to day become more unendurable . it be impossible for he to keep from he partner this plan of emigration , -- but he endeavoure to make believe that the thing , if do at all , be not to be do till all he affair be settle
settle , -- or in other word all he embarrassment clear by downright money payment , and that be to make these payment on the condition that he thus expatriate himself . but have make no such promise . though the threatened day come nearer and nearer he could not bring himself to purchase a short respite for he daughter by pay money to a scoundrel , -- which payment he feel sure would be of no permanent service . during all this time be very wretched . if he could have free he daughter from she marriage by half he fortune he would have do it without a second thought . if he could have assuredly purchase the permanent absence of she husband , he would have do it at a large price . but let he pay what he would , he could see he way to no security . from day to day he become more strongly convinced of the rascality of this man who be he son - in - law , and who be still a inmate in he own house . of course he have accusation enough to make within he own breast against he daughter , who , when the choice be open to she , would not take the altogether fitting husband provide for she , but have declare herself to be break - heart for ever unless she be allow to throw herself away upon this wretched creature . but he blame himself almost as much as he do she . why have he allow himself to be so enervate by she prayer at last as to surrender everything , -- as he have do ? how could he presume to think that he should be allow to escape , when he have do so little to prevent this misery ? he speak to about it , -- not often indeed , but with great earnestness . " I have do it myself , " she say , " and I will bear it . " " tell he you can not go till you know to what home you be go . " " that be for he to consider . I have beg he to let I remain , and I can say no more . if he choose to take I , I shall go . " then he speak to she about money . " of course I have money , " he say . " of course I have enough both for you and . if I could do any good by give it to he , he should have it . " " , " she answer , " I will never again ask you to give he a single penny . that must be altogether between you and he . he be what they call a speculator . money be not safe with he . " " I shall have to send it you when you be in want . " " when I be -- dead there will be no more to be send . do not look like that , papa . I know what I have do , and I must bear it . I have throw away my life . it be just that . if baby have liv it would have be different . " this be about the end of , and then hear of the great attack make by against the , and hear , of course , of the payment allege to have be make to by the on the score of the election at . some person speak to he on the subject . one or two friend at the club ask he what he suppose to be the truth in the matter , and . inquire of he on the subject . " I have ask , " she say , " and I be sure from he manner that he do get the money . " " I do not know anything about it , " say . " if he do get it I think he be very clever . " it be well know at this time to . Roby that the marriage have be a failure , that be not a rich man , and that Emily , as well as she father , be discontented and unhappy . she have latterly heard of the scheme , and have of course express she horror . but she sympathise with rather than with he wife , think that if would only open he pocket wide enough thing might still be right . " it be all the 's fault , you know , " she say to the old man . " I know nothing about it , and when I want to know I certainly shall not come to you . the misery he have bring upon I be so great that it make I wish that I have never see any one who know he . " " it be who introduce he to you house . " " it be you who introduce he to . " " there you be wrong , -- as you so often be , . meet he first at the club . " " what be the use of argue about it ? it be at you house that Emily meet he . it be you that do it . I wonder you can have the face to mention he name to I . " " and the man live all the time in you own house ! " up to this time have not mention to a single person the fact that he have pay he son - in - law 's election expense at . he have give he the cheque without much consideration , with the feeling that by do so he would in some degree benefin he daughter ;
; and have since regret the act , find that no such payment from he could be of any service to . but the thing have be do , -- and there have be , so far , a end of it . in no subsequent discussion would have allude to it , have not circumstance now as it be drive it back upon he mind . and since the day on which he have pay that money he have be , as he declare to himself , swindle over and over again by he son - in - law . there be the dinner in , and after that the brougham , and the rent , and a score of bill , some of which he have pay and some decline to pay ! and yet he have say but little to the man himself of all these injury . of what use be it to say anything ? would simply reply that he have ask he to pay nothing . " what be it all , " have once say , " to the fortune I have a right to expect with you daughter ? " " you have no right to expect a shilling , " have say . then have shrug he shoulders , and there have be a end of it . but now , if this rumour be true , there have be positive dishonesty . from whichever source the man might have get the money first , if the money have be twice get , the second payment have be fraudulently obtain . surely if the accusation have be untrue would have come to he and declare it to be false , knowe what must otherwise be he thought . lately , in the daily worry of he life , he have avoid all conversation with the man . he would not allow he mind to contemplate clearly what be come . he entertain some irrational , undefined hope that something would at last save he daughter from the threaten banishment . it might be , if he hold he own hand tight enough , that there would not be money enough even to pay for she passage out . as for she outfit , would of course order what he want and have the bill send to . whether or not this be be do neither he nor Emily kknow . and thus matter go on without much speech between the two man . but now the old barrister think that he be bound to speak . he therefore wait on a certain morning till have come down , have previously desire he daughter to leave the room . " , " he ask , " what be this that the newspaper be say about you expense at ? " have expect the attack and have endeavoure to prepare himself for it . " I should have think , sir , that you would not have pay much attention to such statement in a newspaper . " " when they concern myself , I do . I pay you electioneering expense . " " you certainly subscribe L500 towards they , . " " I subscribe nothing , sir . there be no question of a subscription , -- by which you intend to imply contribution from various source ; you tell I that the contest cost you and that sum I hand to you , with the full understanding on you part , as well as on mine , that I be pay for the whole . be that so ? " " have it you own way , sir . " " if you be not more precise , I shall think that you have defraude I . " " Defraude you ! " " yes , sir ; -- defraude I , or the of . the money be gone , and it matter little which . but if that be so I shall know that either from he or from I you have raise money under false pretence . " " of course , , from you I must bear whatever you may choose to say . " " be it true that you have apply to the of for money on account of you expense at , and be it true that he have pay you money on that score ? " " , as I say just now , I be bound to hear and to bear from you anything that you may choose to say . you connection with my wife and you age alike restrain my resentment . but I be not bound to answer you question when they be accompany by such language as you have choose to use , and I refuse to answer any further question on this subject . " " of course I know that you have take the money from the . " " then why do you ask I ? " " and of course I know that you be as well aware as I be of the nature of the transaction . that you can brazen it out without a blush only prove to I that you have get beyond the reach of shame ! " " very well , sir . " " and you have no further explanation to make ? " " what do you expect I to say ? without know any of the fact of the case ,-- except the one , that you contribute L500 to my election expense , -- you take upon yourself to tell I that I be a shameless , fraudulent swindler . and then you ask for a further explanation ! in such a position be it likely that I shall explain anything ; -- that I can be in a humour to be explanatory ? just turn it all over in you mind , and
and ask yourself the question . " " I have turn it over in my own mind , and I have ask myself the question , and I do not think it probable that you should wish to explain anything . I shall take step to let the know that I as you father - in - law have pay the full sum which you have state that you have spend at . " " Much the will care about that . " " and after what have pass I be oblige to say that the sooner you leave this house the better I shall be pleased . " " very well , sir . of course I shall take my wife with I . " " that must be as she please . " " no , . that must be as I please . she belong to I , -- not to you or to herself . under you influence she have forget much of what belong to the duty of a wife , but I do not think that she will so far have forgote herself as to give I more trouble than to bid she come with I when I desire it . " " let that be as it may , I must request that you , sir , will absent yourself . I will not entertain as my guest a man who have act as you have do in this matter , -- even though he be my son - in - law . " " I can sleep here to - night , I suppose ? " " or to - morrow if it suit you . as for , she can remain here , if you will allow she to do so . " " that will not suit I , " say . " in that case , as far as I be concerned , I shall do whatever she may ask I to do . good morning . " leave the room , but do not leave the house . before he do so he would see he daughter ; and , think it probable that would also choose to see he wife , he prepare to wait in he own room . but , in about ten minute , start from the hall door in a cab , and do so without go upstairs . have reason to believe that he son - in - law be almost destitute of money for immediate purpose . whatever he might have wwould at any rate be serviceable to he before he start . any home for must be expensive ; and no home in they present circumstance could be so reputable for she as one under she father 's roof . he therefore almost hope that she might still be leave with he till that horrid day should come , -- if it ever do come , -- in which she would be take away from he for ever . " of course , papa , I shall go if he bid I , " she say , when he tell she all that he think right to tell she of that morning 's interview . " I hardly know how to advise you , " say the father , mean in truth to bring himself round to the giving of some advice adverse to she husband 's will . " I want no advice , papa . " " want no advice ! I never know a woman who want it more . " " no , papa . I be bound to do as he tell I . I know what I have do . when some poor wretch have get himself into perpetual prison by he misdeed , no advice can serve he then . so it be with I . " " you can at any rate escape from you prison . " " no ;-- no . I have a feeling of pride which tell I that as I choose to become the wife of my husband , -- as I insist on it in opposition to all my friend , -- as I would judge for myself , -- I be bound to put up with my choice . if this have come upon I through the authority of other , if I have be constrain to marry he , I think I could have reconcile myself to desert he . but I do it myself , and I will abide by it . when he bid I go , I shall go . " poor go to he chamber , and sit there the whole day without take a book or a paper into he hand . could there be no rescue , no protection , no relief ! he turn over in he head various plan , but in a vague and useless manner . what if the be to prosecute for the fraud ! what if he could induce to abandon he wife , -- pledge himself by some deed not to return to she , -- for , say , twenty or even thirty thousand pound ! what if he himself be to carry he daughter away to the continent , half forcing and half persuade she to make the journey ! surely there might be some means find by which the man might be frightene into compliance . but there he sit , -- and do nothing . and in the evening he eat a solitary mutton chop at the , because he could not bear to face even he club , and then return to he chamber , -- to the great disgust of the old woman who have they in charge at night . and at about midnight he creep away to he own house , a wretch old man . when he leave do not go in search
search of a new home for himself and he wife , nor during the whole of the day do he trouble himself on that subject . he spend most of the day at the room in of the , of which have once be . there be now another Chairman and other Director ; but 's influence have so far remain with the company as to enable to become well know in the company 's office , and acknowledge as a claimant for the office of resident manager at in . now the present project be this , -- that be to start on behalf of the company early in , that the company be to pay he own personal expense out to , and that they should allow he while there a salary of L1000 a year for manage the affair of the mine . as far as this offer go , the thing be true enough . it be true that have absolutely secure the place . but he have do so subject to the burden of one very serious stipulation . he be to become proprietor of 50 share in the mine , and to pay up L100 each on those share . it be consider that the man who be to get L1000 a year in for manage the affair , should at any rate assist the affair , and show he confidence in the affair to a extent as great as that . of course the holder of these 50 share would be as fully entitle as any other shareholder to that 20 per cent . which those who promote the mine promise as the immediate result of the speculation . at first have hope that he might be enable to defer the actual payment of the till after he have sai . when once out in as manager , as manager he would doubtless remain . but by degrees he find that the payment must actually be make in advance . now there be nobody to whom he could apply but . he be , indeed , force to declare at the office that the money be to come from , and have give some excellent but fictitious reason why would not pay the money till . and in spite of all that have come and go he still do hope that if the need to go be actually there he might even yet get the money from . surely would sooner pay such a sum than be trouble at home with such a son - in - law . should the worst come to the worst , of course he could raise the money by consent to leave he wife at home . but this be not part of he plan , if he could avoid it . would be a very low price at which to sell he wife , and all that he might get from he connection with she . as long as he keep she with he he be in possession at any rate of all that would do for she . he have not therefore as yet make he final application to he father - in - law for the money , have find it possible to postpone the payment till the middle of . he quarrel with Wharton this morning he regard as have little or no effect upon he circumstance . would not give he the money because he love he , nor yet from personal respect , nor from any sense of duty as to what he might owe to a son - in - law . it would be simply give as the price by which he absence might be purchase , and he absence would not be the less desirable because of this morning 's quarrel . but , even yet , he be not quite resolve as to go to . have be suck nearly dry , and be in truth at this moment so violent with indignation and fear and remorse that do not dare to show himself in ; but still there be , even yet , certain hope in that direction from which great result might come . if a certain new spirit which have just be concoct from the bark of tree in , and which be call , could only be make to go up in the market , everything might be satisfactorily arrange . the hoarding of be already tell the public that if it wish to get drunk without any of the usual trouble of intoxication it must drink . the public no doubt do read the literature of the hoarding , but then it read so slowly ! this Bios have hardly be twelve month on the board as yet ! but they be now increase the size of the letter in the advertisement and the jocundity of the picture , -- and the thing might be do . there be , too , another hope ,-- another hope of instant money by which might be stave off , as to which further explanation shall be give in a further chapter . " I suppose I shall find Dixon a decent sort of a fellow ? " say to the Secretary of the in . " , you know . " " but honest ? " " oh , yes ; -- he be all that . " " if he be honest , and what I call loyal , I do not care a straw for anything else . one do not expect West - end manners in . but I shall have a deal to do with he , -- and I hate a fellow that you can not depend on . " " use to think a great deal of . " " that be all right , " say . be the underground manager out at the mine , and be
be perhaps as anxious for a loyal and honest colleague as be . if so , be very much in the way to be disappoint . stay at the office all the day study the affair of the mine , and then go to the progress for he dinner . Hitherto he have take no step whatever as to get lodging for himself or for he wife . when the time come at which should have leave he be still there . , in discuss the matter with he daughter , -- when wish to persuade she that she might remain in he house even in opposition to she husband , -- have not tell she that he have actually desire to leave it . he have then feel sure that the man would go and would take he wife with he , but he do not even yet know the obduracy and the cleverness and the impregnability of he son - in - law . when the time come , when he see he daughter in the morning after the notice have be give , he could not bring himself even yet to say to she that he have issue a order for he banishment . day go by and be still there , and the old barrister say no further word on the subject . the two man never meet ; -- or meet simply in the hall or passage . Wharton himself studiously avoid such meeting , thus deny himself the commonest use of he own house . at last tell he that she husband have fix the day for she departure . the next indian mail - packet by which they would leave would start from on the 2nd of , and she be to be ready to go on that day . " how be it to be till then ? " the father ask in a low , uncertain voice . " I suppose I may remain with you . " " and you husband ? " " he will be here too , -- I suppose . " " such a misery , -- such a destruction of everything no man ever hear of before ! " say . to this she make no reply , but continue work at some necessary preparation for she final departure . " Emily , " he say , " I will make any sacrifice to prevent it . what can be do ? short of injur 's interest I will do anything . " " I do not know , " she say . " you must understand something of he affair . " " nothing whatever . he have tell I nothing of they . in earlier day , -- soon after we marriage , -- he bade I get money from you . " " when you write to I for money from ? " " and after that . I have refuse to do anything ; -- to say a word . I tell he that it must be between you and he . what else could I say ? and now he tell I nothing . " " I can not think that he should want you to go with he . " then there be again a pause . " be it because he love you ? " " not that , papa . " " why then should he bure himself with a companion ? he money , whatever he have , would go further without such impediment . " " perhaps he think , papa , that while I be with he he have a hold upon you . " " he shall have a stronger hold by leave you . what be he to gain ? if I could only know he price . " " ask he , papa . " " I do not even know how I be to speak to he again . " then again there be a pause . " , " she say after a while , " I have do it myself . let I go . you will still have . and it may be that after a time I shall come back to you . he will not kill I , and it may be that I shall not die . " " by ! " say , rise from he chair suddenly , " if there be money to be make by it , I believe that he would murder you without scruple . " thus it be that within eighteen month of she marriage the father speak to he daughter of she husband . " what be I to take with I ? " she say to she husband a few day later . " you have better ask you father . " " why should I ask he , ? how should he know ? " " and how should I ? " " I should have think that you would interest yourself about it . " " upon my word I have enough to interest I just at present , without think of you finery . I suppose you mean what clothes you should have ? " " I be not think of myself only . " " you need think of nothing else . ask he what he please to allow you to spend , and then I will tell you what to get . " " I will never ask he for anything , . " " then you may go without anything . you might as well do it at once , for you will have to do it sooner or later . or , if you please , go to he tradesman and say nothing to he about it . they will give you credit . you see how it be , my dear . he have cheat I in a
a most rascally manner . he have allow I to marry he daughter , and because I do not make a bargain with he as another man would have do , he deny I the fortune I have a right to expect with you . you know that the despoil the , and it be take as a merit on they part . you father be a egyptian to I , and I will despoil he . you can tell he that I say so if you please . " and so the day go on till the first week of have pass , and have meet . both and he wife be still live in . not another word have be say as to that notice to quit , nor a allusion make to it . it be suppose to be a settled thing that be to start with he wife for in the first week in . have himself feel that difficulty as to he daughter 's outfit , and have tell she that she might get whatever it pleas she on he credit . " for yourself , my dear . " " Papa , I will get nothing till he bid I . " " but you can not go across the world without anything . what be you to do in such a place as that unless you have the thing you want ? " " what do poor people do who have to go ? what should I do if you have cast I off because of my disobedience ? " " but I have not cast you off . " " tell he that you will give he so much , and then , if he bid I , I will spend it . " " let it be so . I will tell he . " upon that do speak to he son - in - law ; -- come upon he suddenly one morning in the dining - room . " Emily will want a outfit if she be to go to this place . " " like other people she want many thing that she can not get . " " I will tell my tradesman to furnish she with what she want , up to ,-- well ,-- suppose I say L200 . I have speak to she and she want you sanction . " " my sanction for spend you money ? she can have that very quickly . " " you can tell she so ;-- or I will do so . " upon that be go , but stop he . it be now essential that the money for the share in the mine should be pay up , and he father - in - law 's pocket be still the source from which the enterprise son - in - law hope to procure it . have fully make up he mind to demand it , and think that the time have now come . and he be resolve that he would not ask it as a favour on bended knee . he be begin to feel he own power , and trust that he might prevail by other means than begge . " , " he say , " you and I have not be very good friend lately . " " no , indeed . " " there be a time , -- a very short time , -- during which I think that we might hit it off together , and I do my best . you do not , I fancy , like man of my class . " " well ;--well ! you have better go on if there be anything to say . " " I have much to say , and I will go on . you be a rich man , and I be you son - in - law . " put he left hand up to he forehead , brush the few hair back from he head , but he say nothing . " have I receive from you during the last most vital year that assistance which I think I have a right to expect , I also might have be a rich man now . it be no good go back to that . " then he pause , but still say nothing . " now you know what have come to I and to you daughter . we be to be expatriate . " " be that my fault ? " " I think it be , but I mean to say nothing further of that . this company which be send I out , and which will probably be the most thrive thing of the kind which have come up within these twenty year , be to pay I a salary of L1000 a year as resident manager at . " " so I understand . " " the salary alone would be a beggarly thing . , I take it , be not the cheapest country in the world in which a man can live . but I be to go out as the owner of fifty share on which L100 each must be pay up , and I be entitle to draw another L1000 a year as dividend on the profit of those share . " " that will be twenty per cent . " " exactly . " " and will double you salary . " " just so . but there be one little ceremony to be perfecte before I can be allow to enter upon so halcyon a state of existence . the L100 a share must be pay up . " simply star at he . " I must have the to invest in the undertaking before I can start . " " well ! " " now I have not get L5000 myself , nor any
any part of it . you do not wish , I suppose , to see either I or you daughter starve . and as for I , I hardly flatter myself when I say that you be very anxious to be ry of I . be not very much for I to ask of you , as I regard it . " " such consummate impudence I never meet in my life before ! " " perhaps so much unprevaricating downright truth . at any rate such be the condition of my affair . if I be to go the money must be pay this week . I have , perhaps foolishly , put off mentio the matter till I be sure that I could not raise the sum elsewhere . though I feel my claim on you to be good , , it be not pleasant to I to make it . " " you be ask I for down ! " " certainly I be . " " what security be I to have ? " " security ? " " yes ; -- that if I pay it I shall not be trouble again by the meanest scoundrel that it have ever be my misfortune to meet . how be I to know that you will not come back to -morrow ? how be I to know that you will go at all ? do you think it probable that I will give you on you own simple word ? " " then the scoundrel will stay in , -- and will generally find it convenient to live in . " " I will be d ---- d if he do . look here , sir . between you and I there can be a bargain , and nothing but a bargain . I will pay the L5000 , -- on certain condition . " " I do not doubt at all that you would pay it . " " I will go with you to the office of this company , and will pay for the share if I can receive assurance there that the matter be as you say , and that the share will not be place in you power before you have reach . " " you can come to - day , sir , and receive all that assurance . " " and I must have a write undertaking from you ,-- a document which my daughter can show if it be necessary , -- that you will never claim she society again or trouble she with any application . " " you mistake I , . my wife go with I to . " " then I will not pay one penny . why wshould I ? what be you presence or absence to I except as it concern she ? do you think that I care for you threat of remain here ? the police will set that right . " " wherever I go , my wife go . " " we will see to that too . if you want the money , you must leave she . good morning . " as he go to he chamber think the matter over . he be certainly willing to risk the demand if he could ry himself and he daughter of this terrible incubus , even if it be only for a time . if would but once go to , leave he wife behind he , it would be comparatively easy to keep they apart should he ever return . the difficulty now be not in he but in she . the man 's conduct have be so outrageous , so bare - faced , so cruel , that the lawyer do not doubt but that he could turn the husband out of he house , and keep the wife , even now , be it not that she be determined to obey the man whom she , in opposition to all she friend , have take as she master . " I have do it myself , and I will bear it , " be all the answer she would make when she father strove to persuade she to separate herself from she husband . " you have get , " she would say . " when a girl be marry she be divide from she family ; -- and I be divide . " but she would willingly stay if would bid she stay . it now seem that he could not go without the L5000 ; and , when the pressure come upon he , surely he would go and leave he wife . in the course of that day go to the office of the mine and ask to see the director . he be show up into a half - furnish room , two story high , in , where he find two clerk sit upon stool ; -- and when he ask for the director be show into the back room in which sit the secretary . the be a dark , plump little man with a greasy face , who have the gift of assume a air of great importance as he twist he chair round to face visitor who come to inquire about the . he name be ; and if the mine " turn out trump , " as he intend that it should , mean to be a great man in the City . to , with considerable embarrassment , explain as much of the joint history of himself and as he find to be absolutely necessary . " he have only leave the office about half - a - hour , " say . " of course you understand that he be my son - in - law . " " he have mention you name to we , , before now . " " and he be
be go out to ? " " oh yes ; -- he be go out . have he not tell you as much himself ? " " certainly , sir . and he have tell I that he be desirous of buy certain share in the company before he start . " " probably , . " " indeed , I believe he can not go unless he buy they . " " that may be so , . no doubt he have tell you all that himself . " " the fact be , , I be willing , under certain stipulation , to advance he the money . " bow . " I need not trouble you with private affair between myself and my son - in - law . " again the bow . " but it seem to be for he interest that he should go . " " a very great opening indeed , . I do not see how a man be to have a better opening . a fine salary ! he expense out pay ! one of the very best thing that have come up for many year ! and as for the capital he be to embark in the affair , he be as safe to get 20 per cent. on it , -- as safe , -- as safe as the of . " " he will have the share ? " " oh yes ; -- the scrip will be hand to he at once . " " and , -- and -- " " if you mean about the mine , , you may take my word that it be all real . it be not one of those sham thing that melt away like snow and leave the shareholder nowhere . there be the prospectus , . perhaps you have not see that before . take it away and cast you eye over it at you leisure . " put the somewhat lengthy pamphlet into he pocket . " look at the list of director . we have three member of parliament , a baronet , and one or two city name that be as good -- as good as the of . if that prospectus will not make a man confident I do not know what will . why , , you do not think that you son - in - law would get those fifty share at par unless he be go out as we general local manager . the share be not to be have . it be a large concern as far as capital go . you will see if you look . about a quarter of a million pay up . but it be all in a box as one may say . it be among ourselves . the share be not in the market . of course it be not for I to say what should be do between you and you son - in - law . be a friend of mine , and a man I esteem , and all that . nevertheless I should not think of advise you to do this or that , -- or not to do it . but when you talk of safety , , -- why , , I do not scruple to tell you as a man who know what these thing be , that this be a opportunity that do not come in a man 's way perhaps twice in he life . " find that he have nothing more to say , and go back to 's . he know very well that 's assurance be not worth much . himself and he belonging , the clerk in he office , the look of the room , and the very nature of the praise which he have sung , all of they inspire anything but confidence . be a man of the world ; and , though he know nothing of City way , be quite aware that no man in he sense would lay out L5000 on the mere word of . but still he be inclin to make the payment . if only he could secure the absence of , -- if he could be sure that would in truth go to , and if also he could induce the man to go without he wife , he would risk the money . the money would , of course , be throw away , -- but he would throw it away . Lopez no doubt have declare that he would not go without he wife , even though the money be pay for he . but the money be a alluring sum ! as the pressure upon the man become greater , think he would probably consent to leave he wife behind he . in he emergency the barrister go to he attorney and tell he everything . the two lawyer be close together for a hour , and 's last word to he old friend be as follow :--" I will risk the money , , or rather I will consent absolutely to throw it away , -- as it will be thrown away , -- if it can be manage that he shall in truth go to this place without he wife . " it can not be suppose that at this time be a very happy man . he have , at any rate , once love he wife , and would have love she still could he have train she to think as he think , to share he wish , and " to put herself into the same boat with he , " -- as he be will not to describe the unison and sympathy which he require from she . to give he he due , he do not know that he be a villain . when he be exhort she to
to " get round she father " he be not aware that he be give she lesson which must shock a well - condition girl . he do not understand that everything that she have discover of he moral disposition since she marriage be of a nature to disgust she . and , not understand all this , he conceive that he be grievously wronge by she in that she adhere to she father rather than to he . this make he unhappy , and doubly disappoint he . he have neither get the wife that he have expect nor the fortune . but he still think that the fortune must come if he would only hold on to the wife which he have get . and then everything have go badly with he since he marriage . he be apt , when think over he affair , to attribute all this to the fear and hesitation and parsimony of . none of he late venture with have be successful . and now be in a bad condition , very violent , drink hard , declare himself to be a ruin man , and swear that if this and that be not do he would have bitter revenge . Sexty still believe in the wealth of he partner 's father - in - law , and still have some hope of salvation from that source . would declare to he , and up to this very time persever in protesting , that salvation be to be find in . if would only risk two or three thousand pound more upon , -- or he credit to that amount , fail the immediate money , -- thing might still be right . " Bios be would ----, " say , utter a string of heavy imprecation . on that morning he have be trust to native produce rather than to the new african spirit . but now as the scheme really take form and loom on 's eyesight as a thing that might be real , he endeavoure to keep out of way . but in vain ; too have hear of , and in he misery hunt about the city . " by g ----, I believe you be afraid to come to , " he say one day , have catch he victim under the equestrian statue in front of the . " what be the good of my come when you will do nothing when I be there ? " " I will tell you what it be , , -- you be not go out of the country about this mining business , if I know it . " " who say I be ? " " I will put a spoke in you wheel there , my man . I will give a write account of all the dealings between we to the director . by g ----, they shall know they man . " " you be a ass , , and always were . look here . if I can carry on as though I be go to this place , I can draw from old . he have already offer it . he have treat I with a stinginess that I never know equall . have he do what I have a right to expect , you and I would have be rich man now . but at last I have get a hold upon he up to . as you and I stand , pretty nearly the whole of that will go to you . but do not you spoil it all by make a ass of yourself . " , who be three part drink , look up into he face for a few seconds , and then make he reply . " I be d ---- would if I believe a word of it . " upon this affect to laugh , and then make he escape . all this , as I have say , do not tend to make he life happy . though he have impudence enough , and callousness of conscience enough , to get he bill pay by as often as he could , he be not quite easy in he mind while do so . he ambition have never be high , but it have soar higher than that . he have have great hope . he have live with some high people . he have dine with lord and lady . he have be the guest of a Duchess . he have marry the daughter of a gentleman . he have nearly be a member of parliament . he still belong to what he consider to be a first - rate club . from a great altitude he look down upon and man of 's class , because of he social success , and because he know how to talk and to look like a gentleman . it be unpleasant to he , therefore , to be drive to the life he be now liive . and the idea of go out to and bury himself in a mine in be not to he a happy idea . in spite of all that he have do he have still some hope that he might avoid that banishment . he have speak the truth to in say that he intend to get the from without that terrible personal sacrifice , though he have hardly speak the truth when he assure he friend that the greater portion of that money would go to he . there be many scheme fluctuat through he brain , and all accompany by many doubt . if he could get 's money by give up he wife , should he consent to give she up ? in either case should he stay or should he go ? should he run one further great chance with , -- and if so ,
, by whose assistance ? and if he should at last decide that he would do so by the aid of a certain friend that be yet left to he , should he throw himself at that friend 's foot , the friend be a lady , and propose to desert he wife and begin the world again with she ? for the lady in question be a lady in possession , as he believe , of very large means . or should he cut he throat and have do at once with all he trouble , acknowledge to himself that he career have be a failure , and that , therefore , it might be bring with advantage to a end ? " after all , " say he to himself , " that may be the best way of win up a bankrupt concern . " we old friend , in these day , live in a very small house in a very small street border upon ; but the street , though very small , and have disagreeable relation with a mew , still have a air of fashion about it . and with she live the widow , , who have introduce she to , and through to . be in the enjoyment of a handsome income , as I hope that some of my reader may remember , -- and this income , during the last year or two , she have learn to foster , if not with much discretion , at any rate with great zeal . during she short life she have have many aspiration . love , poetry , sport , religion , fashion , have all be try ; but in each crisis there have be a certain care for wealth which have save she from the folly of squander what she have win by she early energie in the pursuit of she then prevail passion . she have give she money to no lover , have not lose it on race - course , or in building church ;-- nor even have she materially damage she resource by servants and equipage . at the present time she be still young , and still pretty ,-- though she hair and complexion take rather more time than in the day when she win . she still like a lover , -- or perhaps two , -- though she have thoroughly convinced herself that a lover may be buy too dear . she could still ride a horse , though hunt regularly be too expensive for she . she could talk religion if she could find herself close to a well - get - up clergyman , -- be quite indifferent as to the denomination of the religion . but perhaps a wild dash for a time into fast vulgarity be what in she heart of heart she like best , -- only that it be so difficult to enjoy that pleasure without risk of lose everything . and then , together with these passion , and perhaps above they all , there have lately spring up in the heart of a desire to multiply she mean by successful speculation . this be the friend with whom have lately become intimate , and by whose aid he hope to extricate himself from some of he difficulty . poor as he be he have contrive to bribe by handsome present out of ; -- for , as he still live in , and be the undoubted son - in - law of , he credit be not altogether go . in the giving of these gift no purport be , of course , name , but . be probably aware that she good word with she friend be expect . " I only know what I use to hear from , " say to she friend . " he be mix up with 's people , who roll in money ; would not have give he he daughter if he have not be do well . " " it be very hard to be sure , " say . " he look like a man who would know how to feather he own nest , " say . " do not you think he be very handsome ? " " I do not know that he be likely to do the better for that . " " well ; no ; but there be man of whom you be sure , when you look at they , that they will be successful . I do not suppose he be anything to begin with , but see where he be now ! " " I believe you be in love with he , my dear , " say . " not exactly . I do not know that he have give I any provocation . but I do not see why a woman should not be in love with he if she like . he be a deal nicer than those fair - haired man who have not get a word to say to you , and yet look as though you ink to jump down they mouth ; -- like that fellow you be try to talk to last night ; -- that . he could just jerk out three word at a time , and yet he be proud as . I like a man who if he like I be neither asham nor afraid to say so . " " there be a romance there , you know . be in love with , and she throw he over for . they say he have not hold up he head since . " " she be quite right , " say . " but she be one of those stiff - neck creature who be set up with pride though they have nothing to be proud of . I suppose she have
have a lot of money . would never have take she without . " when , therefore , call one day at the little house in the little street he be not a unwelcome visitor . be in the drawing - room , but soon leave it after he arrival . he have of late be often there , and when he at once introduce the subject on which he be himself intend it be not unexpected . " thousand five hundred pound ! " say , after listen to the proposition which he have come to make . " that be a very large sum of money ! " " yes ; -- it be a large sum of money . it be a large affair . I be in it to rather more than that , I believe . " " how be you to get people to drink it ? " she ask after a pause . " by tell they that they ought to drink it . Advertise it . it have become a certainty now that if you will only advertise sufficiently you may make a fortune by sell anything . only the interest on the money expend increase in so large a ratio in accordance with the magnitude of the operation ! if you spend a few hundred in advertising you throw they away . a hundred thousand pound well lay out make a certainty of anything . " " what be I to get to show for my money ;-- I mean immediately , you know ? " " register share in the company . " " the ? " " no ; -- we do propose to call ourselves and , limit . I think we shall change the name . they will probably use my name . and , limit . " " but it be all for ? " " oh yes ; -- all for . " " and it be to come from ? " " it will be rectify in , you know . some english spirit will perhaps be mix . but I must not tell you the secret of the trade till you join we . that be distill from the bark of the - tree be a certainty . " " have you drank any ? " " I have taste it . " " be it nice ? " " very nice ; -- rather sweet , you know , and will be the better for mixing . " " ? " suggest she ladyship . " perhaps so , -- or whisky . I think I may say that you can not do very much better with you money . you know I would not say this to you be it not true . in such a matter I treat you just as if , -- as if you be my sister . " " I know how good you be , -- but seven thousand five hundred ! I could not raise so much as that just at present . " " there be to be six share , " say , " make L45,000 capital . would you consent to take a share jointly with I ? that would be three thousand seven hundred and fifty . " " but you have a share already , " say suspiciously . " I should then divide that with . we intend to register at any rate as many as nine partner . would you object to hold it with I ? " , as he ask the question , look at she as though he be offer she half he heart . " no , " say , slowly , " I do not suppose I should object to that . " " I should be doubly eager about the affair if I be in partnership with you . " " it be such a venture . " " nothing venture nothing have . " " but I have get something as it be , , and I do not want to lose it all . " " there be no chance of that if you join we . " " you think be so sure ! " " quite safe , " say . " you must give I a little more time to think about it , " say at last , pante with anxiety , struggle with herself , anxious for the excitement which would come to she from deal in , but still fear to risk she money . this have take place immediately after 's offer of the , in make which he have stipulate that should be leave at home . then a few day go by , and be press for he money at the office of the mine . do he or do he not mean to take up the mining share allot to he ? if he do mean to do so , he must do it at once . he swore by all he gods that of course he mean to take they up . have not himself be at the office say that he intend to pay for they ? be not that sufficient guarantee ? they know well enough that be a man to whom the raising of could be a matter of no difficulty . but they do not know , never could know , how impossible it be to get anything do by . but have promise to pay for the share , and when money be concerned he word would surely suffice . , back by two of the director , say that if the thing be to go on at all , the money must really be pay at once . but the conference be end by allow the new local manager another fortnight in which to complete the arrangement . allow four day to pass
pass by , during each of which he be closet for a time with , and then make a attempt to get at through he wife . " you father have say that he will pay the money for I , " say . " if he have say so he certainly will do it . " " but he have promise it on the condition that you should remain at home . do you wish to desert you husband ? " to this she make no immediate answer . " be you already anxious to be rid of I ? " " I should prefer to remain at home , " she say in a very low voice . " then you do wish to desert you husband ? " " what be the use of all this , ? you do not love I . you do not marry I because I love you . " " by heaven I do ; -- for that and that only . " " and how have you treat I ? " " what have I do to you ? " " but I do not mean to make accusation , . I should only add to we misery by that . we should be happier apart . " " not I . be that my idea of marriage . tell you father that you wish to go with I , and then he will let we have the money . " " I will tell he no lie , . if you bid I go , I will go . where you find a home I must find one too if it be you pleasure to take I . but I will not ask my father to give you money because it be my pleasure to go . be I to say so he would not believe I . " " it be you who have tell he to give it I only on the condition of you staying . " " I have tell he nothing . he know that I do not wish to go . he can not but know that . but he know that I mean to go if you require it . " " and you will do nothing for I ? " " nothing , -- in regard to my father . " he raise he fist with the thought of strike she , and she see the motion . but he arm fall again to he side . he have not quite come to that yet . " surely you will have the charity to tell I whether I be to go , if it be fix , " she say . " have I not tell you so twenty time ? " " then it be fix . " " yes ; -- it be fix . you father will tell you about you thing . he have promise you some beggarly sum ,-- about as much as a tallow - chandler would give he daughter . " " whatever he do for I will be sufficient for I . I be not afraid of my father , . " " you shall be afraid of I before I have do with you , " say he , leave the room . then as he sit at he club , dine there alone , there come across he mind idea of what the world would be like to he if he could leave he wife at home and take with he to . be very distant , and it would matter little there whether the woman he bring with he be he wife or no . it be clear enough to he that he wife desire no more of he company . what be the convention of the world to he ? this other woman have money at she own command . he could not make it he own because he could not marry she , but he fancie that it might be possible to bring she so far under he control as to make the money almost as good as he own . 's money be very hard to reach , and would be as hard to reach , -- perhaps harder , -- when be dead , as now , during he life . he have say a good deal to the lady since the interview of which a report have be give . she have declare herself to be afraid of . she do not in the least doubt that great thing might be ultimately do with , but she do not quite see the way with she small capital , -- thus humbly do she speak of she wealth , -- to be one of those who should take the initiative in the matter . Bios evidently require a great deal of advertisement , and have a short - sighted objection to expend what money she have save on the hoarding of . then he open to she the glory of , not contente himself with describe the certainty of the 20 per cent. , but enlarge on the luxurious happiness of life in a country so golden , so green , so gorgeous , and so grand . it have be the very apple of the eye of the old Spaniard . in , he say , and have meet and embrace . they might have do so for anything kknow to the contrary . and here we hero take advantage of he name . have be the first to raise the banner of freedom in when the king of become tyrants to they american subject . all be fair in love and war , and amidst the hard business of she life still love a dash of romance . yes , he be about to change the scene and try he fortune in that golden ,
, green , and gorgeous country . " you will take you wife of course , " have say . then have smile , and shrugge he shoulders have leave the room . it be certainly the fact that she could not eat he . other man before have have to pick up what courage they could in they attack upon woman by remember that fact . she have flirt with he in a very pleasant way , mix up she prettiness and she percentage in a manner that be peculiar to herself . he do not know she , and he know that he do not know she ; -- but still there be the chance . she have throw he wife more than once in he face , after the fashion of woman when they be woo by married man since the day of downward . but he have take that simply as encouragement . he have already let she know that he wife be a vixen who trouble he life . have give he she sympathy , and have almost give he a tear . " but I be not a man to be break - hear because I have make a mistake , " say . " marriage vow be very well , but they shall never bind I to misery . " " marriage vow be not very well . they may be very ill , " have reply , remember certain passage in she own life . there be no doubt about she money , and certainly she could not eat he . the fortnight allow he by the have nearly go by when he call at the little house in the little street , resolve to push he fortune in that direction without fear and without hesitation . again take she departure , leave they together , and allow she friend to go , although the last word that have speak have be , as he think , a fair prelude to the word he intend to speak to - day . " and what do you think of it ? " he say , take both she hand in he . " think of what ? " " of we spanish venture . " " have you give up , my friend ? " " no ; certainly not , " say , seat himself beside she . " I have not take the other half share , but I have keep my old venture in the scheme . I believe in , you know . " " ah ; -- it be so nice to believe . " " but I believe more firmly in the country to which I be go . " " you be go then ? " " yes , my friend ; -- I be go . the allurement be too strong to be resist . think of that climate and of this . " he probably have not hear of the mosquitoe of when he so speak . " remember that a income which give you comfort here will there produce for you every luxury which wealth can purchase . it be to be a king there , or to be but very common among commoner here . " " and yet be a dear old country . " " have you find it so ? think of the wrongs which you have endure ; -- of the injury which you have suffer . " " yes , indeed . " for have go through hard day in she time . " I certainly will fly from such a country to those golden shore on which man may be free and unshackled . " " and you wife ? " " oh , ! " it be the first time that he have call she , and she be apparently neither shock nor abash . perhaps he think too much of this , not know how many man have call she in she time . " do not you at least understand that a man or a woman may undergo that tie , and yet be justified in disregard it altogether ? " " oh , yes ; -- if there have been bigamy , or divorce , or anything of that kind . " now have convict she second husband of bigamy , and have free herself after that fashion . " to h ---- with they prurient law , " say , rise suddenly from he chair . " I will neither appeal to they nor will I obey they . and I expect from you as little subservience as I myself be prepare to pay . , will you go with I , to that land of the sun , where the rage of the vulture , the love of the turtle , now melt into sorrow , now madden to crime ?_ will you dare to escape with I from the cold conventionality , from the miserable thraldom of this country bound in swaddling clot ? , if you will say the word , I will take you to that land of glorious happiness . " but have L4000 a year and a balance at she banker 's . " , " she say . " what answer have you to make I ? " " , I think you must be a fool . " he do at last succeed in get himself into the street , and at any rate she have not eat he . 's the end of have come , and as far as knew she be to start for in a month 's time . and yet there be so much of indecision in she husband 's manner , and apparently so little do by he in regard to personal preparation , that she could hardly bring herself to feel certain that she would have to
to make the journey . from day to day she father would ask she whether she have make she intend purchase , and she would tell he that she have still postpo the work . then he would say no more , for he himself be hesitat , doubtful what he would do , and still think that when at last the time should come , he would buy he daughter 's release at any price that might be demande . , the attorney , have as yet be able to manage nothing . he have see more than once , and have also see . have simply tell he that he would be very happy to register the share on behalf of as soon as the money be pay . have be almost insolent in he bearing . " think , " he ask , " that he be go to sell he wife for ? " " I think you will have to raise you offer , " have say to . that be all very well . be willing enough to raise he offer . he would have double he offer could he thereby have secure the annihilation of . " I will raise it if he will go without he wife , and give she a write assurance that he will never trouble she again . " but the arrangement be one which find it very difficult to carry out . so thing go on till the end of have come . and during all this time be still resident in 's house . " , " she say to he one day , " this be the cruellest thing of all . why do not you tell he that he must go ? " " because he would take you with he . " " it would be better so . I could come to see you . " " I do tell he to go , -- in my passion . I repent of it instantly , because I should have lose you . but what do my tell matter to he ? he be very indignant , and yet he be still here . " " you tell he to go ? " " yes ; -- but I be glad that he do not obey I . there must be a end to this soon , I suppose . " " I do not know , papa . " " do you think that he will not go ? " " I feel that I know nothing , papa . you must not let he stay here always , you know . " " and what will become of you when he go ? " " I must go with he . why should you be sacrifice also ? I will tell he that he must leave the house . I be not afraid of he , papa . " " not yet , my dear ; -- not yet . we will see . " at this time declare he purpose one day of dining at the progress , and take advantage of the occasion to remain at home with he daughter . be now expect , and there be a probability that he might come on this evening . therefore return from he chamber early ; but when he reach the house he be tell that there be a woman in the dining - room with . the servant do not know what woman . she have ask to see , and have go down to she . the woman in the dining - room be . she have call at the house at about half - past five , and Emily have at once come down when summon by tiding that a " lady " want to see she . Servant have a way of announcing a woman as a lady , which clearly express they own opinion that the person in question be not a lady . so it have be on the present occasion , but have at once go to she visitor . " oh , , I be so glad to see you . I hope you be well . " " indeed , then , , I be very far from well . no poor woman , who be the mother of five child , be ever farther from be well than I be . " " be anything wrong ? " " wrong , ma 'am ! everything be wrong . when be go to pay my husband all the money he have take from he ? " " have he take money ? " " ! he have take everything . he have shorn my husband as bare as a board . we be ruin , , and it be you husband have do it . when we be at , I tell you how it be go to be . he business have leave he , and now there be nothing . what be we to do ? " the woman be seat on a chair , lean forward with she two hand on she knee . the day be wet , the street be half mud and half snow , and the poor woman , who have make she way through the slush , be soiled and wet . " I look to you to tell I what I and my child be to do . he be you husband , . " " yes , ; he be my husband . " " why could not he let alone ? why should the like of he be take the bread out of my child 's mouth ? what have we ever do to he ? you be rich . " " indeed I be not , . " " yes , you be . you be live here in a
a grand house , and you father 's make of money . you will know nothing of want , let the worst come to the worst . what be we to do , ? I be the wife of that poor creature , and you be the wife of the man that have ruin he . what be we to do , ? " " I do not understand my husband 's business , . " " you be one with he , be not you ? if anybody have ever come to I and say my husband have rob he , I would never have stop till I know the truth of it . if any woman have ever say to I that have take the bread out of she child 's mouth , do you think that I would sit as you be sitte ? I tell you that have rob we , -- have rob we , and take everything . " " what can I say , ; -- what can I do ? " " where be he ? " " he be not here . he be dine at he club . " " where be that ? I will go there and shame he before they all . do not you feel no shame ? because you have get thing comfortable here , I suppose it be all nothing to you . you do not care , though my child be starve in the gutter , -- as they will do . " " if you know I , Parker , you would not speak to I like that . " " know you ! of course I know you . you be a lady , and you father 's a rich man , and you husband think no end of himself . and we be poor people , so it do not matter whether we be rob and ruin or not . that be about it . " " if I have anything , I would give you all that I have . " " and he be take to drink that hard that he be never rightly sober from morning to night . " as she tell this story of she husband 's disgrace , the poor woman burst into tear . " who be to trust he with business now ? he be that break - hear that he do not know which way to turn , -- only to the bottle . and have do it all , -- do it all ! I have not get a father , ma 'am , who have get a house over he head for I and my baby . only think if you be turn out into the street with you babby , as I be like to be . " " I have no baby , " say the wretch woman through she tear and sob . " have not you , ? oh dear ! " exclaim the soft - hear woman , reduce at once to pity . " how be it then ? " " he die , , -- just a few day after he be bear . " " do he now ? well , well . we all have we trouble , I suppose . " " I have mine , I know , " say Emily , " and very , very heavy they be . I can not tell you what I have to suffer . " " be not he good to you ? " " I can not talk about it , . what you tell I about yourself have add greatly to my sorrow . my husband be talking of go away , -- to live out of . " " yes , at a place they call -- I forget what they call it , but I hear it . " " , -- in . " " I know . tell I . he have no business to go anywhere , while he owe such a lot of money . he have take everything , and now he be go to ! " at this moment knock at the door and enter the room . as he do so get up and curtsey . " this be my father , , " say Emily . " , this be . she be the wife of , who be 's partner . she have come here with bad news . " " very bad news indeed , sir , " say , curtsey again . frown , not as be angry with the woman , but feel that some further horror be to be tell he of he son - in - law . " I can not help come , sir , " continue . " where be I to go if I do not come ? , sir , have ruin we root and branch , -- root and branch . " " that at any rate be not my fault , " say . " but she be he wife , sir . where be I to go if not to where he life ? be I to put up with everything gone , and my poor husband in the right way to go to , and not to say a word about it to the grand relation of he who do it all ? " " he be a bad man , " say . " I can not make he otherwise . " " will he do nothing for we ? " " I will tell you all I know about he . " then do tell she all that he know , as to the appointment at and the amount of salary which be to be attach to it . " whether he will do anything for you , I can not say
say ;-- I should think not , unless he be force . I should advise you to go to the office of the company in and try to make some term there . but I fear , -- I fear it will be all useless . " " then we may starve . " " it be not she fault , " say , point to he daughter . " she have have no hand in it . she know less of it all than you do . " " it be my fault , " say Emily , burste out into self - reproach , --" my fault that I marry he . " " whether marry or single he would have prey upon to the same extent . " " like enough , " say the poor wife . " he have pry upon anybody as he could get a - hold of . and so , , you think that you can do nothing for I . " " if you want be immediate I can relieve it , " say the barrister . do not like the idea of accept direct charity , but , nevertheless , on go away do take the five sovereign which offer to she . after such a interview as that the dinner between the father and the daughter be not very happy . she be eat up by remorse . gradually she have learn how frightful be the thing she have do in give herself to a man of whom she have know nothing . and it be not only that she have degrad herself by love such a man , but that she have be persistent in clinging to he though she father and all he friend have tell she of the danger which she be run . and now it seem that she have destroy she father as well as herself ! all that she could do be to be persistent in she prayer that he would let she go . " I have do it , " she say that night , " and I could bear it better , if you would let I bear it alone . " but he only kiss she , and sob over she , and hold she close to he heart with he clinging arm , -- in a manner in which he have never hold she in they old happy day . he take himself to he own room before return , but she of course have to bear she husband 's presence . as she have declare to she father more than once , she be not afraid of he . even though he should strike she , -- though he should kill she , -- she would not be afraid of he . he have already do worse to she than anything that could follow . " . have be here to - day , " she say to he that night . " and what have to say ? " " that you have ruin she husband . " " exactly . when a man speculate and do not win of course he throw the blame on some one else . and when he be too much of a cur to come himself , he send he wife . " " she say you owe he money . " " what business have you to listen to what she say ? if she come again , do not see she . do you understand I ? " " yes , I understand . she see papa also . if you owe he money , should it not be pay ? " " my dearest love , everybody who owe anything to anybody should always pay it . that be so self - evident that one would almost suppose that it might be understand without be enunciate . but the virtue of pay you debt be incompatible with a absence of money . now , if you please , we will not say anything more about . she be not at any rate a fit companion for you . " " it be you who introduce I to she . " " hold you tongue about she , -- and let that be a end of it . I little know what a world of torment I be prepare for myself when I allow you to come and live in you father 's house . " what the of when the session begin it be understand in the political world that a very strong opposition be to be organise against the government under the guidance of , and that the great sin to be impute to the cabinet be a utter indifference to the safety and honour of Great , as manifest by they neglect of the navy . all the world know that have desert the because he be not allow to build new ship , and of course would make the most of he grievance . with he be join , the patriotic who have never listen to the voice of the seducer , and the staunch remainder of the old Tory party . and with they the more violent of the radical be prepare to act , not desirous , indeed , that new ship should be build , or that a Conservative government should be establish , -- or , indeed , that anything should be do , -- but animate by intense disgust that so mild a politician as the of should be . the fight begin at once , object violently to certain passage in the 's . it be all very well to say that the country be at present at peace with all the world ; but how be peace to be maintain without a fleet ? then pay a great many compliment to the , and end he speech
speech by declare he to be the most absolutely faineant minister that have disgrac the country since the day of the of . defend the , and assure the house that the navy be not only the most powerful navy exist , but that it be the most powerful that ever have exist in the possession of this or any other country , and be probably in absolute efficiency superior to the combine navy of all the world . the House be not shocke by statement so absolutely at variance with each other , come from two gentleman who have lately be member of the same government , and who must be suppose to know what they be talk about , but seem to think that upon the whole have do he duty . for though there be complete confidence in the navy as a navy , and though a very small minority would have vote for any considerably increase expense , still it be well that there should be a opposition . and how can there be a opposition without some subject for grumbl , -- some matter on which a minister may be attack ? no one really think that the and french combine would invade we shore and devastate we field , and plunder , and carry we daughter away into captivity . the state of the fund show very plainly that there be no such fear . but a good cry be a very good thing , -- and it be always well to rub up the official of the Admiralty by a little wholesome abuse . be think to have do he business well . of course he do not risk a division upon the address . have he do so he would have be " nowhere . " but , as it be , he be proud of he achievement . the minister generally would have be indifferent to the very hard word that be say of they , know what they be worth , and feel aware that a ministry which have everything too easy must lose its interest in the country , have it not be that they chief be very sore on the subject . the old 's work at this time consist almost altogether in nurse the . it do sometimes occur to he elder that it might be well to let he brother retire , and that a , malgre lui , could not be a successful , or a useful one . but if the of go the must go too , and the have be the offspring of the old statesman . the country be thrive under the , and there be no real reason why it should not last for the next ten year . he continue , therefore , he system of coddling , and be ready at any moment , or at every moment , to pour , if not comfort , at any rate consolation into the ear of he unhappy friend . in the present emergency , it be the falsehood and general baseness of which nearly break the heart of the . " how be one to live , " he say , " if one have to do with man of that kind ? " " but you have not to do with he any longer , " say the of . " when I see a man who be suppose to have earn the name of a statesman , and be high in the councils of he sovereign , induce by personal jealousy to do as he be do , it make I feel that a honest man should not place himself where he may have to deal with such persons . " " accord to that the honest man be to desert they country in order that the dishonest man may have everything they own way . " we could not answer this , and therefore for the moment he yield . but he be unhappy , saturnine , and generally silent except when close with he ancient mentor . and he know that he be saturnine and silent , and that it behove he as a leader of man to be genial and communicative ,-- listen to counsel even if he do not follow it , and at any rate appear to have confidence in he colleague . during this time be not inactive , and in he heart of heart the be more afraid of 's attack than of those make upon he by . now that be sit , and the mind of man be stir to political feeling by the renew energy of the , a great deal be be say in many quarter about the last Silverbridge election . the papers have take the matter up generally , some accuse the and some defending . but the defence be almost as unpalatable to he as the accusation . it be admit on all side that the , both as a peer and as a , should have abstain from any interference whatever in the election . and it be also admit on all side that he have not so abstained , -- if there be any truth at all in the allegation that he have pay money for . but it be plead on he behalf that the of have always interfere at , and that no have ever have any effect in reduce they influence in that borough . frequent allusion be make to the cautious who , year after year , have report that the of exercise considerable influence in the borough . and then the friendly newspaper go on to explain that the have in this instance stay he hand , and that the money , if pay at all , have be pay because the candidate who be to have be he nominee have be thrown over , when the
the at the last moment make up he mind that he would abandon the privilege which have hitherto be always exercise by the head of he family , and which have be exercise more than once or twice in he own favour . but , day after day , repeat he question , " we want to know whether the do or do not pay the election expense of at the last Silverbridge election , and if so , why he pay they . we shall continue to ask this question till it have be answer , and when ask it we again say that the actual correspondence on the subject between the and be in we own hand . " and then , after a while , allusion be make to the Duchess ; -- for have learn all the fact of the case from himself . when find how hard it be " to draw he badger , " as he express himself concern he own operation , he at last openly allude to the Duchess , run the risk of any punishment that might fall upon he by action for libel or by severe reprehension from he colleague of the press . " we have as yet , " he say , " receive no answer to the question which we have felt ourselves call upon to ask in reference to the conduct of the at the election . we be of opinion that all interference by peer with the constituency of the country should be put down by the strong hand of the law as thoroughly and unmercifully as we be put down ordinary bribery . but when the offending peer be also the of this great country , it become doubly the duty of those who watch over the public safety , " -- be always speak of himself as watch over the public safety , -- " to animadvert upon he crime till it have be assoil , or at any rate repent . from what we now hear we have reason to believe that the crime itself be acknowledge . have the payment on behalf of not be make , -- as it certainly be make , or the letter in we hand would be impudent forgery , -- the charge would long since have be deny . Silence in such a matter amount to confession . but we understand that the intend to escape under the plea that he have a second self , powerful as he be to exercise the baneful influence which he territorial wealth unfortunately give he , but for the action of which second self he , as a peer of parliament and as , be not responsible . in other word we be inform that the privilege belong to the family at be exercise , not by the himself , but by the Duchess ; -- and that the pay the money when he find that the Duchess have promise more than she could perform . we should hardly have think that even a man so notoriously weak as the of would have endeavoure to ride out of responsibility by throw the blame upon he wife ; but he will certainly find that the attempt , if make , will fail . " against the Duchess herself we wish to say not a word . she be know as exercise a wide if not a discriminate hospitality . we believe she to be a kind - hear , bustling , ambitious lady , to whom any little fault may easily be forgive on account of she good - nature and generosity . but we can not accept she indiscretion as a excuse for a most unconstitutional act perform by the of this country . " Latterly the Duchess have take in she own copy of the " 's . " since she have find that those around she be endeavour to keep from she what be be say of she husband in regard to the borough , she have be determined to see it all . she therefore read the article from which two or three paragraph have just be give , -- and have read it she hand it to she friend . " I wonder that you trouble yourself with such trash , " she friend say to she . " that be all very well , my dear , from you ; but we poor wretch who be the slave of the people have to regard what be say of we in the ' 's . ' " " it would be much better for you to neglect it . " " just as author be tell not to read the criticism ; -- but I never would believe any author who tell I that he do not read what be say about he . I wonder when the man find out that I be good - natured . he would not find I good - natured if I could get hold of he . " " you be not go to allow it to torment you ! " " for my own sake , not a moment . I fancy that if I might be permit to have my own way I could answer he very easily . indeed with these dregs of the newspaper , these gutter-slanderer , if one would be open and say all the truth aloud , what would one have to fear ? after all , what be it that I do ? I disobey my husband because I think that he be too scrupulous . let I say as much , out loud to the public , -- say also that I be sorry for it , as I be , -- and who would be against I ? who would have a word to say after that ? I should be the most popular woman in for
for a month , -- and , as regards , and he article would all sink into silence . but even though he be to continue this from day to day for a twelvemonth it would not hurt I , -- but that I know how it scorch he . this mention of my name will make it more intolerable to he than ever . I doubt that you know he even yet . " " I think that I do . " " though in manner he be as dry as a stick , though all he pursuits be opposite to the very idea of romance , though he pass he day and night in think how he may take a halfpenny in the pound off the tax of the people without rob the revenue , there be a dash of chivalry about he worthy of the old poet . to he a woman , particularly he own woman , be a thing so fine and so precious that the wind of heaven should hardly be allow to blow upon she . he can not bear to think that people should even talk of he wife . and yet , know , poor fellow , I have give people occasion enough to talk of I . and he have a much higher chivalry than that of the old poet . they , or they heroe , watch they woman because they do not want to have trouble about they , -- shut they up in castle , keep they in ignorance , and hold they as far as they could out of harm 's way . " " I hardly think they succeed , " say . " but in pure selfishness they try all they could . but he be too proud to watch . if you and I be hatch treason against he in the dark , and chance have bring he there , he would stop he ear with he finger . he be all trust , even when he know that he be be deceive . he be honou complete from head to foot . ah , it be before you know I when I try he the hardest . I never could quite tell you that story , and I will not try it now ; but he behave like a god . I could never tell he what I feel , -- but I feel it . " " you ought to love he . " " I do ; -- but what be the use of it ? he be a god , but I be not a goddess ; -- and then , though he be a god , he be a dry , silent , uncongenial and uncomfortable . it would have suite I much better to have marry a sinner . but then the sinner that I would have marry be so irredeemable a scapegrace . " " I do not believe in a woman marry a bad man in the hope of make he good . " " especially not when the woman be naturally inclin to evil herself . it will half kill he when he read all this about I . he have read it already , and it have already half kill he . for myself I do not mind it in the least , but for he sake I mind it much . it will rob he of he only possible answer to the accusation . the very thing which this wretch in the newspaper say he will say , and that he will be disgrace by say , be the very thing that he ought to say . and there would be no disgrace in it , -- beyond what I might well bear for my little fault , and which I could bear so easily . " " shall you speak to he about it ? " " no ; I dare not . in this matter it have go beyond speaking . I suppose he do talk it over with the old ; but he will say nothing to I about it ,-- unless he be to tell I that he have resign , and that we be to start off and live in for the next ten year . I be so proud when they make he ; but I think that I be begin to regret it now . " then there be a pause , and the Duchess go on with she newspaper ; but she soon resume she discourse . she heart be full , and out of a full heart the mouth speak . " they should have make I , and have let he be of the . I begin to see the way of government now . I could have do all the dirty work . I could have give away garter and ribbon , and make my bargain while give they . I could select sleek , easy bishop who would not be troublesome . I could give pension or withhold they , and make the stupid man per . I could have the big nobleman at my foot , pray to be Lieutenants of county . I could deal out secretaryship and lordship , and never a one without get something in return . I could brazen out a job and let the ' 's ' and the make they worst of it . and I think I could make myself popular with my party , and do the high - flow patriotic talk for the benefit of the province . a man at a regular office have to work . that be what be fit for . he want always to be do something that shall be really useful , and a man have to toil at that and really to know thing . but a should never go beyond generality about
about commerce , agriculture , peace , and general philanthropy . of course he should have the gift of the gab , and that have not get . he never want to say anything unless he have get something to say . I could do a Mansion House dinner to a marvel ! " " I do not doubt that you could speak at all time , . " " oh , I do so wish that I have the opportunity , " say the Duchess . of course the have read the article in the privacy of he own room , and of course the article have nearly madden he with anger and grief . as the have say , the article have take from he the very ground on which he friend have tell he that he could stand . he have never consent , and never would consent , to lay the blame publicly on he wife ; but he have begin to think that he must take notice of the charge make against he , and deputize some one to explain for he in the house of Commons that the injury have be do at by the indiscretion of a agent who have not fulfil he employer 's intention , and that the have think it right afterwards to pay the money in consequence of this indiscretion . he have not agree to this , but he have bring himself to think that he must agree to it . but now , of course , the question would follow :-- who be the indiscreet agent ? be the Duchess the person for whose indiscretion he have have to pay to ? and in this matter do he not find himself in accord even with ? " we should hardly have think that even a man so notoriously weak as the of would have endeavoure to ride out of responsibility by throw the blame upon he wife . " he read and reread these word till he know they by heart . for a few moments it seem to he to be a evil in the constitution that the should not have the power of instantly crucify so foul a slanderer ; -- and yet it be the very truth of the word that crush he . he be weak , -- he tell himself ;-- notoriously weak , it must be ; and it would be most mean in he to ride out of responsibility by throw blame upon he wife . but what else be he to do ? there seem to he to be but one course , -- to get up in the house of Lords and declare that he pay the money because he have think it right to do so under circumstance which he could not explain , and to declare that it be not he intention to say another word on the subject , or to have another word say on he behalf . there be a hold that day , but no one venture to speak to the as to the accusation . though he consider himself to be weak , he colleague be all more or less afraid of he . there be a certain silent dignity about the man which save he from the evils , as it also debar he from the advantages , of familiarity . he have speak on the subject to and to , and , as the reader know , very often to he old mentor . he have also mention it to he friend , who be not in the cabinet . come away from the cabinet he take 's arm , and lead he away to he own room in the . " have you happen to see a article in the ' 's ' this morning ? " he ask . " I never see the ' 's , ' " say . " there it be ; -- just look at that . " Whereupon read the article . " you understand what people call constitutional practice as well as any one I know . as I tell you before , I do pay that man 's expense . do I do anything unconstitutional ? " " that would depend , , upon the circumstance . if you be to back a man up by you wealth in a expensive contest , I think it would be unconstitutional . if you set yourself to work in that way , and car not what you spend , you might materially influence the election , and buy parliamentary support for yourself . " " but in this case the payment be make after the man have fail , and certainly have not be promise either by I or by any one on my behalf . " " I think it be unfortunate , " say . " certainly , certainly ; but I be not ask as to that , " say the impatiently . " the man have be injure by indiscreet person act on my behalf and in opposition to my wish . " he say not a word about the Duchess ; but no doubt know that she have be at any rate one of the indiscreet person . " he apply to I for the money , allege that he have be injure by my agent . that be so , --presum that my story be correct ,-- do I act unconstitutionally ? " " I think not , " say , " and I think that the circumstance , when explain , will bear you harmless . " " thank you ; thank you . I do not want to trouble you about that just at present . " the have be altogether unable to decipher the 's purpose in the question he have ask . about a hour afterwards they walk down to the together
together , have be keep at he office . " I hope I be not a little short with you just now , " say the . " I do not find it out , " say , smile . " you read what be in the papers , and you may imagine that it be of a nature to irritate a man . I know that no one could answer my question so correctly as you , and therefore I be a little eager to keep directly to the question . it occur to I afterwards that I have be -- perhaps uncourteous . " " not at all , . " " if I be , you goodness will excuse a irritated man . if a question be ask about this in the of , who would be the best man to answer it ? would you do it ? " consider awhile . " I think , " he say , " that would do it with a better grace . of course I will do it if you wish it . but he have tact in such matter , and it be know that he wife be much regard by she . " " I will not have the Duchess 's name mention , " say the , turn short upon he companion . " I do not allude to that , but I think that the intimacy which exist might make it pleasant to you to employ as the exponent of you wish . " " I have the greatest confidence in , certainly , and be on most friendly personal term with he . it shall be so , if I decide on answer any question in you on a matter so purely personal to myself . " " I would suggest that you should have the question ask in a friendly way . get some independent member , such as or , to ask it . the matter would then be bring forward in no carping spirit , and you would be enable , through , to set the matter at rest . you have probably speak to the about it . " " I have mention it to he . " " be not that what he would recommend ? " the old have recommend that the entire truth should be tell , and that the Duchess 's operation should be make public . here be we poor 's great difficulty . he and he Mentor be at variance . he Mentor be advise that the real naked truth should be tell , whereas be intent upon keep the name of the actual culprit in the background . " I will think it all over , " say the as the two part company at . that evening he speak to on the subject . though the matter be so odious to he , he could not keep he mind from it for a moment . have see the article in the " 's " ? , like , declare that the paper in question do not constitute part of he usual morning 's recreation . " I will not ask you to read it , " say the ; -- " but it contain a very bitter attack upon I , -- the bitterest that have yet be make . I suppose I ought to notice the matter ? " " if I be you , " say , " I should put myself into the hand of the of , and do exactly what he advise . there be no man in know so well as he do what should be do in such a case as this . " the frown and say nothing . " my dear , " continue , " I can give you no other advice . who be there that have you personal interest and you honour at heart so entirely as he Grace ; -- and what man can be a more sagacious or more experienced adviser ? " " I be think that you might ask a question about it in we House . " " I ? " " you would do it for I in a manner that -- that would be free from all offence . " " if I do it at all , I should certainly strive to do that . but it have never occur to I that you would make such a suggestion . would you give I a few moment to think about it ? " " I could not do it , " say afterwards . " by take such a step , even at you request , I should certainly express the opinion that the matter be one on which parliament be entitled to expect that you should make a explanation . but my own opinion be that have no business to meddle in the matter . I do not think that every action of a minister 's life should be make matter of inquiry because a newspaper may choose to make allusion to it . at any rate , if any word be say about it , it should , I think , be say in the other . " " the of think that something should be say . " " I could not myself consent even to appear to desire information on a matter so entirely personal to yourself . " the bow , and smile with a cold , glitter , uncomfortable smile which would sometimes cross he face when he be not pleased , and no more be then say upon the subject . attempt be make to have the question ask in a far different spirit by some hostile member of the of . be sound , and he for a while do give ear to the suggestion . but , as he come to have the
the matter full before he , he could not do it . the have spurn he advice as a minister , and have refuse to sanction a measure which he , as the head of a branch of the government , have propose . the have so offended he that he conceive himself bound to regard the as he enemy . but he know , -- and he could not escape from the knowledge , -- that do not contain a more honourable man than the . he be delight that the should be vex , and thwart , and call ill name in the matter . to be gratify at this discomfiture of he enemy be in the nature of parliamentary opposition . any blow that might weaken he opponent be a blow in he favour . but this be a blow which he could not strike with he own hand . there be thing in parliamentary tactic which even could not do . be also ask to undertake the task . he be the successful candidate , the man who have oppose , and who be declare in the " 's " to have emancipate that borough by he noble conduct from the tyranny of the of . and it be think that he might like a opportunity of make himself know in the . but he be simply indignant when the suggestion be make to he . " what be it to I , " he say , " who pay the blackguard 's expense ? " this go on for some week after parliament have meet , and for some day even after the article in which direct allusion be make to the Duchess . the could not be get to consent that no notice should be take of the matter , let the papers or the public say what they would , nor could he be induce to let the matter be handle in the manner propose by the elder . and during this time he be in such a fever that those about he feel that something must be do . suggest that if everybody hold he tongue , -- mean all the 's friend , -- the thing would wear itself out . but it be apparent to those who be nearest to the minister , to , for instance , and the of , that the man himself would be wear out first . the happy possessor of a thick skin can hardly understand how one not so bless may be hurt by the thong of a little whip ! at last the matter be arrange . at the instigation of , , who be really the father of the , a independent member , but one who generally vote with the , consent to ask the question in the house of Commons . and be instruct by the as to the answer that be to be give . the of in give these instruction make a mystery of the matter which he by no means himself intend . but he be so sore that he could not be simple in what he say . " , " he say , " you must promise I this , -- that the name of the Duchess shall not be mention . " " certainly not by I , if you tell I that I be not to mention it . " " no one else can do so . the matter will take the form of a simple question , and though the conduct of a minister may no doubt be make the subject of debate , -- and it be not improbable that my conduct may do so in this instance , -- it be , I think , impossible that any member should make a allusion to my wife . the privilege or power of return a member for the borough have undoubtedly be exercise by we family since as well as previous to both the . at the last election I think it right to abandon that privilege , and notify to those about I my intention . but that which a man have the power of do he can not always do without the interference of those around he . there be a misconception , and among my , -- my adherent , -- there be some who injudiciously advise to stand on my interest . but he do not get my interest , and be beat ; -- and therefore when he ask I for the money which he have spend , I pay it to he . that be all . I think the can hardly avoid to see that my effort be make to discontinue a unconstitutional proceeding . " ask the question . " he trust , " he say , " that the house would not think that the question of which he have give notice and which he be about to ask be instigate by any personal desire on he part to inquire into the conduct of the . he be one who believe that the of be as little likely as any man in to offend by unconstitutional practice on he own part . but a great deal have be talk and write lately about the late election at , and there be those who think , -- and he be one of they , -- that something should be say to stop the mouth of caviller . with this object he would ask the who lead the house , and who be perhaps first in stand among the noble 's colleague in that house , whether the noble be prepare to have any statement on the subject make . " the House be full to the very corner of the galleries . of course it be know to everybody that the question be to be ask and to be answer . there
there be some who think that the matter be so serious that the could not get over it . other have hear in the club that , as the Duchess be still call , be to be make the scapegoat . man of all class be open - mouth in they denunciation of the meanness of , -- though no one but kknow half he villainy , as he alone know that the expense have be pay twice over . in one corner of the reporter 's gallery sit , pencil in hand , prepare to revert to he old work on so momentous a occasion . it be a great day for he . he by he own unassisted energy have bring a to book , and have create all this turmoil . it might be he happy lot to be the means of turn that out of office . it be he who have watch over the nation ! the Duchess have be most anxious to be present , -- but have not venture to come without ask she husband 's leave , which he have most peremptorily refuse to give . " I can not understand , , how you can suggest such a thing , " he have say . " you make so much of everything , " she have reply petulantly ; but she have remain at home . the lady 's gallery be , however , quite full . be there , of course , anxious not only for she friend , but eager to hear how she husband would acquit himself in he task . the wife and daughter of all the minister be there ,-- except the wife of the . there never have been , in the memory of they all , a matter that be so interesting to they , for it be the only matter they remember in which a woman 's conduct might probably be call in question in the house of Commons . and the seat appropriate to peer be so cramm that above a dozen grey - head old lord be stand in the passage which divide they from the common stranger . after all it be not , in truth , much of a affair . a very little man indeed have calumniate the conduct of a minister of the , till it have be think well that the minister should defend himself . no one really believe that the have commit any great offence . at the worst it be no more than indiscretion , which be noticeable only because a should never be indiscreet . have the taxation of the whole country for the next year be in dispute , there would have be no such interest felt . have the welfare of the indian occupy the , the would have be empty . but the hope that a certain woman 's name would have to be mention , cramm it from the floor to the ceiling . the reader need not be tell that that name be not mention . we old friend Phineas , on rise to he leg , first apologise for do so in place of the of the . but perhaps the House would accept a statement from he , as the noble at the head of the government have ask he to make it . then he make he statement . " perhaps , " he say , " no falser accusation than this have ever be bring forward against a minister of the , for it specially charge he noble friend with resort to the employment of unconstitutional practice to bolster up he parliamentary support , whereas it be know by everybody that there would have be no matter for accusation at all have not the of he own motion abandon a recognise privilege , because , in he opinion , the exercise of that privilege be oppos to the spirit of the constitution . have the noble simply nominate a candidate , as candidate have be nominate at Silverbridge for centurie past , that candidate would have be return with absolute certainty , and there would have be no word speak on the subject . it be not , perhaps , for he , who have the honour of serve under he , and who , as be a part of he 's , be for the time one with he , to expatiate at length on the nobility of the sacrifice here make . but they all know there at what rate be value a seat in that House . thank that privilege could not now be rate at any money price . it could not be buy and sell . but this privilege which he noble friend have so magnanimously resign from purely patriotic motive , be , he believe , still in existence , and he would ask those few who be still in the happy , or , perhaps , he have better say in the envied , position of be able to send they friend to that , what be they estimation of the conduct of the in this matter ? it might be that there be one or two such present , and who now hear he , -- or , perhaps , one or two who owed they seat to the exercise of such a privilege . they might marvel at the magnitude of the surrender . they might even question the sagacity of the man who could abandon so much without a price . but he hardly think that even they would regard it as unconstitutional . " this be what the have do , -- act not as , but as a nobleman , in the management of he own property and privileges . and now he would come to the gist of the accusation make ; in make which , the thing which the have
have really do have be altogether ignore . when the vacancy have be declare by the acceptance of the by a gentleman whose absence from the house they all regret , the have signify to he agent he intention of retire altogether from the exercise of any privilege or power in the matter . but the be then , as he be also now , and would , it be to be hope , long continue to be , of . he need hardly remind gentleman in that house that the be not in a position to devote he undivided time to the management of he own property , or even to the interest of the of . that he have be earnest in he instructions to he agent , the sequel fully prove ; but that earnestness he agent have misinterpret . " then there be hear a voice in the house , " what agent ? " and from another voice , " name they . " for there be present some who think it to be shameful that the excitement of the occasion should be lower by keep back all allusion to the Duchess . " I have not distinguished , " say , assume a indignant tone , " the honourable gentleman from whom those question have come , and therefore I have the less compunction in tell they that it be no part of my duty on this occasion to gratify a morbid and a indecent curiosity . " then there be a cry of " order , " and a appeal to the speaker . certain gentleman wish to know whether indecent be parliamentary . the speaker , with some hesitation , express he opinion that the word , as then use , be not open to objection from he . he think that it be within the scope of a member 's rights to charge another member with indecent curiosity . " if , " say , rise again to he leg , for he have sit down for a moment , " the gentleman who call for a name will rise in he place and repeat the demand , I will recall the word indecent and substitute another , -- or other . I will tell he that he be one who , regardless of the real conduct of the , either as a man or as a servant of the , be only anxious to inflict a unmanly wound in order that he may be gratify by see the pain which he inflict . " then he pause , but as no further question be ask , he continue he statement . " a candidate have be bring forward , " he say , " by those interested in the 's affair . a man whom he would not name , but who , he trust , would never succeed in he ambition to occupy a seat in that , have be bring forward , and certain tradesman in have be ask to support he as the 's nominee . there be no doubt about it . the House perhaps could understand that the local adherent and neighbour of a man so high in rank and wealth as the of would not gladly see the privileges of they lord diminish . perhaps , too , it occur to they that a could not have he eye everywhere . there would always be worthy man in borough who like to exercise some second - hand authority . at any rate it be the case that this candidate be encourage . then the have hear it , and have put he foot upon the little mutiny , and have stampe it out at once . he might perhaps here , " he say , " congratulate the house on the acquisition it have receive by the failure of that candidate . so far , at any rate , " he think , " it must be admit that the have be free from blame ; -- but now he come to the gravaman of the charge . " the gravaman of the charge be so well know to the reader that the simple account which give of it need not be repeat . the have pay the money , when ask for it , because he feel that the man have be injure by incorrect representation make to he . " I need hardly pause to stigmatise the meanness of that application , " say , " but I may perhaps conclude by say that whether the last act do by the in this matter be or be not indiscreet , I shall probably have the with I when I say that it savour much more strongly of nobility than of indiscretion . " when sit down no one arise to say another word on the subject . it be afterwards feel that it would only have be graceful have risen and express he opinion that the have hear the statement just make with perfect satisfaction . but he do not do so , and after a short pause the ordinary business of the day be recommence . then there be a speedy descent from the galleries , and the lady troope out of they cage , and the grey - head old peer go back to they own chamber , and the member themselves quickly jostle out through the door , and be leave to explain he propose alteration in the dog tax to a thin House of seventy or eighty member . the thing be then over , and people be astonished that so great a thing should be over with so little fuss . it really seem that after 's speech there be nothing more to be say on the matter . everybody of course know that the Duchess have be the chief of the agent to whom he have allude
allude , but they have know as much as that before . it be , however , feel by everybody that the matter have be bring to a end . the game , such as it be , have be play out . perhaps the only person who hear 's speech throughout , and still hope that the spark could be again fan into a flame , be . he go out and write another article about the Duchess . if a man be so unable to rule he affair at home , he be certainly unfit to be . but even , as he write he article , feel that he be hope against hope . the charge might be refer to hereafter as one that have never be satisfactorily clear up . that game be always open to the opponent of a minister . after the lapse of a few month a old accusation can be serviceably use , whether at the time it be prove or disprove . publish he article , but he feel that for the present the election papers have better be put by among the property of the " 's , " and bring out , if necessary , for further use at some future time . " , " say the , " I feel indebted to you for the trouble you have take . " " it be only a pleasant duty . " " I be grateful to you for the manner in which it be perform . " this be all the say , and feel it to be cold . the , in truth , be grateful ; but gratitude with he always fail to exhibit itself readily . from the world at large receive great praise for the manner in which he have perform he task . " " the abuse which be now publicly heape on the name of hit the man very hard ; but not so hard perhaps as he rejection by . that be a episode in he life of which even he feel asham , and of which he be unable to shake the disgrace from he memory . he have no inner appreciation whatsoever of what be really good or what be really bad in a man 's conduct . he do not know that he have do evil in apply to the for the money . he have only mean to attack the ; and when the money have come it have be regard as justifiable prey . and when after receive the 's money , he have keep also 's money , he have justifi himself again by remind himself that certainly owed he much more than that . in a sense he be what be call a gentleman . he know how to speak , and how to look , how to use a knife and fork , how to dress himself , and how to walk . but he have not the faintest notion of the feeling of a gentleman . he have , however , a very keen conception of the evil of be generally ill speak of . even now , though he be make up he mind to leave for a long term of year , he understand the disadvantage of leave it under so heavy a cloud ; -- and he understand also that the cloud might possibly impede he go altogether . even in they be look black upon he , and go so far as to say to himself , that , " by , he have put he foot in it . " he have endeavoure to be courageous under he burden , and every day walk into the office of the company , endeavour to look as though he have commit no fault of which he have to be asham . but after the second day he find that nothing be say to he of the affair of the company , and on the fourth day inform he that the time allow for pay up he share have pass by , and that another local manager would be appoint . " the time be not over till to - morrow , " say angrily . " I tell you what I be tell to tell you , " say . " you will only waste you time by come here any more . " he have not once see since the statement make in parliament , although he have live in the same house with he . have come home , and they twill have meet ; -- but the meeting have be stormy . " it seem to I , , that you be a scoundrel , " say to he one day after have hear the whole story , -- or rather many story , -- from he father . this take place not in , but at the club , where have endeavoure to cut he brother - in - law . it need hardly be say that at this time be not popular at he club . on the next day a meeting of the whole club be to be hold that the propriety of expel he might be discuss . but he have resolve that he would not be cow , that he would still show himself , and still defend he conduct . he do not know , however , that have already make know to the committee of the club all the fact of the double payment . he have address in that solicitude to which a man should never be reduce of seek to be recognise by at any rate one acquaintance , -- and now he brother - in - law have call he a scoundrel in the presence of other man . he raise he arm as though to use the cane in he hand , but he be cow
cow by the feeling that all there be he adversary . " how dare you use that language to I ! " he say very weakly . " it be the language that I must use if you speak to I . " " I be you brother - in - law , and that restrain I . " " unfortunately you be . " " and be live in you father 's house . " " that , again , be a misfortune which it appear difficult to remedy . you have be tell to go , and you will not go . " " you ingratitude , sir , be marvellous ! who save you life when you be attack in the park , and be too drunk to take care of yourself ? who have stand you friend with you close - fiste old father when you have lose money at play that you could not pay ? but you be one of those who would turn away from any benefactor in he misfortune . " " I must certainly turn away from a man who have disgrac himself as you have do , " say , leave the room . throw himself into a easy - chair , and ring the bell loudly for a cup of coffee , and light a cigar . he have not be turn out of the club as yet , and the servant at any rate be bound to attend to he . that night he wait up for he father - in - law in . he would certainly go to now , -- if it be not too late . he would go though he be force to leave he wife behind he , and thus surrender any further hope for money from beyond the sum which he would receive as the price of he banishment . it be true that the fortnight allow to he by the company be only at a end that day , and that , therefore , the follow morning might be take as the last day name for the payment of the money . no doubt , also , 's bill at a few day ' date would be accept if that gentleman could not at the moment give a cheque for so large a sum as be require . and the appointment have be distinctly promise to he with no other stipulation than that the money require for the share should be pay . he do not believe in 's threat . it be impossible , he think , that he should be treat in so infamous a manner merely because he have have he election expense repay he by the of ! he would , therefore , ask for the money , and -- renounce the society of he wife . as he make this resolve something like real love return to he heart , and he become for a while sick with regret . he assure himself that he have love she , and that he could love she still ; -- but why have she not be true to he ? why have she clung to she father instead of clinging to she husband ? why have she not learn he way , -- as a wife be bound to learn the way of the man she marry ? why have she not help he in he device , fall into he plan , be regardful of he fortune , and make herself one with he ? there have be present to he at time a idea that if he could take she away with he to that distant country to which he think to go , and thus remove she from the upa influence of she father 's roof - tree , she would then fall into he view and become he wife indeed . then he would again be tender to she , again love she , again endeavou to make the world soft to she . but it be too late now for that . he have fail in everything as far as be concerned , and it be chiefly by she fault that he have fail . he would consent to leave she ; -- but , as he think of it in he solitude , he eye become moist with regret . in these day never come home till about midnight , and then pass rapidly through the hall to he own room , -- and in the morning have he breakfast bring to he in the same room , so that he might not even see he son - in - law . he daughter would go to he when at breakfast , and there , together for some half - hour , they would endeaavor to look forward to they future fate . but hitherto they have never be able to look forward in accord , as she still persist in declaring that if she husband bade she to go with he , -- she would go . on this night sit up in the dining - room , and as soon as he hear 's key in the door , he place himself in the hall . " I wish to speak to you to - night , sir , " he say . " would you object to come in for a few moment ? " then follow he into the room . " as we live now , " continue , " I have not much opportunity of speak to you , even on business . " " well , sir ; you can speak now , -- if you have anything to say . " " the you promise I must be pay to - morrow . it be the last day . " " I promise it only on certain condition . have you comply with they
they the money would have be pay before this . " " just so . the condition be very hard , . it surprise I that such a one as you should think it right to separate a husband from he wife . " " I think it right , sir , to separate my daughter from such a one as you be . I think so before , but I think so doubly now . if I can secure you absence in by the payment of this money , and if you will give I a document that shall be prepare by and sign by yourself , assure you wife that you will not hereafter call upon she to live with you , the money shall be pay . " " all that will take time , . " " I will not pay a penny without it . I can meet you at the office in to - morrow , and doubtless they will accept my write assurance to pay the money as soon as those stipulation shall be comply with . " " that would disgrace I in the office , . " " and be you not disgrace there already ? can you tell I that they have not hear of you conduct in , or that hear it they disregard it ? " he son -in - law stood frown at he , but do not at the moment say a word . " Nevertheless , I will meet you there if you please , at any time that you may name , and if they do not object to employ such a man as they manager , I shall not object on they behalf . " " to the last you be hard and cruel to I , " say ; --" but I will meet you in at eleven to - morrow . " then leave the room , and be there alone amidst the gloom of the heavy curtain and the dark paper . a dining - room at night be always dark , cavernous , and unlovely . the very picture on the walls lack brightness , and the furniture be black and heavy . this room be large , but old - fashioned and very dark . here walk up and down after have leave he , try to think how far Fate and how far he himself be responsible for he present misfortune . no doubt he have begin the world well . he father have be little better than a travel pedlar , but have make some money by sell jewellery , and have educate he son . could on no score impute blame to he father for what have happen to he . and , when he think of the means at he disposal in he early youth , he feel that he have a right to boast of some success . he have work hard , and have win he way upwards , and have almost lod himself securely among those people with whom it have be he ambition to live . Early in life he have find himself among those who be call gentleman and lady . he have be able to assume they manners , and have live with they on equal term . when think of he past life he never forget to remind himself that he have be a guest at the house of the of ! and yet how be it with he now ? he be penniless . he be reject by he father - in - law . he be fear , and , as he think , detest by he wife . he be expel from he club . he be cut by he old friend . and he have be tell very plainly by the in that he presence there be no longer desire . what should he do with himself if 's money be now refuse , and if the appointment in be deny to he ? and then he think of poor and he family . he be not naturally a ill - natured man . though he could upbraid he wife for alluding to 's misery , declare that . Parker must take the rub of the world just as other take they , still the misfortune which he have bring on she and on she child do add something to the weight of he own misfortune . if he could not go to , what should he do with himself ; -- where should he go ? thus he walk up and down the room for a hour . would not a pistol or a razor give he the best solution for all he difficulty ? on the follow morning he keep he appointment at the office in , as do also . the latter be there first by some minute , and explain to that he have come there to meet he son - in - law . be civil , but very cold . see at the first glance that the service of be no longer in request by the ; but he sit down and wait . now that he be there , however painful the interview would be , he would go through it . at ten minute past eleven he make up he mind that he would wait till the half - hour , -- and then go , with the fix resolution that he would never willingly spend another shilling on behalf of that wretch man . but at a quarter past eleven the wretched man come , -- swagger into the office , though it have not , hithertoo , be he custom to swagger . but misfortune master all but the great man , and upset the best - learn lesson of even a long life . " I hope I have not keep you wait
wait , . well , , how be you to - day ? so this little affair be to be settle at last , and now these share shall be buy and pay for . " do not say a word , not even rise from he chair , or greet he son - in - law by a word . " I dare say have already explain himself , " say . " I do not know that there be any necessity , " say . " well , -- I suppose it be simple enough , " continue . " , I believe I be right in say that you be ready to pay the money at once . " " yes ;-- I be ready to pay the money as soon as I be assure that you be on you route to . I will not pay a penny till I know that as a fact . " then rise from he seat and spoke . " gentlemen , " he say , " the matter within the last few day have assume a different complexion . " " as how ? " exclaim . " the director have change they mind as to send out as they local manager . the director intend to appoint another gentleman . I have already acquaint with the director 's intention . " " then the matter be settle ? " say . " quite settled , " say . as a matter of course begin to fume and to be furious . what !--after all that have be do do the Director mean to go back from they word ? after he have be induce to abandon he business in he own country , be he to be throw over in that way ? if the company intend to treat he like that , the company would very soon hear from he . thank God there be law in the land . " yesterday be the last day fix for the payment of the money , " say . " it be at any rate certain that be not to go to ? " ask . " quite certain , " say . then rise from he chair and quit the room . " by g ----, you have ruin I among you , " say ; --" ruin I in the most shameful manner . there be no mercy , no friendship , no kindness , no forbearance anywhere ! why be I to be treat in this manner ? " " if you have any complaint to make , " say , " you have better write to the director . I have nothing to do but my duty . " " by heaven , the director shall hear of it ! " say as he leave the office . go to he chamber and endeavoure to make up he mind what step he must now take in reference to this dreadful incubus . of course he could turn the man out of he house , but in so do it might well be that he would also turn out he own daughter . he believe to be utterly without means , and a man so destitute would generally be glad to be relieve from the burden of he wife 's support . but this man would care nothing for he wife 's comfort ; nothing even , as believe , for he wife 's life . he would simply use he wife as best he might as a means for obtain money . there be nothing to be do but to buy he off , by so much money down , and by so much at state interval as long as he should keep away . must manage it , but it be quite clear to that the scheme be altogether at a end . in the meantime a certain sum must be offer to the man at once , on condition that he would leave the house and do so without take he wife with he . so far have a plan , and a plan that be at least feasible . Wretch as he be , miserable , as he think of the fate which have befall he daughter , -- there be still a prospect of some relief . but as he walk out of the office have nothing to which he could look for comfort . he slowly make he way to , and there he find balance himself on the back leg of he chair , with a small decanter of public - house sherry before he . " what ; you here ? " he say . " yes ;-- I have come to say good - bye . " " where be you go then ? you sha not start to if I know it . " " that be all over , my boy , " say , smile . " what be it you mean ? " say , sit square on he chair and look very serious . " I be not go to or anywhere else . I think I would just look in to tell you that I be just do for , -- that I have not a hope of a shilling now or hereafter . you tell I the other day that I be afraid to come here . you see that as soon as anything be fix , I come and tell you everything at once . " " what be fix ? " " that I be ruin . that there be not a penny to come from any source . " " have get money , " say . " and there be money in the of , -- but I can not get at it . " " what be you go to do , ? " " ah
ah ; that be the question . what be I go to do ? I can say nothing about that , but I can say , , that we affair be at a end . I be very sorry for it , old boy . we ought to have make fortune , but we do not . as far as the work go , I do my best . good - bye , old fellow . you will do well some of these day yet , I do not doubt . do not teach the bairn to curse I . as for . . I have no hope there , I know . " then he go , leave quite aghast . " the and the last " when be in , have he final interview with , there come a visitor to in . up to this date there have be great doubt with whether at last the banishment to would become a fact . from day to day he mind have change . it have be a infinite benefit that should go , if he could be get to go alone , but as great a evil if at last he should take he wife with he . but the father have never da to express these doubt to she , and she have teach herself to think that absolute banishment with a man whom she certainly no longer love , be the punishment she have to pay for the evil she have do . it be now , and the second or third of have be fix for she departure . of course , she have endeavoure from time to time to learn all that be to be learn from she husband . sometimes he would be almost communicative to she ; at other time she could get hardly a word from he . but , through it all , he give she to believe that she would have to go . do she father make any great effort to turn he mind the other way . if it must be so , of what use would be such false kindness on he part ? she have therefore gone to work to make she purchase , study that economy which must henceforth be the great duty of she life , and remind herself as to everything she buy that it would have to be wear with tear and use in sorrow . and then she send a message to . it so happen that be up in at this time with he daughter . Alured do not come to . there be nothing that the old baronet could say in the midst of all this misery , -- no comfort that he could give . it be well - know now to all the Wharton and all the Fletcher that this , who have marry she who be to have be the pearl of the two family , have prove himself to be a scoundrel . the two old Whartons meet no doubt at some club , or perhaps in , and speak some few bitter word to each other ; but do not see the unfortunate young woman who have disgrac herself by so wretch a marriage . but come , and by she a message be send to . " tell he that I be go , " say Emily . " tell he not to come ; but give he my love . he be always one of my kindest friend . " " why , -- why , -- why do you not take he ? " say , move by the excitement of the moment to suggestion which be quite at variance with the fix propriety of she general idea . " why should you speak of that ? " say the other . " I never speak of he , -- never think of he . but , if you see he , tell he what I say . " be of course in the on the follow day , -- on that very day on which learn that , whatever might be he daughter 's fate , she would not , at any rate , be take to . they twill have never meet since the day on which they have be bring together for a moment at the Duchess 's party at . it have of course be understand by both of they that they be not to be allow to see each other . she husband have make a pretext of a act of friendship on he part to establish a quarrel , and both of they have be bound by that quarrel . when a husband declare that he wife shall not know a man , that edict must be obeyed , -- or , if disobey , must be subvert by intrigue . in this case there have be no inclination to intrigue on either side . the order have be obey , and as far as the wife be concerned , have be only a small part of the terrible punishment which have come upon she as the result of she marriage . but now , when send up he name , she do not hesitate as to see he . no doubt she have think it probable that she might see he when she give she message to she cousin . " I could not let you go without come to you , " he say . " it be very good of you . yes ;-- I suppose we be go . sound a long way off , , do it not ? but they tell I it be a beautiful country . " she speak with a cheerful voice , almost as though she like the idea of she journey ; but he look at she with beseeching , anxious , sorrow -
- laden eye . " after all , what be a journey of a few week ? why should I not be as happy in as in ? as to friend , I do not know that it will make much difference ,-- except papa . " " it seem to I to make a difference , " say he . " I never see anybody now , -- neither you people , nor the . indeed , I see nobody . if it be not for papa I should be glad to go . I be tell that it be a charming country . I have not find Square very charming . I be inclin to think that all the world be very much alike , and that it do not matter very much where one life , -- or , perhaps , what one do . but at any rate I be go , and I be very glad to be able to say good - bye to you before I start . " all this she say rapidly , in a manner unlike herself . she be force herself to speak so that she might save herself , if possible , from break down in he presence . " of course I come when tell I . " " yes ; -- she be here . do not come . I do not wonder at that , however . and you mother be in town some time ago , -- but I do not expect she to come . why should they come ? I do not know whether you might not have better stay away . of course I be a now ; but as I be , I shall be as good as any one else in . you have see since he have be in town , perhaps ? " " yes ;-- I have see he . " " I hope they will not quarrel with because of what I have do . I have feel that more than all , -- that both papa and he have suffer because of it . do you know , I think people be hard . they might have throw I off without be unkind to they . it be that that have kill I , Arthur ; -- that they should have suffer . " he sit look at she , not know how to interrupt she , or what to say . there be much that he mean to say , but he do not know how to begin it , or how to frame he word . " when I be gone , perhaps , it will be all right , " she continue . " when he tell I that I be to go , that be my comfort . I think I have teach myself to think nothing of myself , to bear it all as a necessity , to put up with it , whatever it may be , as man bear thirst in the desert . thank , , I have no baby to suffer with I . here , -- here , it be still very bad . when I think of papa creep in and out of he house , I sometimes feel that I must kill myself . but we go will put a end to all that . it be much better that we should go . I wish we might start to - morrow . " then she look up at he , and see that the tear be run down he face , and as she look she hear he sob . " why should you cry , ? he never cry , -- nor do I . when baby die I cry , -- but very little . Tears be vain , foolish thing . it have to be borne , and there be a end of it . when one make up one 's mind to that , one do not cry . there be a poor woman here the other day whose husband he have ruin . she weep and bewail herself till I pitie she almost more than myself ; -- but then she have child . " " oh , Emily ! " " you must not call I by my name , because he would be angry . I have to do , you know , as he tell I . and I do so strive to do it ! through it all I have a idea that if I do my duty it will be better for I . there be thing , you know , which a husband may tell you to do , but you can not do . if he tell I to rob , I be not to rob ;-- be I ? and now I think of it , you ought not to be here . he would be very much displease . but it have be so pleasant once more to see a old friend . " " I care nothing for he anger , " say moodily . " ah , but I do . I have to care for it . " " leave he ! why do not you leave he ? " " what ! " " you can not deceive I . you do not try to deceive I . you know that he be altogether unworthy of you . " " I will hear nothing of the kind , sir . " " how can I speak otherwise when you yourself tell I of you own misery ? be it possible that I should not know what he be ? would you have I pretend to think well of he ? " " you can hold you tongue , . " " no ;-- I can not hold my tongue . have I not hold
hold my tongue ever since you marry ? and if I be to speak at all , must I not speak now ? " " there be nothing to be say that can serve we at all . " " then it shall be say without serve . when I bid you leave he , it be not that you may come to I . though I love you better than all the world put together , I do not mean that . " " oh , , ! " " but let you father save you . only tell he that you will stay with he , and he will do it . though I should never see you again , I could hope to protect you . of course , I know , -- and you know . he be -- a scoundrel ! " " I will not hear it , " say she , rise from she seat on the sofa with she hand up to she forehead , but still come nearer to he as she move . " do not you father say the same thing ? I will advise nothing that he do not advise . I would not say a word to you that he might not hear . I do love you . I have always love you . but do you think that I would hurt you with my love ? " " no ; -- no ;--no ! " " no , indeed ; -- but I would have you feel that those who love you of old be still anxious for you welfare . you say just now that you have be neglect . " " I speak of papa and . for myself , -- of course I have separate myself from everybody . " " never from I . you may be ten time he wife , but you can not separate yourself from I . get up in the morning and go to be at night I still tell myself that you be the one woman that I love . stay with we , and you shall be honoured , -- as that man 's wife of course , but still as the dearest friend we have . " " I can not stay , " she say . " he have tell I that I be to go , and I be in he hand . when you have a wife , Arthur , you will wish she to do you bidding . I hope she will do it for you sake , without the pain I have in do he . good - bye , dear friend . " she put she hand out and he grasp it , and stand for a moment look at she . then he seize she in he arm and kiss she brow and she lip . " oh , Emily , why be you not my wife ? my darling , my darling ! " she have hardly extricate herself when the door open , and stand in the room . " , " he say , very calmly , " what be the meaning of this ? " " he have come to bid I farewell , " say Emily . " when go on so long a journey one like to see one 's old friend ,-- perhaps for the last time . " there be something of indifference to he anger in she tone , and something also of scorn . look from one to the other , affect a air of great displeasure . " you know , sir , " he say , " that you can not be welcome here . " " but he have be welcome , " say he wife . " and I look upon you come as a base act . you be here with the intention of create discord between I and my wife . " " I be here to tell she that she have a friend to trust to if she ever want a friend , " say . " and you think that such trust as that would be safer than trust in she husband ? I can not turn you out of this house , sir , because it do not belong to I , but I desire you to leave at once the room which be occupy by my wife . " pause a moment to say good - bye to the poor woman , while continue with increase indignation , " if you do not go at once you will force I to desire she to retire . she shall not remain in the same room with you . " " good - bye , , " she say , again put out she hand . but struck it up , not violently , so as to hurt she , but still with eager roughness . " not in my presence , " he say . " go , sy , when I desire you . " " bless you , my friend , " say . " I pray that I may live to see you back in the old country . " " he be -- kiss you , " say , as soon as the door be shut . " he be , " say Emily . " and you tell I so to my face , with such a air as that ! " " what be I to tell you when you ask I ? I do not bid he kiss I . " " but afterwards you take he part as he friend . " " why not ? I should lie to you if I pretend that I be angry with he for what he do . " " perhaps you will tell I that you love he . " " of
of course I love he . there be different kind of love , . there be that which a woman give to a man when she would fain mate with he . it be the sweetest love of all , if it would only last . and there be another love , -- which be not give , but which be win , perhaps through long year , by old friend . I have none older than , and none who be dearer to I . " " and you think it right that he should take you in he arm and kiss you ? " " on such a occasion I could not blame he . " " you be ready enough to receive it , perhaps . " " well ; I be . he have love I well , and I shall never see he again . he be very dear to I , and I be part from he for ever . it be the first and the last , and I do not grudge it to he . you must remember , , that you be take I across the world from all my friend . " " , " he say , " that be all over . you be not go anywhere that I know of ,-- unless it be out into the street when you father shut he door on you . " and so say he leave the room without another word . the and thus the knowledge be convey to that she fate in life be not to carry she to . at the very moment in which she have be summon to meet she have be busy with she needle prepare that almost endless collection of garment necessary for a journey of many day at sea . and now she be inform , by a chance expression , by a word aside , as it be , that the journey be not to be make . " that be all over , " he have say , -- and then have leave she , tell she nothing further . of course she stay she needle . whether the last word have be true or false , she could not work again , at any rate till it have be contradict . if it be so , what be to be she fate ? one thing be certain to she ; -- that she could not remain under she father 's roof . it be impossible that a arrangement so utterly distasteful as the present one , both to she father and to herself , should be continue . but where then should they live , -- and of what nature would she life be if she should be separate from she father ? that evening she see she father , and he corroborate she husband 's statement . " it be all over now , " he say , -- " that scheme of he of go to superintend the mine . the mine do not want he , and will not have he . I can not say that I wonder at it . " " what be we to do , papa ? " " ah ;-- that I can not say . I suppose he will condescmend still to honour I with he company . I do not know why he should wish to go to or elsewhere . he have everything here that he can want . " " you know , papa , that that be impossible . " " I can not say what with he be possible or impossible . he be bound by none of the ordinary rule of mankind . " that evening return to he dinner in , which be still regularly serve for he and he wife , though the servants who attend upon he do so under silent and oft -repeated protest . he say not a word more as to , nor do he seek any ground of quarrel with he wife . but that she continue melancholy and dejection make anything like good - humour impossible , even on he part , he would have be good - humoured . when they be alone she ask he as to they future destiny . " tell I you be not go , " she begin by say . " do I not tell you so this morning ? " " yes ; -- you say so . but I do not know you be earnest . be it all over ? " " all over ,-- I suppose . " " I should have think that you would have tell I with more -- more seriousness . " " I do not know what you would have . I be serious enough . the fact be , that you father have delay so long the payment of the promise money that the thing have fall through of necessity . I do not know that I can blame the company . " then there be a pause . " and now , " she say , " what do you mean to do ? " " upon my word I can not say . I be quite as much in the dark as you can be . " " that be nonsense , . " " thank you ! let it be nonsense if you will . it seem to I that there be a great deal of nonsense go on in the world ; but very little of it as true as what I say now . " " but it be you duty to know . of course you can not stay here . " " nor you , I suppose ,-- without I . " " I be not speak of myself . if you choose , I can remain here . " " and
and -- just throw I overboard altogether . " " if you provide another home for I , I will go to it . however poor it may be I will go to it , if you bid I . but for you , -- of course you can not stay here . " " have you father tell you to say so to I ? " " no ; -- but I can say so without he tell I . you be banish he from he own house . he have put up with it while he think that you be go to this foreign country ; but there must be a end of that now . you must have some scheme of life ? " " upon my soul I have none . " " you must have some intentions for the future ? " " none in the least . I have have intention , and they have fail ; -- from want of that support which I have a right to expect . I have struggle and I have fail , and now I have get no intentions . what be yours ? " " it be not my duty to have any purpose , as what I do must depend on you command . " then again there be a silence , during which he light a cigar , although he be sit in the drawing - room . this be a profanation of the room on which even he have never venture before , but at the present moment she be unable to notice it by any word . " I must tell papa , " she say after a while , " what we plan be . " " you can tell he what you please . I have literally nothing to say to he . if he will settle a adequate income on we , payable of course to I , I will go and live elsewhere . if he turn I into the street without provision , he must turn you too . that be all that I have get to say . it will come better from you than from I . I be sorry , of course , that thing have go wrong with I . when I find myself the son - in - law of a very rich man I think that I might spread my wing a bit . but my rich father - in - law throw I over , and now I be helpless . you be not very cheerful , my dear , and I think I will go down to the club . " he go out of the house and do go down to the progress . the committee which be to be hold with the view of judging whether he be or be not a proper person to remain a member of that assemblage have not yet be hold , and there be nothing to impede he entrance to the club , or the execution of the command which he give for tea and butter toast . but no one speak to he ; nor , though he affect a look of comfort , do he find himself much at he ease . among the member of the club there be a much divided opinion whether he should be expel or not . there be a strong party who declare that he conduct socially , morally , and politically , have be so bad that nothing short of expulsion would meet the case . but there be other who say that no act have be prove against he which the club ought to notice . he have , no doubt , show himself to be a blackguard , a man without a spark of honour or honesty . but then , -- as they say who think he position in the club to be unassailable , -- what have the club to do with that ? " if you turn out all the blackguard and all the dishonourable man , where will the club be ? " be a question ask with a great deal of vigour by one middle - aged gentleman who be suppose to know the club -world very thoroughly . he have commit no offence which the law could recognise and punish , nor have he sinn against the club rule . " he be not require to be a man of honou by any regulation of which I be aware , " say the middle - aged gentleman . the general opinion seem to be that he should be ask to go , and that , if he decline , no one should speak to he . this penalty be already inflict on he , for on the evening in question no one do speak to he . he drank he tea and eat he toast and read a magazine , strive to look as comfortable and as much at he ease as man at they club generally be . he be not a bad actor , and those who see he and make report as to he conduct on the follow day declare that he have apparently be quite indifferent to the disagreeable incidents of he position . but he indifference have be mere ac . he careless manner with he wife have be all assume . Selfish as he be , void as he be of all principle , utterly unmanly and even unconscious of the worth of manliness , still he be alive to the opinion of other . he think that the world be wrong to condemn he , -- that the world do not understand the fact of he case , and that the world generally would have do as he have do in similar circumstance . he do not know that there be such a quality as honesty , nor
nor do he understand what the word mean . but he do know that some man , a unfortunate class , become subject to evil report from other who be more successful , and he be aware that he have become one of those unfortunate . could he see any remedy for he position . it be all blank and black before he . it may be doubt whether he get much instruction or amusement from the page of the magazine which he turn . at about twelve o'clock he leave the club and take he way homewards . but he do not go straight home . it be a nasty cold night , with a catching wind , and occasional short showers of something between snow and rain , -- as disagreeable a night for a gentleman to walk in as one could well conceive . but he go round by , and along the , and up some dirty street by the small theatre , and so on to and by up to , then through some unused street into , along the , and back to by . he have more than double the distance ,-- apparently without any object . he have be speak to frequently by unfortunate of both sex , but have answer a word to no one . he have trudge on and on with he umbrella over he head , but almost unconscious of the cold and wet . and yet he be a man sedulously attentive to he own personal comfort and health , who have at any rate show this virtue in he mode of living , that he have never subject himself to danger by imprudence . but now the working of he mind keep he warm , and , if not dry , at least indifferent to the damp . he have throw aside with affect nonchalance those question which he wife have ask he , but still it be necessary that he should answer they . he do not suppose that he could continue to live in in he present condition . , if it be necessary that he should wander forth into the world , could he force he wife to wander with he . if he would consent to leave she , he father - in - law would probably give he something , -- some allowance on which he might exist . but then of what sort would be he life ? he do not fail to remind himself over and over again that he have nearly succeed . he have be the guest of the , and have be the nominee choose by a Duchess to represent she husband 's borough in parliament . he have be intimate with who be fast become a millionaire . he have marry much above himself in every way . he have achieve a certain popularity and be conscious of intellect . but at the present moment two or three sovereign in he pocket be the extent of he worldly wealth and he character be utterly ruin . he regard he fate as do a card - player who day after day hold six and sevens when other man have the ace and king . Fate be against he . he see no reason why he should not have have the ace and king continually , especially as fate have give he perhaps more than he share of they at first . he have , however , lose rubber after rubber , -- not pay he stake for some of the last rubber lost , -- till the player would play with he no longer . the misfortune might have happen to any man ; -- but it have happene to he . there be no beginning again . a possible small allowance and some very retired and solitary life , in which there would be no show of honour , no flattery come to he , be all that be leave to he . he let himself in at the house , and find he wife still awake . " I be wet to the skin , " he say . " I make up my mind to walk , and I would do it ;-- but I be a fool for my pain . " she make he some feeble answer , affect to be half asleep , and merely turn in she bed . " I must be out early in the morning . mind you make they dry my thing . they never do anything for my telling . " " you do not want they dry to - night ? " " not to - night , of course ; -- but after I be go to - morrow . they will leave they there without put a hand to they , if you do not speak . I must be off before breakfast to - morrow . " " where be you go ? do you want anything pack ? " " no ; nothing . I shall be back to dinner . but I must go down to , to see a friend of 's on business . I will breakfast at the station . as you say to - day , something must be do . if it be to sweep a crossing , I must sweep it . " as she lay awake while he sleep , she think that those last word be the best she have hear he speak since they be marry . there seem to be some indication of a purpose in they . if he would only sweep a crossing as a man should sweep it , she would stand by he , and at any rate do she duty to he , in spite of all that have happen . ! she be not old enough to have learn that a dishonest man
man can not begin even to sweep a crossing honestly till he have in very truth repent of he former dishonesty . the lazy man may become lazy no longer , but there must have be first a process through he mind whereby laziness have become odious to he . and that process can hardly be the immediate result of misfortune arise from misconduct . have find he crossing at he would hardly have sweep it well . Early on the follow morning he be up , and before he leave he room he kiss he wife . " good - bye , old girl , " he say ; " do not be down - hear . " " if you have anything before you to do , I will not be down - hear , " she say . " I shall have something to do before night , I think . tell you father , when you see he , that I will not trouble he here much longer . but tell he , also , that I have no thanks to give he for he hospitality . " " I will not tell he that , . " " he shall know it , though . but I do not mean to be cross to you . good - bye , love . " then he stoop over she and kiss she again ; -- and so he take he leave of she . it be raine hard , and when he get into the street he look about for a cab , but there be none to be find . in he get a omnibus which take he down to the underground railway , and by that he go to . through the rain he walk up to the Station , and there he order breakfast . could he have a mutton chop and some tea ? and he be very particular that the mutton chop should be well cook . he be a good - look man , of fashionable appearance , and the young lady who attend he notice he and be courteous to he . he condescende even to have a little light conversation with she , and , on the whole , he seem to enjoy he breakfast . " upon my word , I should like to breakfast here every day of my life , " he say . the young lady assure he that , as far as she could see , there be no objection to such a arrangement . " only it be a bore , you know , come out in the rain when there be no cab , " he say . then there be various little joke between they , till the young lady be quite impressed with the gentleman 's pleasant affability . after a while he go back into the hall and take a first - class return ticket , not for , but for the . it be quite unnecessary to describe the , as everybody know it . from this spot , some six or seven miles distant from , line diverge east , west , and north , north - east , and north - west , round the metropolis in every direction , and with direct communication with every other line in and out of . it be a marvellous place , quite unintelligible to the uninitiated , and yet daily use by thousand who only know that when they get there , they be to do what some one tell they . the space occupy by the convergent rail seem to be sufficient for a large farm . and these rails always run one into another with sloping point , and cross passage , and mysterious meander siding , till it seem to the thoughtful stranger to be impossible that the best train engine should know its own line . here and there and around there be ever a wilderness of waggon , some load , some empty , some smoking with close - pack oxen , and other furlong in length black with coal , which look as though they have be strand there by chance , and be never destin to get again into the right path of traffic . not a minute pass without a train go here or there , some rush by without notice in the least , crash through like flash of substantial lightning , and other stop , disgorge and take up passenger by the hundred . man and woman ,-- especially the man , for the woman know they ignorance be generally willing to trust to the pundit of the place , -- look doubtful , uneasy , and bewilder . but they all do get properly place and unplaced , so that the spectator at last acknowledge that over all this apparent chaos there be presid a great genius of order . from dusky morn to dark night , and indeed almost throughout the night , the air be load with a succession of shriek . the theory go that each separate shriek , -- if there can be any separation where the sound be so nearly continuous , -- be a separate notice to separate ear of the come or go of a separate train . the stranger , as he speculate on these pandemoniac noise , be able to realise the idea that be they discontinue the excitement necessary for the mind of the pundit might be lower , and that activity might be lessen , and evil result might follow . but he can not bring himself to credit that theory of individual notice . at there be half - a - dozen long platform , on which man and woman and luggage be crowd . on one of these for a while walk backwards and forward as though wait for the coming of some especial
especial train . the crowd be ever so great that a man might be suppose to walk there from morning to night without excit special notice . but the pundit be very clever , and have much experience in man and woman . a well - teach pundit , who have exercise authority for a year or two at such a station as that of , will know within a minute of the appearance of each stranger what be he purpose there , -- whether he be go or have just come , whether he be himself on the way or wait for other , whether he should be treat with civility or with some curt command , -- so that if he purport be honest all necessary assistance may be render he . as be walk up and down , with smile face and leisurely pace , now read a advertisement and now watch the contortion of some amazed passenger , a certain pundit ask he he business . he be wait , he say , for a train from , intend , when he friend arrive , to go with he to Dulwich by a train which go round the west of . it be all feasible , and the pundit tell he that the stopping train from be due there in six minute , but that the express from the north would pass first . thanke the pundit and give he sixpence , -- which make the pundit suspicious . a pundit hope to be pay when he handle luggage , but have no such expectation when he merely give information . the pundit still have he eye on we friend when the shriek and the whirr of the express from the north be hear . walk quickly up towards the edge of the platform , when the pundit follow he , tell he that this be not he train . then run a few yard along the platform , not notice the man , reach a spot that be unoccupied ; -- and there he stand fix . and as he stand the express flash by . " I be fond of see they pass like that , " say to the man who have follow he . " but you should not do it , sir , " say the suspicious pundit . " no one be not allow to stand near like that . the very hair of it might take you off you leg when you be not use to it . " " all right , old fellow , " say , retreate . the next train be the train ; and it seem that we friend 's friend have not come , for when the passenger have clear themselves off , he be still walk up and down the platform . " he will come by the next , " say to the pundit , who now follow he about and keep a eye on he . " there be not another from stop here till the 2.20 , " say the pundit . " you have better come again if you mean to meet he by that . " " he have come on part of the way , and will reach this by some other train , " say . " there be not nothing he can come by , " say the pundit . " gentleman can not wait here all day , sir . the horder be against waiting on the platform . " " all right , " say , move away as though to make he exit through the station . now be so big a place , and so scatter , that it be impossible that all the pundit should by any combine activity maintain to the letter that order of which we special pundit have speak . Lopez , depart from the platform which he have hithertoo occupied , be soon to be see on another , walk up and down , and again wait . but the old pundit have have he eye upon he , and have follow he round . at that moment there come a shriek louder than all the other shriek , and the morning express down from to be see come round the curve at a thousand mile a hour . turn round and look at it , and again walk towards the edge of the platform . but now it be not exactly the edge that he near , but a descent to a pathway , -- a inclined plane lead down to the level of the rail , and make there for certain purpose of traffic . as he do so the pundit call to he , and then make a rush at he , -- for we friend 's back be turn to the come train . but heede not the call , and the rush be too late . with quick , but still with gentle and apparently unhurried step , he walk down before the fly engine -- and in a moment have be knock into bloody atom . the and the catastrophe describe in the last chapter have take place during the first week in . by the end of that month old have probably reconcile himself to the tragedy , although in fact it have affect he very deeply . in the first day after the news have reach he he seem to be bow to the ground . be neglect , and the see nothing of he . indeed , he barely leave the house from which he have be so long banish by the presence of he son - in - law . it seem to , who now come to live with he and he sister , as though he father be overcome by the horror of the affair . but after awhile he recovere himself , and
and appear one morning in court with he wig and gown , and argue a case , -- which be now unusual with he , -- as though to show the world that a dreadful episode in he life be pass , and should be think of no more . at this period , three or four week after the occurrence , -- he rarely speak to he daughter about ; but to Everett the man 's name would be often on he tongue . " I do not know that there could have be any other deliverance , " he say to he son one day . " I think it would have kill I when I first hear it , and it nearly kill she . but , at any rate , now there be peace . " but the widow seem to feel it more as time go on . at first she be stun , and for a while absolutely senseless . it be not till two day after the occurrence that the fact become known to she , -- nor know as a certainty to she father and brother . it seem as though the man have be careful to carry with he no record of identity , the nature of which would permit it to outlive the crash of the train . no card be find , no scrap of paper with he name ; and it be discover at last that when he leave the house on the fatal morning he have be careful to dress himself in shirt and sock , with handkerchief and collar that have be newly purchase for he propose journey and which bear no mark . the fragment of he body set identity at defiance , and even he watch have be crumple into ash . of course the fact become certain with no great delay . the man himself be missing , and be accuritely describe both by the young lady from the refreshment room , and by the suspicious pundit who have actually see the thing do . there be first belief that it be so , which be not communicate to , -- and then certainty . there be a inquest held of course , -- well , we will say on the body , -- and , singularly enough , great difference of opinion as to the manner , though of course none as to the immediate cause of the death . have it be accidental , or premeditate ? the pundit , who in the performance of he duty on the Tenway platforms be so efficient and valuable , give half - a - dozen opinion in half - a - dozen minute when subject to the question of the Coroner . in he own mind he have not the least doubt in the world as to what have happen . but he be make to believe that he be not to speak he own mind . the gentleman , he say , certainly might have walk down by accident . the gentleman 's back be turn , and it be possible that the gentleman do not hear the train . he be quite certain the gentleman knew of the train ; but yet he could not say . the gentleman walk down before the train of ' purpose ; but perhaps he do not mean to do himself a injury . there be a deal of this , till the Coroner , put all he wrath into he brow , tell the man that he be a disgrace to the service , and express a hope that the company would no longer employ a man so evidently unfin for he position . but the man be in truth a conscientious and useful railway pundit , with a large family , and evident capability for he business . at last a verdict be give , -- that the man 's name be , that he have be crush by a express train on the and , and that there be no evidence to show how he presence on the line have be occasion . of course have employ counsel , and of course the counsel 's object have be to avoid a verdict of felo de se . Append to the verdict be a recommendation from the jury that the should be advise to signalise they express train more clearly at the . when these tiding be tell to the widow she have already give way to many fear . have gone , purporting , -- as he say , -- to be back to dinner . he have not come then , nor on the follow morning ; nor have he write . then she remembe all that he have do and say ; -- how he have kiss she , and leave a parting malediction for she father . she do not at first imagine that he have destroy himself , but that he have go away , intend to vanish as other man before now have vanish . as she think of this something almost like love come back upon she heart . of course he be bad . even in she sorrow , even when alarm as to he fate , she could not deny that . but she oath to he have not be to love he only while he be good . she have make herself a part of he , and be she not bound to be true to he , whether good or bad ? she implor she father and she implor she brother to be ceaseless in they endeavour to trace he ,-- sometimes see almost to fear that in this respect she could not fully trust they . then she discern from they manner a doubt as to she husband 's fate . " oh , papa , if you think anything , tell
tell I what you think , " she say late on the evening of the second day . he be then nearly sure that the man who have be kill at be ; -- but he be not quite sure , and he would not tell she . but on the follow morning , somewhat before noon , have himself go out early to , he come back to he own house , -- and then he tell she all . for the first hour she do not shed a tear or lose she consciousness of the horror of the thing ; -- but sit still and silent , gaze at nothing , cast back she mind over the history of she life , and the misery which she have bring on all who belong to she . then at last she give way , fall into tear , hysteric sobbing , convulsion so violent as for a time to take the appearance of epileptic fit , and be at last exhausted and , happily for herself , unconscious . after that she be ill for many week , -- so ill that at time both she father and she brother think that she would die . when the first month or six week have pass by she would often speak of she husband , especially to she father , and always speak of he as though she have bring he to he untimely fate . could she endure at this time that she father should say a word against he , even when she oblige the old man to speak of one whose conduct have be so infamous . it have all be she do ! have she not marry he there would have be no misfortune ! she do not say that he have be noble , true , or honest , -- but she assert that all the evils which have come upon he have be produce by herself . " my dear , " she father say to she one evening , " it be a matter which we can not forget , but on which it be well that we should be silent . " " I shall always know what that silence mean , " she reply . " it will never mean condemnation of you by I , " say he . " but I have destroy you life , -- and he . I know I ought not to have marry he , because you bade I not . and I know that I should have be gentler with he , and more obedient , when I be he wife . I sometimes wish that I be a , and that I could go into a convent , and bury it all amidst sackcloth and ash . " " that would not bury it , " say she father . " but I should at least be bury . if I be out of sight , you might forget it all . " she once stir up to speak more plainly than she father ever da to do , and then also she herself use language that be very plain . " my darling , " say she brother once , when she have be try to make out that she husband have be more sinn against than sinning , --" he be a bad man . it be better that the truth should be tell . " " and who be a good man ? " she say , raise herself in she bed and look he full in the face with she deep - sunken eye . " if there be any truth in we religion , be we not all bad ? who be to tell the shade of difference in badness ? he be not a drunkard , or a gambler . through it all he be true to he wife . " she , poor creature , be of course ignorant of that little scene in the little street near , in which have offer to carry away with he to . " he be industrious . he idea about money be not the same as yours or 's . how be he worse than other ? it happen that he fault be distasteful to you -- and so , perhaps , be he virtue . " " he fault , such as they be , bring all these misery . " " he would have be successful now if he have never see I . but why should we talk of it ? we shall never agree . and you , , can never understand all that have pass through my mind during the last two year . " there be two or three person who attempt to see she at this period , but she avoid they all . first come , who , as she nearest neighbour , as she aunt , and as a aunt who have be so nearly ally to she , have almost a right to demand admittance . but she would not see . she send down word to say that she be too ill . and when . write to she , she get she father to answer the note . " you have better let it drop , " the old man say at last to he sister - in - law . " of course she remember that it be you who bring they together . " " but I do not bring they together , . how often be I to tell you so ? it be who bring here . " " the marriage be make up in you house , and it have destroy I and my child . I will not quarrel with my wife 's sister if I can help it , but at present you have better keep apart . "
" then he have leave she abruptly , and have not da either to write or to call again . at this time see both and frequently , but he do not go to the , contente himself with ask whether he might be allow to do so . " not yet , , " say the old man . " I be sure she think of you as one of she best friend , but she could not see you yet . " " she would have nothing to fear , " say . " we know each other when we be child , and I should be now only as I be then . " " not yet , ; -- not yet , " say the barrister . then there come a letter , or rather two letter , from ; -- one to and the other to . to tell the truth as to these letter , they contain the combine wisdom and tenderness of and . as soon as the fate of have be ascertaine and thoroughly discuss in , there go forth a edict that Emily have suffer punishment sufficient and be to be forgive . do not come to this at once , -- have some deep - seat feeling which she do not dare to express even to she son , though she mutter it to she daughter - in - law , that yoArthu would be disgrace for ever be he to marry the widow of such a man as . but when this question of receive Emily back into family favou be moo in the parliament no one allude to the possibility of such a marriage . there be the fact that she whom they have all loved have be free by a great tragedy from the husband whom they have all condemned , -- and also the knowledge that the poor victim have suffer greatly during the period of she married life . have frown , and shake she head , and make a little speech about the duty of woman , and the necessarily fatal consequence when those duty be neglect . there be present there , with the old lady , and he wife , and , and . yoArthu be not in the county , nor could the discussion have be hold in he presence . " I can only say , " say , get up and look away from he mother , " that she shall always find a home at Longbarns when she choose to come here , and I hope will say the same as to . " after all , be k in these part , and Fletcher , with many nodding and some sobbing , have to give way to . the end of all this be that write she letter . in that to she ask whether it would not be better that she cousin should change the scene and come at once into the country . let she come and stay a month at , and then go on to Longbarns . she might be sure that there would be no company in either house . in the Fletcher would go up to town for a week , and then Emily might return to . it be a long letter , and give many reason why the poor sufferer would be better in the country than in town . the letter to herself be shorter but full of affection . " do , do , do come . you know how we all love you . let it be as it use to be . you always like the country . I will devote myself to try and comfort you . " but Emily could not as yet submit to receive devotion even from she cousin . through it all , and under it all ,-- though she would ever defend she husband because he be dead , -- she know that she have disgrac the Wharton and bring a load of sorrow upon the Fletcher , and she be too proud to be forgive so quickly . then she receive another tender of affection from a quarter whence she certainly do not expect it . the Duchess of write to she . the Duchess , though she have lately be considerably restrain by the condition of the 's mind , and by the effect of she own political and social mistake , still from time to time make renew effort to keep together the by give dinner , ball , and garden party , and by bind to herself the gratitude and worship of young parliamentary aspirant . in carry out she plan , she have lately shower she courtesy upon , who have be make welcome even by the as the sit member for . with she have of course discuss the conduct of as to the election bill , and have be very loud in condemn he . and from also she have hear something of the sorrow of . yoArthu have be very desirous that the Duchess , who have receive they both at she house , should distinguish between the husband and the wife . then have come the tragedy , to which the notoriety of the man 's conduct of course give additional interest . it be believe that have destroy himself because of the disgrace which have fall upon he from the affair . and for much of that affair the Duchess herself be responsible . she wait till a couple of month have go by , and then , in the beginning of , send to the widow what be intend to be , and indeed be , a very kind note . the Duchess have hear the sad story with the greatest grief . she hope that would permit she to avail herself of a short acquaintance to express she
she sincere sympathy . she would not venture to call as yet , but hope that before long she might be allow to come to . this note touch the poor woman to whom it be write , not because she herself be solicitous to be acquaint with the Duchess of , but because the application seem to she to contain something like a acquittal , or at any rate a pardon , of she husband . he sin in that measure of the election , -- a sin which she father have be loud in denouncing before the wretch have destroy himself , -- have be especially against the of . and now the come forward to say that it should be forgive and forgote . when she show the letter to she father , and ask he what she should say in answer to it , he only shook he head . " it be mean for kindness , papa . " " yes ;-- I think it be . there be people who have no right to be kind to I . if a man stop I in the street and offer I half - a - cry it might be kindness ; -- but I do not want the man 's half - crown . " " I do not think it be the same , papa . there be a reason here . " " perhaps so , my dear ; but I do not see the reason . " she become very red , but even to he she would not explain she idea . " I think I shall answer it . " " certainly answer it . you compliment to the Duchess and thank she for she kind inquiry . " " but she say she will come here . " " I should not notice that . " " very well , papa . if you think so , of course I will not . perhaps it would be a inconvenience , if she be really to come . " on the next day she do write a note , not quite so cold as that which she father propose , but still say nothing as to the offer visit . she feel , she say , very grateful for the Duchess 's kind remembrance of she . the Duchess would perhaps understand that at present she sorrow overwhelm she . and there be one other tender of kindness which be more surprising than even that from the Duchess . the reader may perhaps remember that and have not part when they last see each other on the pleasantest term . he have be very affectionate , but when he have propose to devote he whole life to she and to carry she off to she have simply tell he that he be -- a fool . then he have escape from she house and have never again see . she have not think very much about it . have he return to she the next day with some more tempting proposition for make money she would have listen to he , -- and have he beg she pardon for what have take place on the former day she would have merely laugh . she be not more offended than she would have be have he ask she for half she fortune instead of she person and she honour . but , as it be , he have escape and have never again show himself in the little street near . then she have the tiding of he death , first see the account in a very sensational article from the pen of himself . she be immediately fill with a intense interest which be infinitely increase by the fact that the man have but a few day before declare himself to be she lover . it be bring she almost as near to the event as though she have see it ! she be , perhaps , entitle to think that she have cause it ! Nay ; -- in one sense she have cause it , for he certainly would not have destroy himself have she consent to go with he to or elsewhere . and she know he wife . a uninteresting , dowdy creature she have call she . but , nevertheless , they have be in company together more than once . so she present she compliment , and express she sorrow , and hope that she might be allow to call . there have be no one for whom she have feel more sincere respect and esteem than for she late friend . to this note there be send a answer write by himself . , my daughter be too ill to see even she own friend . I be , madam , you obedient servant , . after this , life go on in a very quiet way at for many week . recovere she capability of attend to the duty of life . gradually she become again able to interest herself in she brother 's pursuit and in she father 's comfort , and the house return to its old form as it have be before these terrible two year , in which the happiness of the and family have be mar , and scotch , and almost destroy for ever by the interference of . but never for a moment forget that she have do the mischief , -- and that the black enduring cloud have be create solely by she own perversity and self - will . though she would still defend she late husband if any attack be make upon he memory , not the less do she feel that hers have be the fault , though the punishment have come upon they all . have a to the sensation create by the man 's death be by no means confin
confin to , but be very general in the metropolis , and , indeed , throughout the country . as the catastrophe become the subject of general conversation , many people learn that the affair have not , in truth , have much to do with it . the man have kill himself , as many other man have do before he , because he have run through he money and have no chance leave of redeem himself . but to the world at large , the disgrace bring upon he by the explanation give in parliament be the apparent cause of he self - immolation , and there be not want those who feel and expresse a sympathy for a man who could feel so acutely the effect of he own wrong - do . no doubt he have do wrong in ask the for the money . but the request , though wrong , might almost be justified . there could be no doubt , these apologist say , that he have be ill -treate between the and the Duchess . no doubt , who be now describe by some opponent as the 's creature , have be able to make out a story in the 's favour . but all the world know what be the worth and what be the truth of ministerial explanation ! the be very strong ; and even the question in the , which should have be hostile , have be ask in a friendly spirit . in this way there come to be a party who speak and write of as though he have be a martyr . of course be in the front rank of these accuser . he may be say to have lead the little army which make this matter a pretext for a special attack upon the . be especially hostile to the , but he be not less hotly the enemy of . against he have old grudge , which , however , age have never cool . he could , therefore , write with a most powerful pen when discuss the death of that unfortunate man , the late candidate for , crush he two foe in the single grasp of he journalistic fist . Phineas have certainly say some hard thing against , though he have not mention the man 's name . he have congratulate the house that it have not be contaminate by the presence of so base a creature , and he have say that he would not pause to stigmatise the meanness of the application for money which have make . have continue to live and to endure " the sling and arrow of outrageous fortune , " no one would have venture to say that these word would have inflict too severe a punishment . but death wipe out many fault , and a self - inflict death cause by remorse will , in the mind of many , wash a blackamoor almost white . thus it come to pass that some heavy weapon be hurl at , but none so heavy as those hurl by . should not this irish knight , who be so ready with he lance in the defence of the , ask , have remember the past event of he own rather peculiar life ? have not he , too , be poor , and drive in he poverty to rather questionable strait ? have not he be abject in he petition for office , -- and in what degree be such petition less disgraceful than a request for money which have be hopelessly expend on a impossible object , attempt at the instance of the great Croesus who , when ask to pay it , have at once acknowledge the necessity of do so ? could not remember that he himself have stood in danger of he life before a british jury , and that , though he have be , no doubt properly , acquit of the crime impute to he , circumstance have come out against he during the trial which , if not as criminal , be at any rate almost as disgraceful ? could he not have have some mercy on a broken political adventurer who , in he aspiration for public life , have show none of that greed by which have be characterise in all the relation of life ? as for the , " we , " as always describe himself ,-- " we do not wish to add to the agony which the fate of must have bring upon he . he have hound that poor man to he death in revenge for the trifling sum of money which he be call on to pay for he . it may be that the first blame lay not with the himself , but with the 's wife . with that we have nothing to do . the whole thing lie in a nutshell . the bare mention of the name of she the in would have save the , at any rate as effectually as he have be save by the service of he man - of - all - work , , and would have save he without drive poor to insanity . but rather than do this he allow he servant to make statement about mysterious agent , which we be justified in stigmatize as untrue , and to throw the whole blame where but least of the blame be due . we all know the result . it be find in those gory shred and tatter of a poor human be with which the be bespatter . " of course such a article have considerable effect . it be apparent at once that there be ample room for a action for libel against the newspaper , on the part of if not on that of the . but it be equally apparent that must
must have be very well aware of this when he write the article . such a action , even if successful , may bring with it to the man punish more of good than of evil . any pecuniary penalty might be more than recou by the largeness of the advertisement which such a action would produce . no doubt calculate that he would carry with he a great body of public feeling by the mere fact that he have attack a and a Duke . if he could only get all the in to take he paper because of he patriotic and bold conduct , the fortune of the paper would be make . there be no better trade than that of martyrdom , if they would - be martyr know how far he may judiciously go , and in what direction . all this be suppose to have consider very well . and know that he enemy have also consider the nature of the matters which he would have be able to drag into Court if there should be a trial . Allusion , very strong allusion , have be make to former period of 's life . and though there be but little , if anything , in the past circumstance of which he be asham , -- but little , if anything , which he think would subject he personally to the odium of good man , could they be make accurately know in all they detail , -- it would , he be well aware , be impossible that such accuracy should be achieve . and the story if tell inaccurately would not suit he . and then , there be a reason against any public proceeding much stronger even than this . whether the telling of the story would or would not suit he , it certainly would not suit other . as have be before remark , there be former chronicle respect , and in they may be find adequate cause for this conviction on he part . to no outsider be this history know better than to , and therefore could dare almost to defy the law . but not the less on this account be there many who tell Phineas that he ought to bring the action . among these none be more eager than he old friend , the master of the hound , a man who really love , who also love the abstract idea of justice , and who could not endure the thought that a miscreant should go unpunished . be over for the season in the country , and rush up to , have this object among other of a very pressing nature on he mind . he saddler have to be see , -- and threaten , -- on a certain matter touch the horse 's back . a dratch of hound be be send down to a friend in . and there be a committee of Masters to sit on a moot question concern a neutral covert in the country , of which committee he be one . but the desire to punish be almost as strong in he indignant mind as those other matter refer more especially to the profession of he life . " Phinea , " he say , " you be bound to do it . if you will allow a fellow like that to say such thing of you , why , by heaven , any man may say anything of anybody . " now Phineas could hardly explain to he objection to the propose action . a lady be closely concerned , and that lady be 's sister . " I certainly shall not , " say . " and why ? " " just because he wish I to do it . I should be fall into the little pit that he have dug for I . " " he could not hurt you . what have you get to be afraid of ? Ruat coelum . " " there be certain angels , , live up in that heaven which you wish I to pull about we ear , as to whom , if all they heart and all they wish and all they doings could be know , nothing but praise could be speak ; but who would still be drag with soiled wing through the dirt if this man be empower to bring witness after witness into court . my wife would be name . for atch I know , you wife . " " by g ----, he would find himself wrong there . " " leave a chimney - sweep alone when you see he , . should he run against you , then remember that it be one of the necessary penalty of clean linen that it be apt to be soil . " " I be d ---- would if I would let he off . " " yes you would , old fellow . when you come to see clearly what you would gain and what you would lose , you would not meddle with he . " he wife be at first inclin to think that a action should be take , but she be more easily convinced than . " I have not think , " she say , " of poor . but be it not horrible that a man should be able to go on like that , and that there should be no punishment ? " in answer to this he only shrug he shoulders . but the greatest pressure come upon he from another source . he do not in truth suffer much himself from what be say in the " 's . " he have become used to the " 's " and have find out that in no relation of life be he less pleasantly situate because of the malediction heape upon
upon he in the column of that newspaper . he position in public life do not seem to be weaken by they . he personal friend do not fall off because of they . those who love he do not love he less . it have not be so with he always , but now , at last , he be harden against . but the poor be by no means equally strong . this attack upon he , this denunciation of he cruelty , this assurance that he have cause the death of , be very grievous to he . it be not that he really feel himself to be guilty of the man 's blood , but that any one should say that he be guilty . it be of no use to point out to he that other newspapers have sufficiently vindicate he conduct in that respect , that it be already publicly know that have receive payment for those election expense from before the application have be make to he , and that therefore the man 's dishonesty be patent to all the world . it be equally futile to explain to he that the man 's last act have be in no degree cause by what have be say in parliament , but have be the result of he continue failure in life and final absolute ruin . he fret and fume and be very wretched , -- and at last express he opinion that legal step should be take to punish the " 's . " now it have be already acknowledge , on the dictum of no less a man than , the Attorney - General , that the action for libel , if take at all , must be take , not on the part of the , but on that of . have indeed doubt , but it have come to be understand by all the member of the that always do doubt whatever be say by . " the think that something should be do , " say , the 's private , to . " not by I , I hope , " say . " nobody else can do it . that be to say it must be do in you name . of course it would be a government matter , as far as expense go , and all that . " " I be sorry the should think so . " " I do not see that it could hurt you . " " I be sorry the should think so , " repeat , -- " because nothing can be do in my name . I have make up my mind about it . I think the be wrong in wish it , and I believe that be any action take , we should only be play into the hand of that wretch fellow , . I have long be conversant with , and have quite make up my mind that I will never play upon he pipe . and you may tell the Duke that there be other reason . the man have refer to my past life , and in seek to justify those remark he would be enable to drag before the public circumstance and story , and perhaps person , in a manner that I personally should disregard , but which , for the sake of other , I be bound to prevent . you will explain all this to the ? " " I be afraid you will find the very urgent . " " I must then express my great sorrow that I can not oblige the . I trust I need hardly say that the have no colleague more devoted to he interest than I be . be he to wish I to change my office , or to abandon it , or to undertake any political duty within the compass of my small power , he would find I ready to obey he behest . but in this matter other be concerned , and I can not make my judgment subordinate to he . " the private look very serious , and simply say that he would do he best to explain these objection to he . that the would take he refusal in bad part Phineas feel nearly certain . he have be a little surprised at the coldness of the 's manner to he after the statement he have make in the klouse , and have mention the matter to he wife . " you hardly know he , " she have say , " as well as I do . " " certainly not . you ought to know he very intimately , and I have have but little personal friendship with he . but it be a moment in which the man might , for the moment , have be cordial . " " it be not a moment for he cordiality . the Duchess say that if you want to get a really genial smile from he you must talk to he about cork soles . I know exactly what she mean . he love to be simple , but he do not know how to show people that he like it . find he out by accident . " " do not suppose that I be in the least aggrieve , " he have say . and now he speak again to he wife in the same spirit . " clearly think that he will be offend , and , I suppose , know he mind . " " I do not see why he should . I have be read it longer , and I still find it very difficult . have be at the work for the last fifteen year , and sometimes own that there be passage she have not master yet . I fancy be afraid of he
he , and be a little give to fancy that everybody should bow down to he . now if there be anything certain about the it be this , -- that he do not want any one to bow down to he . he hate all bow down . " " I do not think he love those who oppose he . " " it be not the opposition he hate , but the cause in the man 's mind which may produce it . when oppose he , and he think that 's opposition be found on jealousy , then he despise . but have he believe in 's belief in the new ship , he would have be capable of press to he bosom , although he might have be force to oppose 's ship in the cabinet . " " he be a to you , " say , laugh . " rather a , whom I take to have be the better man of the two . I will tell you what he be , Phineas , and how he be better than all the real knights of whom I have ever read in story . he be a man altogether without guile , and entirely devote to he country . do not quarrel with he , if you can help it . " Phineas have not the slightest desire to quarrel with he chief ; but he do think it to be not improbable that he chief would quarrel with he . it be notorious to he as a member of the cabinet , -- as a colleague live with other colleague by whom the be coddle , and especially as the husband of he wife , who liv almost continually with the 's wife , -- that the be cut to the quick by the accusation that he have hound to he death . the have defend himself in the against the first charge by means of , and now require Phineas to defend he from the second charge in another way . this he be oblige to refuse to do . and then the 's private look very grave , and leave he with the impression that the would be much annoyed , if not offend . and already there have grow up a idea that the would have on the list of he colleague none who be personally disagreeable to himself . though he be by no means a strong in regard to political measure , or the proper dominion of he party , still man be afraid of he . it be not that he would call upon they to resign , but that , if aggrieve , he would resign himself . have rebel and have try a fall with the , -- and have greatly fail . determine that if frown upon he would resign , but that he certainly would bring no action for libel against the " 's . " a week pass after he have see before he by chance find himself alone with the . this occur at the house in , at which he be a frequent visitor , -- and could hardly have cease to be so without be notice , as he wife spend half she time there . it be evident to he then that the occasion be seek for by the . " , " say the , " I want to have a word or two with you . " " certainly , " say , arrest he step . " speak to you about that -- that newspaper . " " yes , . he seem to think that there should be a action for libel . " " I think so too . it be very bad , you know . " " yes ; -- it be bad . I have know the ' 's ' for some time , and it be always bad . " " no doubt ; -- no doubt . it be bad , very bad . be it not sad that there should be such dishonesty , and that nothing can be do to stop it ? say that you will not hear of a action in you name . " " there be reason , . " " no doubt ; -- no doubt . well ;--there be a end of it . I own I think the man should be punish . I be not often vindictive , but I think that he should be punish . however , I suppose it can not be . " " I do not see the way . " " so be it . so be it . it must be entirely for you to judge . be you not longe to get into the country , ? " " hardly yet , " say , surprised . " it be only , and we have two month more of it . what be the use of long yet ? " " two month more ! " say the . " two month certainly . but even two month will come to a end . we go down to quietly ,-- very quietly , -- when the time do come . you must promise that you will come with we . Eh ? I make a point of it , . " do promise , and think that he have succeed in master one of the difficult passage in that book . the and but the , though he be by far too magnanimous to be angry with because would not fall into he view respect the propose action , be not the less torment and goad by what the newspaper say . the assertion that he have hound to he death , that by he defence of himself he have bring the man 's blood on he head , be make
make and repeat till those around he do not dare to mention the name of in he hearing . even he wife be restrain and become fearful , and in she heart of heart begin almost to wish for that retirement to which he have occasionally alluded as a distant Elysium which he should never be allow to reach . he be begin to have the worn look of a old man . he scanty hair be turn grey , and he long thing cheek longer and thinner . of what he do when sit alone in he chamber , either at home or at the , she know less and less from day to day , and she begin to think that much of he sorrow arise from the fact that among they they would allow he to do nothing . there be no special subject now which stir he to eagerness and bring upon herself explanations which be tedious and unintelligible to she , but evidently delightful to he . there be no quint or semi-tenth now , no aspiration for decimal perfection , no delightfully fatiguing hour spend in the manipulation of the multiplication table . and she could not but observe that the old now speak to she much less frequently of she husband 's political position than have be he habit . through the first year and a half of the present ministerial arrangement he have be constant in he advice to she , and have always , even when thing be difficult , be cheery and full of hope . he still come frequently to the house , but do not often see she . and when he do see she he seem to avoid all allusion either to the political success or the political reverse of the . and even she other special allie seem to labour under unusual restraint with she . Erle seldom tell she any news . never have a word for she . , who have ever be discreet , become almost petrify by discretion . and even have grow to be solemn , silent , and uncommunicative . " have you hear who be the new ? " she say to . one day . " have there be a change ? " " I suppose so . everything have become so quiet that I can not imagine that be still in office . do you know what anybody be do ? " " the world be go on very smoothly , I take it . " " I hate smoothness . it always mean treachery and danger . I feel sure that there will be a great blow up before long . I smell it in the air . do not you tremble for you husband ? " " why should I ? he like be in office because it give he something to do ; but he would never be a idle man . as long as he have a seat in parliament , I shall be contented . " " to have be be something after all , and they can not rob he of that , " say the Duchess , recurr again to she own husband . " I half fancy sometimes that the charm of the thing be grow upon he . " " upon the ? " " yes . he be always talk of the delight he will have in give it up . he be always Cincinnatus , go back to he peach and he plough . but I fear he be begin to feel that the salt would be go out of he life if he cease to be the first man in the kingdom . he have never say so , but there be a nervousness about he when I suggest to he the name of this or that man as he successor which alarm I . and I think he be become a tyrant with he own man . he speak the other day of almost as though he mean to have he whip . it be not what one expect from he ; -- be it ? " " the weight of the load on he mind make he irritable . " " either that , or have no load . if he have really much to do he would not surely have time to think so much of that poor wretch who destroy himself . such sensitiveness be simply a disease . one can never punish any fault in the world if the sinner can revenge himself upon we by rush into eternity . sometimes I see he shiver and shudder , and then I know that he be think of . " " I can understand all that , . " " it be not as it should be , though you can understand it . I will bet you a guinea that have to go out before the beginning of next session . " " I have no objection . but why ? " " he mention 's name the other day before . I hear he . pull that long face of he , look as though he mean to impose silence on the whole world for the next six week . but be brass itself , a sound cymbal of brass that nothing can silence . he go on to declare with that loud voice of he that the death of be a good riddance of bad rubbish . turn away and leave the room and shut himself up . he do not declare to himself that he would dismiss , because that be not the way of he mind . but you will see that will have to go . " " that , at any rate , will be a good riddance of bad rubbish , " say , who do not love . after that the Duchess make
make up she mind that she would interrogate the of as to the present state of affair . it be then the end of , and nearly one of those long and tedious month have go by of which the spoke so feelingly when he ask to come down to . hope have be express in more than one quarter that this would be a short session . such hope be much more common in than in , and , though rarely verify , serve to keep up the droop spirit of languid senator . " I suppose we shall be early out of town , , " she say one day . " I think so . I do not see what there be to keep we . it often happen that ministers be a great deal better in the country than in , and I fancy it will be so this year . " " you never think of the poor girl who have not get they husband yet . " " they should make better use of they time . besides , they can get they husband in the country . " " it be quite true that they never get to the end of they labour . they be not like you member of parliament who can shut up you portfolio and go and shoot grouse . they have to keep at they work spring and summer , autumn and winter , -- year after year ! how they must hate the man they persecute ! " " I do not think we can put off go for they sake . " " man be always selfish , I know . what do you think of lately ? " the question be put very abruptly , without a moment 's notice , and there be no avoid it . " think of he ! " " yes ; -- what do you think of he condition ; -- of he happiness , he health , he capacity of endurance ? will he be able to go on much longer ? now , my dear , do not stare at I like that . you know , and I know , that you have not speak a word to I for the last two month . and you know , and I know , how many thing there be of which we be both think in common . you have not quarrell with ? " " Quarrell with he ! good heaven , no . " " of course I know you still call he you noble colleague , and you noble friend , and make one of the same team with he and all that . but it use to be so much more than that . " " it be still more than that ;-- very much more . " " it be you who make he . " " no , no , no ;-- and again no . he make himself by obtain the confidence of the of . there be no other possible way in which a man can become in this country . " " if I be not very serious at this moment , , I should make a allusion to the -- . " no other human be could have say this to the of , except the young woman whom he have pet all he life as . " but I be very serious , " she continue , " and I may say not very happy . of course the big wig of a party have to settle among themselves who shall be they leader , and when this party be form they settle , at you advice , that should be the man . " " my dear , I can not allow that to pass without contradiction . " " do not suppose that I be find fault , or even that I be ungrateful . no one rejoice as I rejoice . no one still feel so much pride in it as I feel . I would have give ten year of my life to make he , and now I would give five to keep he so . it be like it be to be k , when man struggle among themselves who should be ke . whatever he may be , I be ambitious . I love to think that other man should look to he as be above they , and that something of this should come down upon I as he wife . I do not know whether it be not the happiest moment of my life when he tell I that the have send for he . " " it be not so with he . " " no , , -- no ! he and I be very different . he only want to be useful . at any rate , that be all he do want . " " he be still the same . " " a man can not always be carry a huge load up a hill without have he back bend . " " I do not know that the load need be so heavy , . " " ah , but what be the load ? it be not go to the at eleven or twelve in the morning , and sit four or five time a week in the of till seven or eight o'clock . he be never ill when he would remain in the of till two in the morning , and not have a decent dinner above twice in the week . the load I speak of be not work . " " what be it then ? " say the , who in truth understand it all nearly as well as the Duchess herself . " it be hard to explain , but it be very heavy .
. " " responsibility , my dear , will always be heavy . " " but it be hardly that ; -- certainly not that alone . it be the feeling that so many people blame he for so many thing , and the doubt in he own mind whether he may not deserve it . and then he become fretful , and conscious that such fretfulness be beneath he and injuriious to he honour . he condemn man in he mind , and condemn himself for condescending to condemn they . he spend one quarter of a hour in think that as he be he will be down to he finger 's end , and the next in resolve that he never ink to have be at all . " here something like a frown pass across the old man 's brow , which be , however , no indication , of anger . " dear , " she say , " you must not be angry with I . who be there to whom I can speak but you ? " " , my dear ! no , indeed ! " " because you look as though you would scold I . " at this he smile . " and of course all this tell upon he health . " " do you think he be ill ? " " he never say so . there be no special illness . but he be thin and want and carewear . he do not eat and he do not sleep . of course I watch he . " " do he doctor see he ? " " never . when I ask he once to say a word to , -- for he be get hoarse , you know , -- he only shook he head and turn on he heel . when he be in the other , and speak every night , he would see constantly , and do just what he be tell . he use to like open he mouth and have to look down it . but now he will not let any one touch he . " " what would you have I do , ? " " I do not know . " " do you think that he be so far out of health that he ought to give it up ? " " I do not say that . I do not dare to say it . I do not dare to recommend anything . no consideration of health would tell with he at all . if he be to die to - morrow as the penalty of do something useful to - night , he would not think twice about it . if you want to make he stay where he be , the way to do it would be to tell he that he health be fail he . I do not know that he do want to give up now . " " the autumn month will do everything for he ; -- only let he be quiet . " " you be come to , ? " " I suppose so , -- if you ask I , -- for a week or two . " " you must come . I be quite nervous if you desert we . I think he become more estrange every day from all the other . I know you will not do a mischief by repea what I say . " " I hope not . " " he seem to I to turn he nose up at everybody . he use to like ; but he envy , because be of the . I ask he whether we should not have at , and he tell I angrily that I might ask all the government if I like . " " contradict he the other day . " " I know there be something . he have get to be like a bear with a sore head , . you should have see he face the other day , when make some suggestion to he about the proper way of dividing farm . " " I do not think he ever like . " " what of that ? do not I have to smile upon man whom I hate like poison ; -- and woman too , which be worse ? do you think that I love old , or ? he use to be so fond of . " " I think he like , " say the . " he ask he lordship to do something , and Cantrip decline . " " I know all about that , " say the . " and now he look gloomy at . he friend will not stand that kind of thing , you know , for ever . " " he be always courteous to , " say the . " yes ;--just now he be on good term with . he would never be harsh to , because he know that . be the one really intimate female friend whom I have in the world . after all , , besides and the child , there be only two person in the world whom I really love . there be only you and she . she will never desert I ; -- and you must not desert I either . " then he put he hand behind she waist , and stoop over she and kiss she brow , and swore to she that he would never desert she . but what be he to do ? he know , without be tell by the Duchess , that he colleague and chief be become , from day to day , more difficult to manage . he have be right enough in lay it down as a general rule that be select for that position by the
the general confidence of the of ; -- but he be aware at the same time that it have hardly be so in the present instance . there have come to be a dead - lock in affair , during which neither of the two old and well - recognise leader of party could command a sufficient follow for the carrying on of the government . with unusual patience these two gentleman have now for the greater part of three session sit by , offer but little opposition to the , but of course bid they time . they , too , call themselves , -- perhaps think themselves ,-- Cincinnatuse . but they plough and peach do not suffice to they , and they long again to be in every mouth , and to have , if not they deed , then even they omission blazon in every paragraph . the palate accustom to can hardly be gratify by simple salt . when that dead - lock have come , politician who be really anxious for the country have be force to look about for a premier , -- and in the search the old have be the foremost . the Duchess have hardly say more than the truth when she declare that she husband 's promotion have be effect by they old friend . but it be sometimes easier to make than to unmake . perhaps the time have now in truth come , in which it would be better for the country that the usual state of thing should again exist . perhaps ,--nay , the now think that he see that it be so ,-- might again have a liberal majority at he back if the of could find some graceful mode of retiring . but who be to tell all this to the of ? there be only one man in all to whom such a task be possible , and that be the old himself , -- who during the last two year have be constantly urgent with he friend not to retire ! how often since he have take office have the conscientious and timid begge of he friend permission to abandon he high office ! but that permission have always be refuse , and now , for the last three month , the request have not be repeat . the probably be right in say that she husband " do not want to give it up now . " but he , the of , have bring he friend into the trouble , and it be certainly he duty to extricate he from it . the admonition might come in the rude shape of repeat minority in the of . Hitherto the number of vote at the command of the have not be very much impaired . a few always fall off as time go on . become too just , and the mind of man be greedy of novelty . , also , have take with he a few , and it may be that two or three have tell themselves that there could not be all that smoke raise by the " 's " without some fire below it . but there be a good work majority , -- very much at 's command , -- and be move by none of that feeling of rebellion which have urge on to he destruction . it be difficult to find a cause for resignation . and yet the of , who have watch the of closely for nearly half a century , be aware that the which he have create have do its work , and be almost convinced that it would not be permit to remain very much longer in power . he have see symptom of impatience in , and have snort once or twice , as though eager for the battle . the in have die the of . in all there be no older family than that of the Fichy Fidgetts , whose baronial castle of Fichy fellows be still keep up , the glory of archaeologist and the charm of tourist . some people declare it to be the most perfect castle residence in the country . it be admit to have be complete in the time of , and be think to have be commence in the day of . it have always belong to the family , who with a persistence that be become rarer every day , have clung to every acre that it ever own , and have add acre to acre in every age . the consequence have be that the exist of have always be possess of great territorial influence , and have be flatter , cajol , and rever by one after another . now the late have be , as be the custom with the , a man of pleasure . if the truth may be speak openly , it should be admit that he have be a man of sin . the duty of keep together the family property he have perform with a perfect zeal . it have always be acknowledge on behalf of the exist , that in whatever manner he might spend he money , however base might be the gully into which he wealth descende , he never spend more than he have to spend . perhaps there be but little praise in this , as he could hardly have get beyond he enormous income unless he have throw it away on race - course and roulette table . but it have long be remark of the marquise that they be too wise to gamble . the family have not be a honour to the country , but have nevertheless be honoure by the country . the man who have just die have perhaps be as selfish and as sensual a brute as have ever disgrac humanity ; -- but nevertheless he have be
be a Knight of the Garter . he have be possess of considerable parliamentary interest , and the of the day have not da not to make he a Knight of the Garter . all the of have for many year past be of the Garter . on the last occasion a good deal have be say about it . a feeling have even then begin to prevail that the highest personal honour in the gift of the should not be bestow upon a man whose whole life be a disgrace , and who do indeed seem to deserve every punishment which human or divine wrath could inflict . he have a large family , but they be all illegitimate . wife generally he like , but of he own wife he very soon break the heart . of all the company with which he consort he be the admitted king , but he subject could do no man any honour . the Castle of be visit by the world at large , but no man or woman with a character to lose go into any house really inhabit by the . and yet he have become a Knight of the , and be therefore , presumably , one of those noble to whom the majesty of the day be willing to confide the honour , and glory , and safety of the Crown . there be many who dislike this . that a base reprobate should become a and a peer of parliament be in accordance with the constitution of the country . Marquise and peer be not as a rule reprobate , and the misfortune be one which could not be avoid . he might have ill - use he own wife and other wife ' husband without special remark , have he not be make a Knight of the . the of the day , however , have know the value of the man 's support , and , be thick - skinned , have live through the reproach utter without much damage to himself . now the wicked be dead , and it be the privilege and the duty of the of to select another Knight . there be a good deal say about it at the time . there be a rumour , -- no doubt a false rumour , -- that the Crown insist in this instance on dictate a choice to the of . but even be it so , the could not have be very much aggrieve , as the choice dictate be suppose to be that of himself . the late have be a Knight , and when he have die , it be think that he successor would succeed also to the ribbon . the new have be at that time in the cabinet , and have remain there , but have accept a office inferior in rank to that which he have formerly fill . the whole history of these thing have be write , and may be read by the curiious . the Duchess , newly a duchess then and very keen in reference to she husband 's rank , have instigate he to demand the ribbon as he right . this he have not only decline to do , but have go out of the way to say that he think it should be bestow elsewhere . it have be bestow elsewhere , and there have be a very general feeling that he have be pass over because he easy temperament in such matter have be see and utilise . now , whether the interfere or not ,-- a matter on which no one short of a writer of newspaper article dare to make a suggestion till time shall have make mellow the doings of sovereign and they minister , -- the suggestion be make . the of venture to say to he friend that no other selection be possible . " recommend she Majesty to give it to myself ! " say the . " you will find it to be she 's wish . it have be very common . have it . " " I be not . " the name other example of who have be garter by themselves . but we declare it to be out of the question . no honour of that description should be confer upon he as long as he hold he present position . the old be much in earnest , and there be a great deal say on the subject , -- but at last it become clear , not only to he , but to the member of the cabinet generally , and then to the outside world , that the would not consent to accept the vacant honour . for nearly a month after this the question subside . a be not bound to bestow a Garter the day after it become vacant . there be other Knights to guard the throne , and one may be spare for a short interval . but during that interval many eye be turn towards the stall in 's . a good thing should be give away like a clap of thunder if envy , hatred , and malice be to be avoid . a broad blue ribbon across the chest be of all decoration the most become , or , at any rate , the most desire . and there be , I fear , a impression on the mind of some man that the in such matter be weak and might be persuade . then there come to he a application in the form of a letter from the new of , -- a man whom he have never see , and of whom he have never hear . the new have hitherto reside in , and man only know of he that he be odious to he uncle . but he have inherit all the
the estates , and be now possess of immense wealth and great honour . he venture , he say , to represent to the that for generation past the of have be honoure by the Garter . he political status in the country be exactly that enjoy by he late uncle ; but he intend that he political career should be very different . he be quite prepared to support the . " what be he that he should expect to be make a Knight of the ? " say we to the old . " he be the of , and next to yourself , perhaps , the richest peer of Great . " " have rich anything to do with it ? " " something certainly . you would not name a pauper peer . " " yes ; -- if he be a man whose career have be highly honourable to the country . such a man , of course , could not be a pauper , but I do not think he want of wealth should stand in the way of he be honoure by the Garter . " " wealth , rank , and territorial influence have be generally think to have something to do with it . " " and character nothing ! " " my dear , I have not say so . " " something very much like it , my friend , if you advocate the claim of the of . do you approve of the selection of the late ? " " I be in the cabinet at the time , and will therefore say nothing against it . but I have never hear anything against this man 's character . " " nor in favour of it . to my thinking he have as much claim , and no more , as that man who just open the door . he be never see in the . " " surely that can not signify . " " you think , then , that he should have it ? " " you know what I think , " say the elder statesman thoughtfully . " in my opinion there be no doubt that you would best consult the honour of the country by allow she Majesty to bestow this act of upon a subject who have deserve so well from she as yourself . " " it be quite impossible . " " it seem to I , " say the , not appear to notice the refusal of he friend , " that in this peculiar position you should allow yourself to be persuade to lay aside you own feeling . no man of high character be desirous of secure to himself decoration which he may bestow upon other . " " just so . " " but here the decoration bestow upon the chief whom we all follow , would confer a wider honour upon many than it could do if give to any one else . " " the same may be say of any . " " not so . a commoner , without high permanent rank or large fortune , be not lowere in the world 's esteem by not be of the order . you will permit I to say -- that a of have not reach that position which he ought to enjoy unless he be a Knight of the Garter . " it must be borne in mind that the old , who use this argument , have himself wear the ribbon for the last thirty year . " but if -- " " well ;-- well . " " but if you be , -- I must call it obstinate . " " I be obstinate in that respect . " " then , " say the of , " I should recommend she to give it to the . " " never , " say the , with very unaccustomed energy . " I will never sanction the payment of such a price for service which should never be buy or sell . " " it would give no offence . " " that be not enough , my friend . here be a man of whom I only know that he have buy a great many marble statue . he have do nothing for he country , and nothing for he sovereign . " " if you be determined to look to what you call desert alone , I would name . " the frown and look unhappy . it be quite true that have contradict he , and that he have feel the injury grievously . " have be very true to we . " " yes ;-- true to we ! what be that ? " " he be in every respect a man of character , and well look upon in the country . there would be some enmity and a good deal of envy -- which might be avoid by either of the course I have propose ; but those course you will not take . I take it for grant that you be anxious to secure the support of those who generally act with . " " I do not know that I be . " the old shrug he shoulders . " what I mean be , that I do not think that we ought to pay a increase price for they support . he lordship be very well as the of a ; but he be not nearly so great a man as my friend . " " Cantrip would not join we . there be no evil in politics so great as that have seem to buy the man who will not come without buy . these reward be fairly give for political support . " " I have not , in truth , think of . " " he do not
not expect it any more than my butler . " " I only name he as have a claim stronger than any that can put forward . I have a man in my mind to whom I think such a honour be fairly due . what do you say to ? " the old open he mouth and lifte up he hand in unaffected surprise . the of be a old man of a very peculiar character . he have never open he mouth in the house of Lords and have never sit in the of . the political world know he not at all . he have a house in town , but very rarely live there . , in the parish of , have be he residence since he first come to the title forty year ago , and have be the scene of all he labour . he be a nobleman possess of a moderate fortune , and , as man say of he , of a moderate intellect . he have marry early in life and be bless with a large family . but he have certainly not be a idle man . for nearly half a century he have devote himself to the improvement of the labouring class , especially in reference to they abode and education , and have gradually , without any desire on he own part , work himself up into public notice . he be not a eloquent man , but he would take the chair at meeting after meet , and sit with admirable patience for long hour to hear the eloquence of other . he be a man very simple in he taste , and have brotch up he family to follow he habits . he have therefore be able to do munificent thing with moderate means , and in the long course of year have fail in hide he munificence from the public . , till after middle life , have not be much consider , but gradually there have grow up a feeling that there be not very many better man in the country . he be a fat , bald - head old man , who be always pull he spectacle on and off , nearly blind , very awkward , and altogether indifferent to appearance . probably he have no more idea of the in he own mind than he have of a 's hat . but he have grow into fame , and have not escape the notice of the . " do you know anything against ? " ask the . " certainly nothing against he , . " " anything in he favour ? " " I know he very well , -- I think I may say intimately . there be not a better man breathe . " " a honour to the peerage ! " say the . " a honour to humanity rather , " say the other , " as be of all man the least selfish and most philanthropical . " " what more can be say of a man ? " " but accord to my view he be not the sort of person whom one would wish to see make a Knight of the . if he have the ribbon he would never wear it . " " the honour surly do not consist in its outward sign . I be entitle to wear some kind of coronet , but I do not walk about with it on my head . he be a man of a great heart and of many virtue . surely the country , and she Majesty on behalf of the country , should delight to honour such a man . " " I really doubt whether you look at the matter in the right light , " say the ancient statesman , who be in truth frightene at what be be propose . " you must not be angry with I if I speak plainly . " " my friend , I do not think that it be within you power to make I angry . " " well then ,-- I will get you for a moment to listen to my view on the matter . there be certain great prize in the gift of the and of the of the , -- the greatest of which be now traditionally at the disposal of the . these be always give to party friend . I may perhaps agree with you that party support should not be look to alone . let we acknowledge that character and service should be take into account . but the very theory of we government will be overset by a reversal of the rule which I have attempt to describe . you will offend all you own friend , and only incur the ridicule of you opponent . it be no doubt desirable that the high seat of the country should be fill by man of both party . I would not wish to see every lord- Lieutenant of a county a . " in he enthusiasm the old go back to he old phraseology . " but I know that my opponent when they turn come will appoint they friend to the Lieutenancy , and that so the balance will be maintain . if you or I appoint they friend , they will not appoint ours . 's proxy have be in the hand of the Conservative leader of the of ever since he succeed he father . " then the old man pause , but he friend wait to listen whether the lecture be finish before he speak , and the of continue . " and , moreover , though be a very good man ,-- so much so that many of we may well envy he , -- he be not just the man fit for this destination . a Knight of
of the should be a man pro to show himself , a public man , one whose work in the country have bring he face to face with he fellows . there be a aptness , a propriety , a fitness in these thing which one can understand perhaps better than explain . " " those fitnesse and aptness change , I think , from day to day . there be a time when a knight should be a fight man . " " that have go by . " " and the aptness and fitnesse in accordance with which the sovereign of the day be induce to grase with the Garter such a man as the late of have , I hope , go by . you will admit that ? " " there be no such man propose . " " and other fitnesse and aptness will go by , till the time will come when the man to be select as of a county will be the man whose selection will be most beneficial to the county , and of the will be choose for they real virtue . " " I think you be quixotic . a be of all men bound to follow the tradition of he country , or , when he leave they , to leave they with very gradual step . " " and if he break that law and throw over all that thraldom ; -- what then ? " " he will lose the confidence which have make he what he be . " " it be well that I know the penalty . it be hardly heavy enough to enforce strict obedience . as for the matter in dispute , it have better stand over yet for a few day . " when the say this the old kknow very well that he intend to have he own way . and so it be . a week pass by , and then the write to the elder say that he have give to the matter all the consideration in he power , and that he have at last resolved to recommend she to bestow the ribbon on . he would not , however , take any step for a few day so that he friend might have a opportunity of make further remonstrance if he please . no further remonstrance be make , and , much to he own amazement , be nominate to the vacant Garter . the appointment be one certainly not popular with any of the 's friend . with some , such as , it indicate a determination on the part of the to declare he freedom from all those bond which have hitherto be bind on the head of government . have the select himself , certainly no offence would have be give . have the of be the happy man , excuse would have be make . but it be unpardonable to that he should have be pass over and that the Garter should have be give to . to the poor old the offence be of a different nature . he have intend to use a very strong word when he tell he friend that he propose conduct would be quixotic . the of would surely know that the of could not support a quixotic . and yet the younger , the of the last two year , -- after hear that word , -- have rebel against he Mentor , and have obstinately adhere to he Quixotism ! the greed of power have fall upon the man ,-- so say the dear old to himself , -- and the man 's fall be certain . Alas , alas ; have he be allow to go before the poison have enter he vein , how much less would have be he suffer ! " there be time " at the end of the third week in , when the session be still sit , and when no day have be absolutely as yet fix for the escape of member , receive a letter from he friend which certainly surprise he very much , and which leave he for a day or two unable to decide what answer ought to be give . it will be remember that destroy himself in , now three month since . the act have be more than a nine day ' wonder , have be keep in the memory of many man by the sedulous effort of , and by the fact that the name of so great a man as the be concerned in the matter . but gradually the feeling about have die away , and he fate , though it have outlive the nominal nine day , have sunk into general oblivion before the end of the ninth week . the have not forget the man , nor have . the name be still common in the column of the " 's , " and be never mention without be read by the unfortunate . but other have cease to talk of . to the mind , however , of Fletcher the fact of the man 's death be always present . a dreadful incubus have come upon he life , blight all he prospect , obscur all he sun by a great cloud , cover up all he hope , and change for he all he outlook into the world . it be not only that should not have become he wife , but that the woman whom he love with so perfect a love should have be sacrifice to so vile a creature as this man . he never blame she , -- but look upon he fate as . then on a sudden he hear that the incubus be remove . the man who have make he and she wretch have by a sudden stroke be take away and annihilate . there
there be nothing now between he and she , -- but a memory . he could certainly forgive , if she could forget . of course he have feel at the first moment that time must pass by . he have become certain that she mad love for the man have perish . he have be make sure that she have repent she own deed in sackcloth and ash . it have be acknowledge to he by she father that she have be anxious to be separate from she husband , if she husband would consent to such a separation . and then , remember as he do he last interview with she , have in he mind as he do every circumstance of that caress which he have give she , -- down to the very quiver of the finger he have press , -- he could not but flatter himself that at last he have touch she heart . but there must be time ! the convention of the world operate on all heart , especially on the female heart , and teach that new vow , too quickly give , be disgraceful . the world have seem to decide that a widow should take two year before she can bestow herself on a second man without a touch of scandal . but the two year be to include everything , the courtship of the second as well as the burial of the first , -- and not only the courtship , but the preparation of the dress and the wedding itself . and then this case be different from all other . of course there must be time , but surely not here a full period of two year ! why should the life of two young person be so waste , if it be the case that they love each other ? there be horror here , remorse , pity , perhaps pardon ; but there be no love , -- none of that love which be always for a time increase in its fervour by the loss of the love object ; none of that passionate devotion which must at first make the very idea of another man 's love intolerable . there have be a great escape , -- a escape which could not but be inwardly acknowledge , however little prone the tongue might be to confess it . of course there must be time ; -- but how much time ? he argue it in he mind daily , and at each daily argument the time consider by he to be appropriate be shorten . three month have pass and he have not yet see she . he have resolve that he would not even attempt to see she till she father should consent . but surely a period have pass sufficient to justify he in apply for that permission . and then he bethotch himself that it would be best in apply for that permission to tell everything to . he well know that he would be tell no secret . know the state of he feeling as well as he know it himself . if ever there be a case in which time might be abridge , this be one ; and therefore he write he letter , -- as follow :-- 3 , ---- , , , 187 -- . my , it be a matter of great regret to I that we should see so little of each other , -- and especially of regret that I should never now see Emily . I may as well rush into the matter at once . of course this letter will not be show to she , and therefore I may write as I would speak if I be with you . the wretch man whom she marry be gone , and my love for she be the same as it be before she have ever see he , and as it have always be from that day to this . I could not address you or even think of she as yet , do I not know that that marriage have be unfortunate . but it have not alter she to I in the least . it have be a dreadful trouble to we all , -- to she , to you , to I , and to all connect with we . but it be over , and I think that it should be look back upon as a black chasm which we have bridge and get over , and to which we need never cast back we eye . I have no right to think that , though she might some day love another man , she would , therefore , love I ; but I think that I have a right to try , and I know that I should have you good - will . it be a question of time , but if I let time go by , some one else may slip in . who can tell ? I would not be think to press indecently , but I do feel that here the ordinary rule which govern man and woman be not to be follow . he make she unhappy almost from the first day . she have make a mistake which you and she and all acknowledge . she have be punish ; and so have I ,-- very severely I can assure you . would not it be a good thing to bring all this to a end as soon as possible , -- if it can be bring to a end in the way I want ? pray tell I what you think . I would propose that you should ask she to see I , and then say just as much as you please . of course I should not press she at first . you might ask
ask I to dinner , and all that kind of thing , and so she would get used to I . it be not as though we have not be very , very old friend . but I know you will do the best . I have put off writing to you till I sometimes think that I shall go mad over it if I sit still any longer . you affectionate friend , . when get this letter he be very much puzzl . could he have have he wish , he too would have leave the chasm behind he as propose by he young friend , and have never cast a eye back upon the frightful abyss . he would willingly have allow the whole incident to be pass over as a episode in they life , which , if it could not be forget , should at any rate never be mention . they have all be severely punished , as have say , and if the matter could end there he would be well content to bear on he own shoulders all that remain of that punishment , and to let everything begin again . but he know very well it could not be so with she . even yet it be impossible to induce Emily to think of she husband without regret . it have be only too manifest during the last year of they marry life that she have feel horror rather than love towards he . when there have be a question of he leave she behind , should he go to , she have always express herself more than willing to comply with such a arrangement . she would go with he should he order she to do so , but would infinitely sooner remain in . and then , too , she have speak of he while alive with disdain and disgust , and have submit to hear she father describe he as infamous . she life have be one long misery , under which she have see gradually to be perish . now she be relieved , and she health be re-establish . a certain amount of unjoyous cheerfulness be return to she . it be impossible to doubt that she must have know that a great burden have fall from she back . and yet she would never allow he name to be mention without give some outward sign of affection for he memory . if he be bad , so be other bad . there be many worse than he . such be the excuse she make for she late husband . , who really think that in all he experience he have never know any one worse than he son - in - law , would sometimes become testy , and at last resolved that he would altogether hold he tongue . but he could hardly hold he tongue now . he , no doubt , have already form he hope in regard to . he have trust that the man whom he have teach himself some year since to regard as he wish - for son - in - law , might be constant and strong enough in he love to forget all that be past , and to be still willing to redeem he daughter from misery . but as day have crept on since the scene at the , he have become aware that time must do much before such relief would be accept . it be , however , still possible that the presence of the man might do something . , since the deed have be do , no stranger have dine in . she herself have see no visitor . she have hardly leave the house except to go to church , and then have be envelope in the deepest crape . once or twice she have allow herself to be drive out in a carriage , and , when she have do so , she father have always accompany she . no widow , since the seclusion of widow be first ordained , have be more strict in maintain the restraint of widowhood as enjoin . how then could he bid she receive a new lover , -- or how suggest to she that a lover be possible ? and yet he do not like to answer without name some period for the present mourning , -- some time at which he might at least show himself in . " I have have a letter from , " he say to he daughter a day or two after he have receive it . he be sit after dinner , and be also in the room . " be he in ? " she ask . " no ; -- he be up in town , attend to the of , I suppose . he have something to say to I , and as we be not in the way of meet he write . he want to come and see you . " " not yet , papa . " " he talk of come and dine here . " " oh yes ; pray let he come . " " you would not mind that ? " " I would dine early and be out of the way . I should be so glad if you would have somebody sometimes . I should not think then that I be such a -- such a restraint to you . " but this be not what desire . " I should not like that , my dear . of course he would know that you be in the house . " " upon my word , I think you might meet a old friend like that , " say . she look at she brother , and then at she father , and burst into tear . " of course you shall
shall not be press if it would be irksome to you , " say she father . " it be the first plunge that hurt , " say . " if you could once bring yourself to do it , you would find afterwards that you be more comfortable . " " , " she say slowly , " I know what it mean . he goodness I shall always remember . you may tell he I say so . but I can not meet he yet . " then they press she no further . of course she have understand . she father could not even ask she to say a word which might give comfort to as to some long distant time . he go down to the of the next day , and see he young friend there . then they walk up and down for nearly a hour , talk over the matter with the most absolute freedom . " it can not be for the benefit of any one , " say , " that she should immolate herself like a indian widow , -- and for the sake of such a man as that ! of course I have no right to dictate to you ,-- hardly , perhaps , to give a opinion . " " yes , yes , yes . " " it do seem to I , then , that you ought to force she out of that kind of thing . why should she not go down to ? " " in time , , -- in time . " " but people 's life be run away . " " my dear fellow , if you be to see she you would know how vain it would be to try to hurry she . there must be time . " the of the session the of have be very much disappointed . he have contradict with a repetition of no the assertion of the Duchess that he have be the who have place the 's crown on the head of the of , but no doubt he feel in he heart that he have do so much towards it that he advice respect the vacant , when give with so much weight , should have be follow . he be a old man , and have know the secret of when he younger friend be a little boy . he have give advice to , and have be one of the first to congratulate when that statesman become a free - trader . he have sit in conclave with the , and have listen to the bold Liberalism of old , both in the and the . he have be always great in council , never give he advice unasked , nor throw he pearl before swine , and cautious at all time to avoid excess on this side or on that . he have never allow himself a hobby horse of he own to ride , have never be ambitious , have never seek to be the ostensible leader of man . but he do now think that when , with all he experience , he speak very much in earnest , some attention should be pay to what he say . when he have describe a certain line of conduct as he have be very much in earnest . he do not usually indulge in strong language , and , when apply to the conduct of a , be , to he idea , very strong . the thing describe as have now be do , and the of be a disappointed man . for a hour or two he think that he must gently secede from all private councils with the . to resign , or to put impediment in the way of he own chief , do not belong to he character . that line of strategy have come into fashion since he have lear not he political rudiment , and be very odious to he . but in all party compact there must be inner party , peculiar bond , and confidences stricter , stronger , and also sweeter than those which bind together the twenty or thirty gentleman who form a government . from those closer tie which have hitherto bound he to the of he think , for a while , that he must divorce himself . surely on such a subject as the nomination of a Knight of the he advice might have be take , -- if only because it have come from he ! and so he keep himself apart for a day or two , and even in the house of Lords cease to whisper kindly , cheerful word into the ear of he next neighbour . but various remembrance crowd in upon he by degree , compelle he to moderate and at last to abandon he purpose . among these the first be the memory of the kiss which he have give the Duchess . the woman have tell he that she love he , that he be one of the very few whom she do love , -- and the word have go straight into he old heart . she have bay he not to desert she ; and he have not only give she he promise , but he have convert that promise to a sacred pledge by a kiss . he have know well why she have exact the promise . the turmoil in she husband 's mind , the agony which he sometimes endure when people speak ill of he , the aversion which he have at first genuinely feel to a office for which he hardly think himself fit , and now the gradual love of power create by the exercise of power , have all be see by she , and have create that solicitude which have induce she to ask
ask for the promise . the old have know they both well , but have hardly as yet give the Duchess credit for so true a devotion to she husband . it now seem to he that though she have fail to love the man , she have give she entire heart to the . he sympathise with she altogether , and , at any rate could not go back from he promise . and then he remembe , too , that if this man do anything amiss in the high office which he have be make to fill , he who have induce he to fill it be responsible . what right have he , the of , to be angry because he friend be not all - wise at all point ? let the Drought and the Drummonds and the quarrel among themselves or with they colleague . he belong to a different school , in the teaching of which there be less perhaps of excitement and more of long -suffer ; -- but surly , also , more of nobility . he be , at any rate , too old to change , and he would therefore be true to he friend through evil and through good . have think this all out he again whisper some cheery word to the , as they sit listen to the denunciation of , a liberal lord , much use to business , but who have not be receive into the Coalition . the first whisper and the second whisper the receive very coldly . he have fully appreciate the discontinuance of the whisper , and be aware of the cause . he have make a selection on he own unassisted judgment in opposition to he old friend 's advice , and this be the result . let it be so ! all he friend be turn away from he and he would have to stand alone . if so , he would stand alone till the pendulum of the house of Commons have tell he that it be time for he to retire . but gradually the determined good - humour of the old man prevail . " he have a wonderful gift of say nothing with second - rate dignity , " whisper the repentant friend , speak of . " a very honest man , " say the in return . " a sort of bastard honesty , -- by precept out of stupidity . there be no real conviction in it , beget by thought . " this little bit of criticism , harsh as it be , have the effect , and the become less miserable than he have be . but forgave nothing . he still hold he office , but more than once he be see in private conference with both and . he do not attempt to conceal he anger . ! a old woman ! one whom no other man in would have think of make a Knight of the Garter ! it be not , he say , personal disappointment in himself . there be half - a - dozen per whom he would willingly have see so grac without the slightest chagrin . but this must have be do simply to show the 's power , and to let the world understand that he owe nothing and would pay nothing to he supporter . it be almost a disgrace , say , to belong to a government the head of which could so commit himself ! the session be nearly at a end , and think that no step could be conveniently take now . but it be quite clear to he that this state of thing could not be continue . it be observ that and the never speak to each other in the house , and that the of for the , -- that be the office which he hold , -- never rise in he place after 's nomination , unless to say a word or two as to he own peculiar duty . it be very soon know to all the world that there be war to the knife between and the . and , strange to say , there seem to be some feeling of general discontent on this very trifling subject . when have be much too just the oyster - shell become numerous . it be say that the have be guilty of pretentious love of virtue in take out of he own path of life and force he to write after he name . there come out a article , of course in the " 's , " head , " we 's , " in which poor be ridicule in a very unbecoming manner , and in which it be assert that the thing be do as a counterpoise to the iniquity display in " hound to he death . " whenever be mention he have always be hound . and then the article go on to declare that either the have quarrell with all he colleague , or else that all he colleague have quarrell with the . do not care which it might be , but , whichever it might be , the poor country have to suffer when such a state of thing be permit . it be notorious that neither the of nor would now even speak to they own chief , so thoroughly be they disgust with he conduct . indeed it seem that the only ally the have in he own cabinet be the irish adventurer , . never read a word of all this , and be altogether undisturbed as he sit in he chair in , -- or just at this time of the year more frequently in the province . but the of read it all . after what have pass he do not dare to show it to he brother .
. he do not dare to tell he friend that it be say in the newspaper that they do not speak to each other . but every word from 's pen settle on he own memory , and add to he torment . it come to be a fix idea in the 's mind that be a gadfly send to the earth for the express purpose of worry he . and as a matter of course the in he own mind blame himself for what he have do . it be the chief torment of a person constitute as he be that strong as may be the determination to do a thing , fix as may be the conviction that that thing ought to be do , no sooner have it be perfect than the objection of other , which before have be inefficacious , become suddenly endow with truth and force . he do not like be tell by that he ought not to have set he cabinet against he , but when he have in fact do so , then he believe what tell he . as soon almost as the irrevocable letter have be win on its way to , he see the absurdity of send it . who be he that he should venture to set aside all the tradition of office ? a or a Peel or a might have do so , because they have be abnormally strong . they have be by the work of they own hand , hold they power against the whole world . but he , -- he tell himself daily that he be only there by sufferance , because at the moment no one else could be find to take it . in such a condition should he not have be bound by the traditions of office , bound by the advice of one so experienced and so true as the of ? and for whom have he break through these tradition and throw away this advice ? for a man who have no power whatever to help he or any other of the ; -- for one whose every pursuit in life be at variance with the acquisition of such honour as that now thrust upon he ! he could see he own obstinacy , and could even hate the pretentious love of virtue which he have himself display . " have you see with he ribbon ? " he wife say to he . " I do not know by sight , " he reply angrily . " any one else either . but he would have come and show himself to you , if he have have a spark of gratitude in he composition . as far as I can learn you have sacrifice the for he sake . " " I do my duty as best I know how to do it , " say the , almost with ferocity , " and it little become you to taunt I with any deficiency . " " ! " " I be drive , " he say , " almost beyond myself , and it kill I when you take part against I . " " take part against you ! surely there be very little in what I say . " and yet , as she speak , she repent bitterly that she have at the moment allow herself to relapse into the sort of badinage which have be usual with she before she have understand the extent of he suffering . " if I trouble you by what I say , I will certainly hold my tongue . " " do not repeat to I what that man say in the newspaper . " " you should not regard the man , . you should not allow the paper to come into you hand . " " am I to be afraid of see what man say of I ? never ! but you need not repeat it , at any rate if it be false . " she have not see the article in question or she certainly would not have repeat the accusation which it contain . " I have quarrell with no colleague . if such a one as choose to think himself injur , be I to stoop to he ? nothing strike I so much in all this as the ill - nature of the world at large . when they use to bait a bear tie to a stake , every one around would cheer the dog and help to torment the helpless animal . it be much the same now , only they have a man instead of a bear for they pleasure . " " I will never help the dog again , " she say , come up to he and cling within the embrace of he arm . he know that he have be quixotic , and he would sit in he chair repeat the word to himself aloud , till he himself begin to fear that he would do it in company . but the thing have be do and could not be undone . he have have the bestowal of one Garter , and he have give it to ! it be , -- he tell himself , but not correctly , -- the only thing that he have do on he own undivided responsibility since he have be . the last day of have pass , and it have be at last decided that the session should close on the 11th of . now the 11th of be think to be a great deal too near the 12th to allow of such a arrangement be consider satisfactory . a great many member be very angry at the arrangement . it have be say all through and into that it be to be a early session , and yet thing have be
be so mismanaged that when the end come everything could not be finish without keep member of parliament in town up to the 11th of ! in the memory of present legislator there have never be anything so awkward . the fault , if there be a fault , be attributable to . in all probability the delay be unavoidable . a minister can not control long - win gentleman , and when gentleman be very long - win there must be delay . no doubt a strong minister can exercise some control , and it be certain that long - win gentleman find a unusual scope for they breath when the reigning dynasty be weak . in that way and the may have be responsible , but they be blame as though they , for they own special amusement , detain gentleman in town . indeed the gentleman be not detain . they grumble and grow and then fle , -- but they grumbling and growling be hear even after they departure . " well ; -- what do you think of it all ? " the say one day to , at the Treasury , affect a air of cheery good - humour . " I think , " say , " that the country be very prosperous . I do not know that I ever remember trade to have be more evenly satisfactory . " " ah , yes . that be very well for the country , and ought , I suppose , to satisfy we . " " it satisfie I , " say . " and I , in a way . but if you be walk about in a very tight pair of boot , in a agony with you foot , would you be able just then to relish the news that agricultural wage in that parish have go up sixpence a week ? " " I would take my boot off , and then try , " say . " that be just what I be think of do . if I have my boot off all that prosperity would be so pleasant to I ! but you see you can not take you boot off in company . and it may be that you have a walk before you , and that no boot will be worse for you foot even than tight one . " " we will have we boot off soon , , " say , speak of the recess . " and when shall we be quit of they altogether ? joke apart , they have to be worn if the country require it . " " certainly , . " " and it may be that you and I think that upon the whole they may be wear with advantage . what do the country say to that ? " " the country have never say the reverse . we have not have a majority against we this session on any government question . " " but we have have narrowing majority . what will the do as to the ' amendment on the ? " there be a that have go down from the of , but have not originate with the government . it have , however , be foster by in the house of Lords , and have be send back with certain amendment for which the have make himself responsible . it be therefore now almost a government measure . the manipulation of this measure have be one of the cause of the prolonged sitting of the house . " Grogrbe say they will take the amendment . " " and if they do not ? " " why then , " say , " the Lord must take we rejection . " " and we shall have be beaten , " say the . " undoubtedly . " " and beaten simply because the desire to beat we . I be tell that intend to speak and vote against the amendment . " " what ,-- on one side , and on the other ? " " so tell I , " say the . " if it be so , what be we to do ? " " certainly not go out in , " say . when the time come for the consideration of the 's amendment in the of , -- and it do not come till the 8th of , -- the matter be exactly as the have say . , with a great deal of earnestness , support the Lord ' amendment , -- as he be in honour bound to do . the amendment have come from he chief , the , and have indeed be discuss with before it have be propose . he be very much in earnest ; -- but it be evident from 's earnestness that he expect a violent opposition . immediately after he rise . now be a pretentious man , who assume to be not only a advocate but a lawyer . and he assume also to be a political magnate . he go into the matter at great length . he begin by say that it be not a party question . the , which he have have the honour of support before it go from they own , have be a private . as such it have receive a general support from the government . it have be materially alter in the other under the auspices of he noble friend on the woolsack , but from those alteration he be oblige to dissent . then he say some very heavy thing against the , and increase in acerbity as he describe what he call the altered mind of he honourable and learn friend the - . he then make some very uncomplimentary allusion to the , whom he accuse of be more than ordinarily reserve with
with he subordinate . the speech be manifestly arrange and deliver with the express view of damage the , of which at the time he himself make a part . observ that thing be very much alte when such a course as that be take in the house of Commons . but that be the course take on this occasion by , and be so far take with success that the 's amendment be reject and the government be beat in a thin , by a large majority , -- compose partly of its own man . " what be I to do ? " ask the of the old . the old 's answer be exactly the same as that give by . " we can not resign in . " and then he go on . " we must wait and see how thing go at the beginning of next session . the chief question be whether should not be ask to resign . " then the session be at a end , and they who have be staunch to the last get out of town as quick as the train could carry they . prepares to move the Duchess of be not the most discreet woman in the world . that be admit by she best friend , and be the great sin allege against she by she worst enemie . in she desire to say sharp thing , she would say the sharp thing in the wrong place , and in she wish to be good - nature she be apt to run into offence . just as she be about to leave town , which do not take place for some day after parliament have risen , she make a indiscreet proposition to she husband . " should you mind my ask down to ? we shall only be a very small party . " now the very name of be terrible to the 's ears . anything which recall the wretch and that wretch tragedy to the 's mind give he a stab . the Duchess ought to have feel that any communication between she husband and even the man 's widow be to be avoid rather than seek . " quite out of the question ! " say the , draw himself up . " why out of the question ? " " there be a thousand reason . I could not have it . " " then I will say nothing more about it . but there be a romance there , -- something quite touch . " " you do not mean that she have -- a lover ? " " well ; -- yes . " " and she lose she husband only the other day , -- lose he in so terrible a manner ! if that be so , certainly I do not wish to see she again . " " ah , that be because you do not know the story . " " I do not wish to know it . " " the man who now want to marry she know she long before she have see , and have offer to she ever so many time . he be a fine fellow , and you know he . " " I have rather not hear any more about it , " say the , walk away . there be a end to the Duchess 's scheme of get Emily down to ,-- a scheme which could hardly have be successful even have the not object to it . but yet the Duchess would not abandon she project of befriend the widow . she have injured . she have like what she have see of . and she be now endeavour to take by the hand . she call therefore at on the day before she start for , and leave a card and a note . this be on the 15th of , when be as empty as it ever be . the street at the be desert . the house be shut up . the very sweepers of the crossing seem to have go out of town . the public office be mann by one or two unfortunate each , who consol themselves by read novel at they desk . half the cab-driver have go apparently to the seaside , -- or to bed . the shop be still open , but all the respectable shopkeeper be either in or at they marine villa . the travelling world have divide itself into Cookites and Hookites ; -- those who escape trouble under the auspices of , and those who boldly combate the extortion of foreign innkeeper and the anti-Anglican tendency of foreign railway official " on they own hook . " the Duchess of be nevertheless in town , and the might still be see go in at the back entrance of the chamber every day at eleven o'clock . think it very hard , for he , too , could shoot grouse ; but he would have perish rather than have speak a word . the Duchess do not ask to see , but leave she card and a note . she have not like , she say , to leave town without call , though she would not seek to be admit . she hope that be recover she health , and trust that on she return to town she might be allow to renew she acquaintance . the note be very simple , and could not be take as other than friendly . if she have be simply , and she husband have be a junior clerk in the Treasury , such a visit would have be a courtesy ; and it be not less so because it be make by the Duchess of and by the wife of the . but yet among all the poor widow 's acquaintance she
she be the only one who have venture to call since have destroy himself . have be tell not to come . have be sternly reject . even old . when she have be up in town have , after a very solemn meeting with , contente herself with send she love . it have come to pass that the idea of be immure be grow to be natural to Emily herself . the longer that it be continue the more do it seem to be impossible to she that she should break from she seclusion . but yet she be gratify by the note from the Duchess . " she mean to be civil , papa . " " oh yes ; -- but there be people whose civility I do not want . " " certainly . I do not want the civility of that horrid . but I can understand this . she think that she do a injury . " " when you begin , my dear , -- and I hope it will be soon , -- to get back to the world , you will find it more comfortable , I think , to find yourself among you own people . " " I do not want to go back , " she say , sobb bitterly . " but I want you to go back . all who know you want you to go back . only do not begin at that end . " " you do not suppose , papa , that I wish to go to the Duchess ? " " I wish you to go somewhere . it can not be good for you to remain here . indeed I shall think it wick , or at any rate weak , if you continue to seclude yourself . " " where shall I go ? " she say , imploringly . " to . I certainly think you ought to go there first . " " if you would go , papa , and leave I here , -- just this once . next year I will go , -- if they ask I . " " when I may be dead , for atch that any of we know . " " do not say that , papa . of course any one may die . " " I certainly shall not go without you . you may take that as certain . be it likely that I should leave you alone in and in this great gloomy house ? if you stay , I shall stay . " now this mean a great deal more than it have mean in former year . since have die have not once dine at the . he come home regularly at six o'clock , sit with he daughter a hour before dinner , and then remain with she all the evening . it seem as though he be determined to force she out of she solitude by she natural consideration for he . she would implore he to go to he club and have he rubber , but he would never give way . no ;--he do not care for the , and dislike whist . so he say . till at last he speak more plainly . " you be dull enough here all day , and I will not leave you in the evening . " there be a pertinacious tenderness in this which she have not expect from the antecedent of he life . when , therefore , he tell she that he would not go into the country without she , she feel herself almost constrain to yield . and she would have yield at once but for one fear . how could she insure to herself that should not be there ? of course he would be at , and how could she prevent he come over from to ? she could hardly bring herself to ask the question of she father . but she feel a insuperable objection to find herself in 's presence . of course she love he . of course in all the world he be of all the dearest to she . of course if she could wipe out the past as with a wet towel , if she could put the crape off she mind as well as from she limb , she would become he wife with the greatest joy . but the very feel that she love he be disgraceful to she in she own thought . she have allow he caress while be still she husband , -- the husband who have ill - use she and betraye she , who have seek to drag she down to he own depth of baseness . but now she could not endure to think that that other man should even touch she . it be forbidden to she , she believe , by all the canons of womanhood even to think of love again . there ink to be nothing leave for she but crape and weeper . she have do it all by she own obstinacy , and she could make no compensation either to she family , or to the world , or to she own feeling , but by drink the cup of she misery down to the very dregs . even to think of joy would in she be a treason . on that occasion she do not yield to she father , conquer he as she have conquer he before by the pleading of she look rather than of she word . but a day or two afterwards he come to she with argument of a very different kind . he at any rate must go to immediately , in reference to a letter of vital importance which he have receive from . the reader may perhaps remember that 's heir , -- the
the heir to the title and property , -- be a nephew for whom he entertain no affection whatever . this have be discard by all the Wharton as a profligate drunkard . some year ago Alured have endeavoure to reclaim the man , and have spend perhaps more money than he have be justified in do in the endeavour , see that , as present occupier of the property , he be bound to provide for he own daughter , and that at he death every acre must go to this ne 'er - do - well . the money have be allow to flow like water for a twelvemonth , and have do no good whatever . there have then be no hope . the man be strong and likely to live , -- and after a while marry a wife , some woman that he take from the very street . this have be he last know achievement , and from that moment not even have he name be mention at . now there come the tiding of he death . it be say that he have perish in some attempt to cross some glacier in ; -- but by degree it appear that the glacier itself have be less dangerous than the brandy which he have swallow whilst on he journey . at any rate he be dead . as to that 's letter be certain . and he be equally certain that he have leave no son . these tiding be quite as important to as to , -- more important to than to either of they , as he would inherit all after the death of those two old man . at this moment he be away yacht with a friend , and even he address be unknown . letter for he be to be send to , and might , or might not , reach he in the course of a month . but in a man of 's feeling , this catastrophe produce a great change . the heir to he title and property be one whom he be bound to regard with affection and almost with reverence , -- if it be only possible for he to do so . with he late heir it have be impossible . but he have always like . have not be quite all that he father and uncle have wish . but he fault have be exactly those which would be cure , -- or would almost be make virtue , -- by the possession of a title and property . Distaste for a profession and aptitude for parliament would become a young man who be here not only to the estate , but to half he father 's money . Alure in he letter express a hope that might be inform instantly . he would have write himself have he know 's address . but he do know that he elder cousin be in town , and he besotch he elder cousin to come at once , -- quite at once , -- to . Emily , he say , would of course accompany she father on such a occasion . then there be long letter from , and even from , to Emily . the Wharton must have be very much move when could be induce to write a long letter . the Whartons be very much move . they be in a state of enthusiasm at these news , amount almost to fury . it seem as though they think that every tenant and labourer on the estate , and every tenant and labourer 's wife , would be in a abnormal condition and unfit for the duty of life , till they should have see as here of the property . go so far as to tell Emily which bedroom be be prepare for , -- a bedroom very different in honour from any by the occupation of which he have as yet be grac . and there be twenty point as to know wills and new deed as to which the present baronet want the immediate advice of he cousin . there be a score of thing which could now be do which be before impossible . tree could be cut down , and building put up ; and a little bit of land sell , and a little bit of land buy ; -- the doing of all which would give new life to . a life interest in a estate be a much pleasanter thing when the heir be a friend who can be walk about the property , than when he be a enemy who must be keep at arm 's length . all these delights could now be 's , -- if the old hey would give he he counsel and the young one he assistance . this change in affair occasion some flutter also in . it could not make much difference personally to old . he be , in fact , as old as the baronet , and do not pay much regard to he own chance of succession . but the position be one which would suit he son admirably , and he be now on good term with he son . he have convince himself that have do all that he could to separate they , and therefore find himself to be more bound to he son than ever . " we must go at once , " he say to he daughter , speak almost as though he have forget she misery for the moment . " I suppose you and ought to be there . " " heaven know where be . I ought to be there , and I suppose that on such a occasion as this you will condescmend to go with I . " " Condescend , papa ; -- what do that mean ? " "
" you know I can not go alone . it be out of the question that I should leave you here . " " why , papa ? " " and at such a time the family ought to come together . of course they will take it very much amiss if you refuse . what will think if you refuse after she write such a letter as that ? it be my duty to tell you that you ought to go . you can not think that it be right to throw over every friend that you have in the world . " there be a great deal more say in which it almost see that the father 's tenderness have be wear out . he word be much rougher and more imperious than any that he have yet speak since he daughter have become a widow , but they be also more efficacious , and therefore probably more salutary . after twenty - four hour of this she find that she be oblige to yield , and a telegram be send to , -- by no means the first telegram that have be send since the news have arrive , -- say that would accompany she father . they be to occupy themselves for two day further in preparation for they journey . these preparations to be so sad as almost to break she heart . she have never as yet pack up she widow 's weed . she have never as yet even contemplate the necessity of come down to dinner in they before other eye than those of she father and brother . she have as yet make none of those struggle with which widow seek to lessen the deformity of they costume . it be incumbent on she now to get a ribbon or two less ghastly than those weeper which have , for the last five month , hang about she face and shoulders . and then how should she look if he be to be there ? it be not to be expect that the Wharton should seclude themselves because of she grief . this very change in the circumstance of the property would be sure , of itself , to bring the Fletcher to , -- and then how should she look at he , how answer he , if he speak to she tenderly ? it be very hard for a woman to tell a lie to a man when she love he . she may speak the word . she may be able to assure he that he be indifferent to she . but when a woman really love a man , as she love this man , there be a desire to touch he which quiver at she finger ' end , a longing to look at he which she can not keep out of she eye , a inclination to be near he which affect every motion of she body . she can not refrain herself from excessive attention to he word . she have a god to worship , and she can not control she admiration . of all this herself feel much , -- but feel at the same time that she would never pardon herself if she betraye she love by a gleam of she eye , by the tone of a word , or the movement of a finger . what ,-- should she be know to love again after such a mistake as hers , after such a catastrophe ? the evening before they start who should bustle into the house but himself . it be then about six o'clock , and he be go to leave by the night mail . that he should be a little give to bustle on such a occasion may perhaps be forgive he . he have hear the news down on the Scotch coast , and have fly up to , telegraph as he do so backwards and forward to . of course he feel that the destruction of he cousin among the glacier ,-- whether by brandy or ice he do not much care , -- have make he for the nonce one of the important people of the world . the young man who would not so feel might be the better philosopher , but one might doubt whether he would be the better young man . he quite agree with he father that it be he sister 's duty to go to , and he be now in a position to speak with authority as to the duty of member of he family . he could not wait , even for one night , in order that he might travel with they . be impatient . want he in . have say that on such a occasion he , the heir , ought to be on the property with the shortest possible delay . he father smile ; -- but with a approve smile . Everett therefore start by the night mail , leave he father and sister to follow he on the morrow . the 's the , before he go to , twice remind that he be expect there in a day or two . " the say that you wife be come to - morrow , " the say on the day of he departure . but could not go then . he service to he country be require among the dockyard and ship , and he postpone he visit till the end of . then he start for , have the double pleasure before he of meet he wife and he noble host and hostess . he find a small party there , but not so small as the have once suggest to he . " you wife will be there , of course , . she be too good to desert I in my trouble . and there will
will probably be . be to the what you wife be to I . I do not suppose there will be anybody else ,-- except , perhaps , . " but be not there . in place of there be the and of , with they daughter , two or three Palliser offshoot , with they wife , and . there be , too , the Bishop of the diocese with he wife , and three or four other , come and go , so that the party never seem to be too small . " we ask , " say the Duchess in a whisper to , " but he decline , with a string of florid compliment . when will not come to the 's house , you may depend that something be go to happen . it be like pig carry straw in they mouth . be my pig . " Phinea only laugh and say that he do not believe to be a better pig than any one else . it be soon apparent to that the 's manner to he be entirely alter , so much so that he be compelle to acknowledge to himself that he have not hithertoo read the 's character aright . Hitherto he have never find the pleasant in conversation . look back he could hardly remember that he have in truth ever converse with the . the man have seem to shut himself up as soon as he have utter certain word which the circumstance of the moment have demand . whether it be arrogance or shyness Phineas have not know . he wife have say that the be shy . have he be arrogant the effect would have be the same . he be unbending , hard , and lucid only when he speak on some detail of business , or on some point of policy . but now he smile , and though hesitat a little at first , very soon fell into the way of a pleasant country host . " you shoot , " say the . do shoot but car very little about it . " but you hunt . " be very fond of ri to hound . " I be begin to think , " say the , " that I have make a mistake in not care for such thing . when I be very young I give they up , because it appear that other man devote too much time to they . one might as well not eat because some man be glutton . " " only that you would die if you do not eat . " " bread , I suppose , would keep I alive , but still one eat meat without be a glutton . I very often regret the want of amusement , and particularly of those which would throw I more among my fellow - creature . a man be alone when read , alone when write , alone when think . even sit in parliament he be very much alone , though there be a crowd around he . now a man can hardly be thoroughly useful unless he know he fellow - man , and how be he to know they if he shut himself up ? if I have to begin again I think I would cultivate the amusement of the time . " not long after this the ask he whether he be go to join the shoot man on that morning . declare that he hand be too full of business for any amusement before lunch . " then , " say the , " will you walk with I in the afternoon ? there be nothing I really like so much as a walk . there be some very pretty point where the river skirt the park . and I will show you the spot on which perform the feat for which the king give he this property . it be a grand time when a man could get half - a - dozen parish because he tick the king 's fancy . " " but suppose he do not tickle the king 's fancy ? " " ah , then indeed , it might go otherwise with he . but I be glad to say that be a accomplished courtier . " the walk be take , and the pretty bend of the river be see ; but they be look at without much earnestness , and 's great deed be not again mention . the conversation go away to other matters . of course it be not long before the be deep in discuss the probability of the next session . it be soon apparent to that the be no longer desirous of resigning , though he speak very freely of the probable necessity there might be for he to do so . at the present moment he be in he best humour . he foot be on he own property . he could see the prosperity around he . the spot be the one which he love best in all the world . he like he present companion , who be one to whom he be entitle to speak with freedom . but there be still present to he the sense of some injury from which he could not free himself . of course he do not know that he have be haughty to , to , and other . but he do know that he have intend to be true , and he think that they have be treacherous . twelve month ago there have be a goal before he which he might attain , a win - post which be still within he reach . there be in store for he the tranquillity of retirement which he would enjoy as soon as a sense of duty would permit he to seize it .
. but now the prospect of that happiness have gradually vanished from he . that retirement be no longer a win - post for he . the poison of place and power and dignity have get into he blood . as he look forward he fear rather than sigh for retirement . " you think it will go against we , " he say . do think so . there be hardly a man high up in the party who do not think so . when one branch of a have gradually drop off , the other branch will hardly flourish long . and then the tint of a political be so neutral and unallur that man will only endure they when they feel that no more pronounced colour be within they reach . " after all , " say , " the inning have not be a bad one . it have be of service to the country , and have last longer than most man expect . " " if it have be of service to the country , that be everything . it should at least be everything . with the statesman to whom it be not everything there must be something wrong . " the , as he say this , be preach to himself . he be tell himself that , though he see the better way , he be allow himself to walk on in that which be worse . for it be not only Phineas who could see the change , -- or the old , or the Duchess . it be apparent to the man himself , though he could not prevent it . " I sometimes think , " he say , " that we whom chance have lead to be meddler in the game of politics sometimes give ourselves hardly time enough to think what we be about . " " a man may have to work so hard , " say , " that he have no time for thinking . " " or more probably , may be so eager in party conflict that he will hardly keep he mind cool enough for thought . it seem to I that many man , -- men whom you and I know ,-- embrace the profession of politics not only without political conviction , but without see that it be proper that they should entertain they . chance bring a young man under the guidance of this or that elder man . he have come of a family , as be my case , -- or from some old Tory stock ; and loyalty keep he true to the interest which have first push he forward into the world . there be no conviction there . " " conviction grow . " " yes ; -- the conviction that it be the man 's duty to be a staunch , but not the reason why . or a man see he opening on this side or on that , -- as be the case with the lawyer . or he have a body of man at he back ready to support he on this side or on that , as we see with commercial man . or perhaps he have some vague idea that aristocracy be pleasant , and he become a Conservative , -- or that democracy be prosper , and he become a . you be a , . " " certainly , . " " why ? " " well ; -- after what you have say I will not boast of myself . experience , however , seem to show I that be demand by the country . " " so , perhaps , at certain epoch , may the and all he work ; but you will hardly say that you will carry the 's colour because the country may like the . it be not sufficient , I think , to say that be demand . you should first know what mean , and then assure yourself that the thing itself be good . I dare say you have do so ; but I see some who never make the inquiry . " " I will not claim to be better than my neighbour , -- I mean my real neighbour . " " I understand ; I understand , " say the laugh . " you prefer some good on the opposition benche to and the Pharisee . it be hard to come woun out of the fight , and then to see he who should be you friend not only walk by on the other side , but flinge a stone at you as he go . but I do not mean just now to allude to the detail of recent misfortune , though there be no one to whom I could do so more openly than to you . I be trye yesterday to explain to myself why I have , all my life , sit on what be call the liberal side of the to which I have belong . " " do you succeed ? " " I begin life with the misfortune of a ready - make political creed . there be a seat in the House for I when I be twenty - one . nobody take the trouble to ask I my opinion . it be a matter of course that I should be a . my uncle , whom nothing could ever induce to move in politics himself , take it for grant that I should run straight , -- as he would have say . it be a tradition of the family , and be as inseparable from it as any of the title which he have inherit . the property might be sell or squander , -- but the political creed be fix as adamant . I do not know that I ever have
have a wish to rebel , but I think that I take it at first very much as a matter of course . " " a man seldom inquire very deeply at twenty - one . " " and if he do it be ten to one but he come to a wrong conclusion . but since then I have satisfy myself that chance put I into the right course . it have be , I dare say , the same with you as with I . we both go into office early , and the anxiety to do special duty well probably deter we both from think much of the great question . when a man have to be on the alert to keep quiet , or to prevent peculation in the dockyard , or to raise the revenue while he lower the tax , he feel himself to be save from the necessity of investigating principle . in this way I sometimes think that ministers , or they who have be ministers and who have to watch ministers from the opposition benche , have less opportunity of become real politician than the man who sit in parliament with empty hand and with time at they own disposal . but when a man have be place by circumstance as I be now , he do begin to think . " " and yet you have not empty hand . " " they be not so full , perhaps , as you think . at any rate I can not contend myself with a single branch of the public service as I use to do in old day . do not suppose that I claim to have make any grand political invention , but I think that I have at least label my own thought . I suppose what we all desire be to improve the condition of the people by whom we be employ , and to advance we country , or at any rate to save it from retrogression . " " that of course . " " so much be of course . I give credit to my opponent in parliament for that desire quite as readily as I do to my colleague or to myself . the idea that political virtue be all on one side be both mischievous and absurd . we allow ourselves to talk in that way because indignation , scorn , and sometimes , I fear , vituperation , be the fuel with which the necessary heat of debate be maintain . " " there be some man who be very fond of pok the fire , " say . " well ; I will not name any one at present , " say the , " but I have see gentleman of you country very handy with the poker . " Phinea laugh , know that he have be consider by some to have be a little violent when defend the . " but we put all that aside when we really think , and can give the Conservative credit for philanthropy and patriotism as readily as the . the Conservative who have have any idea of the meaning of the name which he carry , wish , I suppose , to maintain the difference and the distance which separate the highly place from they lower breth . he think that have divide the world as he find it divide , and that he may best do he duty by make the inferior man happy and contente in he position , teach he that the place which he hold be he by 's ordinance . " " and it be so . " " hardly in the sense that I mean . but that be the great Conservative lesson . that lesson seem to I to be hardly compatible with continual improvement in the condition of the lower man . but with the Conservative all such improveament be to be base on the idea of the maintenance of those distance . I as a be to be keep as far apart from the man who drive my horse as be my ancestor from the man who drive he , or who ride after he to the wars , -- and that be to go on for ever . there be much to be say for such a scheme . let the lord be , all of they , man with love heart , and clear intellect , and noble instinct , and it be possible that they should use they power so beneficently as to spread happiness over the earth . it be one of the millennium which the mind of man can conceive , and seem to be that which the Conservative mind do conceive . " " but the other man who be not lord do not want that kind of happiness . " " if such happiness be attainable it might be well to constrain man to accept it . but the lord of this world be fallible man ; and though as unit they ought to be and perhaps be better than those other who have fewer advantage , they be much more likely as unit to go astray in opinion than the body of man whom they would seek to govern . we know that power do corrupt , and that we can not trust king to have loving heart , and clear intellect , and noble instinct . as they come to think about it and to look forward , and to look back , will not believe in such a millennium as that . " " do they believe in any millennium ? " " I think they do after a fashion , and I think that I do myself . that be my idea of . the doctrine of be , of course , the reverse . the , if he have any fix
fix idea at all , must , I think , have conceive the idea of lessening distance , -- of bring the coachman and the duke nearer together , -- nearer and nearer , till a millennium shall be reach by -- " " by equality ? " ask , eagerly interrupt the , and show he dissent by the tone of he voice . " I do not use the word , which be open to many objection . in the first place the millennium , which I have perhaps rashly name , be so distant that we need not even think of it as possible . Men' intellects be at present so various that we can not even realise the idea of equality , and here in we have be teach to hate the word by the evil effect of those absurd attempt which have be make elsewhere to proclaim it as a fact accomplish by the scratch of a pen or by a chisel on a stone . we have be injur in that , because a good word signify a grand idea have be drive out of the vocabulary of good man . would be a heaven , if we could attain it . how can we to whom so much have be give dare to think otherwise ? how can you look at the bow back and bent leg and abject face of that poor ploughman , who winter and summer have to drag he rheumatic limb to he work , while you go a - hunting or sit in pride of place among the foremost few of you country , and say that it all be as it ought to be ? you be a liberal because you know that it be not all as it ought to be , and because you would still march on to some nearer approach to equality ; though the thing itself be so great , so glorious , so godlike , -- nay , so absolutely divine , -- that you have be disgust by the very promise of it , because it be perfection be unattainable . have assert a mock equality till the very idea of equality stink in man 's nostril . " the in he enthusiasm have throw off he hat , and be sit on a wooden seat which they have reach , look up among the cloud . he leave hand be clench , and from time to time with he right he rub the thin hair on he brow . he have begin in a low voice , with a somewhat slipshod enunciation of he word , but have gradually become clear , resonant , and even eloquent . know that there be story told of certain bursts of word which have come from he in former day in the house of Commons . these have occasionally surprised man and induce they to declare that , -- as he be then often call , -- be a dark horse . but they have be few and far between , and have never hear they . now he gaze at he companion in silence , wonder whether the speaker would go on with he speech . but the face change on a sudden , and the with a awkward motion snatch up he hat . " I hope you be not cold , " he say . " not at all , " say . " I come here because of that bend of the river . I be always very fond of that bend . we do not go over the river . that be 's property . " " the member for the county ? " " yes ; and a very good member he be too , though he do not support we ; -- a old - school Tory , but a great friend of my uncle , who after all have a good deal of the about he . I wonder whether he be at home . I must remind the Duchess to ask he to dinner . you know he , of course . " " only by just see he in the . " " you would like he very much . when in the country he always wear knee - breech and gaiter , which I think a very comfortable dress . " " , ; be not it ? " " I never try it , and I should not dare now . goodness , I ; it be past five o'clock , and we have get two mile to get home . I have not look at a letter , and will think that I have throw myself into the river because of . " then they start to go home at a fast pace . " I sha not forget , , " say , " you definition of conservatives and liberals . " " I do not think I venture on a definition ; -- only a few loose idea which have be trouble I lately . I say , ! " " you ? " " do not you go and tell and Drummond that I have be preach equality , or we shall have a pretty mess . I do not know that it would serve I with my dear friend , the . " " I will be discretion itself . " " be a dream . but sometimes one like to dream ,-- especially as there be no danger that matching will fly from I in a dream . I doubt whether I could bear the test that have be attempt in other country . " " that poor ploughman would hardly get he share , . " " no ; -- that be where it be . we can only do a little and a little to bring it nearer to we ;-- so little
little that it will not touch in we day . here be she ladyship and the poney . I do not think she ladyship would like to lose she pony by my doctrine . " the two wife of the two man be in the pony carriage , and the little , the Duchess 's eldest daughter , be sit between they . " have send three messenger to demand you presence , " say the Duchess , " and , as I live by bread , I believe that you and have be amuse yourselves ! " " we have be talk politics , " say the . " of course . what other amusement be possible ? but what business have you to indulge in idle talk when want you in the library ? there have come a box , " she say , " big enough to contain the resignation of all the traitor of the party . " this be strong language , and the frown ; -- but there be no one there to hear it but and he wife , and they , at least , be trustworthy . the suggest that he have better get back to the house as soon as possible . there might be something to be do require time before dinner . might , at any rate , want to smoke a tranquil cigar after he day 's work . the Duchess therefore leave the carriage , as do , and the to drive the little girl back to the house . " he will surely go against a tree , " say the Duchess . but , -- as a fact ,-- the do take himself and the child home in safety . " and what do you think about it , ? " say she . " I suppose you and the have be settle what be to be do . " " we have certainly settle nothing . " " then you must have disagreed . " " that we have certainly have not do . we have in truth not once be out of cloud - land . " " ah ; -- then there be no hope . when once grow - up politician get into cloud - land it be because the reality of the world have no longer any charm for they . " the big box do not contain the resignation of any of the objectionable member of the . ministers do not often resign in , -- nor would it be expedient that they should do so . and be safe , at any rate , till next , and might live without any show either of obedience or mutiny . the remain in comparative quiet at . there be not very much to do , except to prepare the work for the next session . the great work of the come year be to be the assimilation , or something very near to the assimilation , of the county suffrage with those of the borough . the measure be one which have now be promise by statesman for the last two year ,-- promise at first with that half promise which would mean nothing , be it not that such promise always lead to more define assurance . the of , , and other ministers have wish to stave it off . be eager for its adoption , and be of course support by . the have at first be inclin to be lead by the old . there be no doubt to he but that the measure be desirable and would come , but there might well be a question as to the time at which it should be make to come . the old know that the measure would come , -- but believe it to be wholly undesirable , think that he be do good work in postpone it from year to year . but have become urgent , and the old have admit the necessity . there must surely have be a shade of melancholy on that old man 's mind as , year after year , he assist in pull down institution which he in truth regard as the safeguard of the nation ; -- but which he know that , as a , he be bound to assist in destroy ! it must have occur to he , from time to time , that it would be well for he to depart and be at peace before everything be gone . when he go from take he place , and , who have go up to for a while , return ; and then the three between they , with assistance from and other , work out the propose scheme of the new county franchise , with the new division and the new constituency . but it could hardly have be hearty work , as they all of they feel that whatever might be they first proposition they would be beat upon it in a house of Commons which think that this have be long enough at the Treasury . 's have now be dead more than five month , and not a word have be hear by he widow of and she child . she own sorrow have be so great that she have hardly thought of those of the poor woman who have come to she but a few day before she husband 's death , tell she of ruin cause by she husband 's treachery . but late on the evening before she departure for ,-- very shortly after have leave the house , -- there be a ring at the door , and a poorly - clad female ask to see . the poorly - clad female be 's wife . the servant , who do not remember she , would not leave she alone in the hall , have
have a eye to the coat and umbrella , but call up one of the maid to carry the message . the poor woman understand the insult and resent it in she heart . but recognise the name in a moment , and go down to she in the parlour , leave upstairs . , smart from she present grievance , have bend she mind on complain at once of the treatment she have receive from the servant , but the sight of the widow 's weed quell she . Emily have never be much give to fine clothes , either as a girl or as a married woman ; but it have always be she husband 's pleasure that she should be well dress , -- though he have never carry he trouble so far as to pay the bill ; and 's remembrance of she friend at have be that of a fine lady in bright apparel . now a black shade , -- something almost like a dark ghost , -- glide into the room , and forget she recent injury . Emily come forward and offer she hand , and be the first to speak . " I have have a great sorrow since we meet , " she say . " yes , indeed , . I do not think there be anything leave in the world now except sorrow . " " I hope be well . will you not sit down , ? " " thank you , ma 'am . indeed , then , he be not well at all . how should he be well ? everything ,--everything have be take away from he . " poor Emily groane as she hear this . " I would not say a word against they as be go , , if I could help it . I know it be bad to bear when he who once love you be not no more . and perhaps it be all the worse when thing do not go well with he , and it be , maybe , he own fault . I would not do it , , if I could help it . " " let I hear what you have to say , " say Emily , determine to suffer everything patiently . " well ; -- it be just this . he have leave we that bear that there be nothing leave . and that , they say , be not the worst of all , -- though what can be worse than do that , how be a woman to think ? Parker be that soft , and he have that way with he of talking , that he have talk I and mine out of the very linen on we back . " " what do you mean by say that that be not the worst ? " " they have come upon for a bill for four hundred and fifty , -- something to do with that stuff they call , -- and say it be not he name at all . but he be be in that state he do not hardly know how to swear to anything . but he be sure he do not sign it . the bill be brotch to he by , and there be word between they , and he would not have nothing to do with it . how be he to go to law ? and it do not make much difference neither , for they can not take much more from he than they have take . " Emily as she hear all this sat shivering , try to repress she groan . " only , " continue , " they have not sell the furniture , and I be think they might let I stay in the house , and try to do with letting lodging , -- and now they be seize everything along of this bill . be like a madman , swear this and swear that ; -- but what can he do , ? it be as like he hand as two pea ; but he be clever at everything be -- be -- you know who i mean , ma'am . " then Emily cover she face with she hand and burst into violent tear . she have not determine whether she do or do not believe this last accusation make against she husband . she have have hardly time to realise the criminality of the offence impute . but she do believe that the woman before she have be ruin by she husband 's speculation . " it be very bad , ma 'am ; be not it ? " say , cry for company . " it be bad all round . if you have five child as have not bread you would know how it be that I feel . I have get to go back by the 10.15 to - night , and when I have pay for a third - class ticket I not have but twopence leave in the world . " this utter depth of immediate poverty , this want of bread for the morrow and the next day , Emily could relieve out of she own pocket . and , think of this and remember that she purse be not with she at the moment , she start up with the idea of get it . but it occur to she that that would not suffice ; that she duty require more of she than that . and yet , by she own power , she could do no more . from month to month , almost from week to week , since she husband 's death , she father have be call upon to satisfy claim for money which he would not resist , lest by do so he should add to she misery
misery . she have feel that she ought to bind herself to the strictest personal economy because of the miserable loss to which she have subject he by she ill - starr marriage . " what would you wish I to do ? " she say , resume she seat . " you be rich , " say . Emily shook she head . " they say you papa be rich . I think you would not like to see I in want like this . " " indeed , indeed , it make I very unhappy . " " would not you papa do something ? it be not 's fault nigh so much as it be he . I would not say it to you if it be not for starve . I would not say it to you if it be not for the child . I would lie in the ditch and die if it be only myself , because -- because I know what you feeling be . but what would not you do , and what would not you say , if you have five child at home as have not a loaf of bread among th'ey ? " Emily get up and leave the room , bid she visitor wait for a few minute . presently the offensive butler come in , who have wrong by watch he master 's coat , and bring a tray with meat and wine . , say the altered man , hope that . Parker would take a little refreshment , and he would be down himself very soon . , know that strength for she journey home would be necessary to she , remember that she would have to walk all through the city to the station , do take some refreshment , and permit herself to drink the glass of sherry that she late enemy have benignantly pour out for she . Emily have be nearly half - a - hour with she father before 's heavy step be hear upon the stair . and when he reach the dining - room door he pause a moment before he venture to turn the lock . he have not tell Emily what he would do , and have hardly as yet make up he own mind . as every fresh call be make upon he , he hatre for the memory of the man who have step in and disturb he whole life , and turn all the mellow satisfaction of he evening into storm and gloom , be of course increase . the scoundrel 's name be so odious to he that he could hardly keep himself from shuddering visibly before he daughter even when the servants call she by it . but yet he have determine that he would devote himself to save she from further suffering . it have be she fault , no doubt . but she be expiat it in very sackcloth and ash , and he would add nothing to the burden on she back . he would pay , and pay , and pay , merely remember that what he pay must be deduct from she share of he property . he have never intend to make what be call a elder son of , and now there be less necessity than ever that he should do so , as have become a elder son in another direction . he could satisfy almost any demand that might be make without material injury to himself . but these demand , one after another , scald he by they frequency , and by the baseness of the man who have occasion they . he daughter have now repeat to he with sobbing and wailing the whole story as it have be tell to she by the woman downstairs . " , " she have say , " I do not know how to tell you or how not . " then he have encourage she , and have listen without say a word . he have endeavoure not even to shrink as the charge of forgery be repeat to he by he own child , -- the widow of the guilty man . he endeavoure not to remember at the moment that she have claim this wretch as the chosen one of she maiden heart , in opposition to all he wish . it hardly occur to he to disbelieve the accusation . it be so probable ! what be there to hinder the man from forgery , if he could only make it believe that he victim have sign the bill when intoxicate ? he hear it all ;-- kiss he daughter , and then go down to the dining - room . , when she see he , get up , and curtsied low , and then sit down again . look at she from under he bushy eyebrow before he speak , and then sit opposite to she . " madam , " he say , " this be a very sad story that I have hear . " again rise , again curtsy , and put she handkerchief to she face . " it be of no use talk any more about it here . " " no , sir , " say . " I and my daughter leave town early to - morrow morning . " " indeed , sir . do not tell I . " " my clerk will be in , at no. 12 , , 's , till I come back . do you think you can find the place ? I have write it there . " " yes , sir , I can find it , " say , just raise herself from she chair at every word she speak . " I have write he name , you see . . " " yes , sir . " "
" if you will permit I , I will give you two sovereign now . " " thank you , sir . " " and if you can make it convenient to call on every morning about twelve , he will pay you two sovereignd a week till I come back to town . then I will see about it . " " bless you , sir ! " " and as to the furniture , I will write to my attorney , . you need not trouble yourself by go to he . " " no , sir . " " if necessary , he will send to you , and he will see what can be do . good night , . " then he walk across the room with two sovereign which he drop in she hand . , with many sob , bade he farewell , and stand in the hall immovable till the front door have be close behind she . " I have settle it , " he say to . " I will tell you to - morrow , or some day . do not worry yourself now , but go to bed . " she look wistfully , -- so sadly , up into he face , and then do as he bade she . but could not go to be without further trouble . it be incumbent on he to write full particular that very night both to and to . and the odious letter in the writing become very long ;--odious because he have to confess in they over and over again that he daughter , the very apple of he eye , have be the wife of a scoundrel . to he have to tell the whole story of the allege forgery , and in do so could not abstain from the use of hard word . " I do not suppose that it can be prove , but there be every reason to believe that it be true . " and again --" I believe the man to have be as vile a scoundrel as ever be make by the love of money . " even to he could not be reticent . " she be a object of pity , " he say . " she husband be ruin by the infamous speculation of . " then he betake himself to be . oh , how happy would he be to pay the two pound weekly , -- even to add to that the amount of the for bill , if by do so he might be save from ever again hear the name of . the amount of the bill be ultimately lose by the banker who have advanced money on it . as for , from week to week , and from month to month , and at last from year to year , she and she child , -- and probably she husband also , -- be support by the weekly pension of two sovereign which she always receive on morning from the hand of himself . in a little time the one excitement of she life be the weekly journey to , whom she come to regard as a man appoint by to supply she with 40s . on morning . as to poor , -- it be to be fear that he never again become a prosperous man . " you will tell I what you do for that poor woman , papa , " say Emily , lean over she father in the train . " I have settle it , my dear . " " you say you would tell I . " " Crumpy will pay she two pound a week till we know more about it . " Emily press she father 's hand and that be a end . no one ever do know any more about it , and continue to pay the money . at when and he daughter reach hall there be at any rate no Fletcher there as yet . Emily , as she be drive from the station to the house , have not da to ask a question or even to prompt she father to do so . he would probably have tell she that on such a occasion there be but little chance that she would find any visitor , and none at all that she would find . but she be too confused and too ill at ease to think of probability , and to the last be in trepidation , specially lest she should meet she lover . she find , however , at none but Whartons , and she find also to she great relief that this change in the heir relieve she of much of the attention which must otherwise have add to she trouble . at the first glance she dress and demeanou struck they so forcibly that they could not avoid show they feeling . of course they have expect to see she in black , -- have expect to see she in widow 's weed . but , with she , she very face and limb have so adapt themselves to she crape , that she look like a monument of bereaved woe . take the mourner up into she own room , and there make she a little speech . " we have all wept for you , " she say , " and grieve for you still . but excessive grief be wick , especially in the young . we will do we best to make you happy , and hope we shall succeed . all this about dear ought to be a comfort to you . " Emily promise that she would do she best , not , however , take much immediate comfort from the prospect of dear . certainly have never in she life speak of dear while the
the wicked cousin be alive . then also make she little speech . " dear Emily , I will do all that I can . pray try to believe in I . " but be so much the hero of the hour , that there be not much room for general attention to any one else . there be very much room for triumph in regard to . it have already be ascertaine that the who be now dead have have a child , -- but that the child be a daughter . oh , -- what salvation or destruction there may be to a english gentleman in the sex of a infant ! this poor baby be now little better than a beggar brat , unless the relatives who be utterly disregardful of its fate , should choose , in they charity , to make some small allowance for its maintenance . have it by chance be a boy , would have be nobody ; and the child , rescue from the iniquity of he parent , would have be nurse in the best bedroom of , and cherish with the warmest kiss , and would have be the centre of all the hope of all the Wharton . but the lawyer by use of reckless telegram have certify himself that the infant be a girl , and be the hero of the day . he find himself to be possess of a thousand graces , even in he father 's eyesight . it seem to be take as a mark of he special good fortune that he have not cling to any business . to have be a banker immerse in the making of money , or even a lawyer attach to he circuit and he court , would have lessen he fitness , or at any rate he readiness , for the duty which he would have to perform . he would never be a very rich man , but he would have a command of ready money , and of course he would go into parliament . in he new position as , -- not quite head of he family , but head expectant , -- it seem to he to be he duty to lecture he sister . it might be well that some one should lecture she with more severity than she father use . undoubtedly she be succumb to the wretchedness of she position in a manner that be repugnant to humanity generally . there be no power so useful to man as that capacity of recovere himself after a fall , which belong especially to those who possess a healthy mind in a healthy body . it be not rare to see one ,--generally a woman , -- whom a sorrow gradually kill ; and there be those among we , who hardly perhaps envy , but certainly admire , a spirit so delicate as to be snuff out by a woe . but it be the weakness of the heart rather than the strength of the feeling which have in such case most often produce the destruction . some endurance of fibre have be want , which power of endurance be a noble attribute . see something of this , and be , now , the heir apparent of the family , take he sister to task . " Emily , " he say , " you make we all unhappy when we look at you . " " do I ? " she say . " I be sorry for that ; -- but why should you look at I ? " " because you be one of we . of course we can not shake you off . we would not if we could . we have all be very unhappy because , -- because of what have happen . but do not you think you ought to make some sacrifice to we , -- to we father , I mean , and to and ? when you go on weeping , other people have to weep too . I have a idea that people ink to be happy if it be only for the sake of they neighbour . " " what be I to do , ? " " talk to people a little , and smile sometimes . move about quicker . do not look when you come into a room as if you be consecrat it to tear . and , if I may venture to say so , drop something of the heaviness of you mourning . " " do you mean that I be a hypocrite ? " " no ;-- I mean nothing of the kind . you know I do not . but you may exert yourself for the benefit of other without be untrue to you own memory . I be sure you know what i mean . make a struggle and see if you can not do something . " she do make a struggle , and she do do something . no one , not well verse in the mystery of feminine dress , could say very accurately what it be that she have do ; but every one felt that something of the weight be reduce . at first , as she brother 's word come upon she ear , and as she feel the blow which they inflict on she , she accuse he in she heart of cruelty . they be very hard to bear . there be a moment in which she be almost tempted to turn upon he and tell he that he know nothing of she sorrow . but she restrain herself , and when she be alone she acknowledge to herself that he have speak the truth . no one have a right to go about the world as a , dampe all joy with selfish tear . what do she not
not owe to she father , who have warn she so often against the evil she have contemplate , and have then , from the first moment after the fault be done , forgive she the do of it ? she have at any rate learn from she misfortune the infinite tenderness of he heart , which in the day of they unalloyed prosperity he have never feel the necessity of expose to she . so she struggle and do do something . she press 's hand , and kiss she cousin , and throw herself into she father 's arm when they be alone , whisper to he that she would try . " what you tell I , , be quite right , " she say afterwards to she brother . " I do not mean to be savage , " he answer with a smile . " it be quite right , and I have think of it , and I will do my best . I will keep it to myself if I can . it be not quite , perhaps , what you think it be , but I will keep it to myself . " she fancie that they do not understand she , and perhaps she be right . it be not only that he have die and leave she a young widow ; -- nor even that he end have be so harsh a tragedy and so foul a disgrace ! it be not only that she love have be misbestow , -- not only that she have make so grievous a error in the one great act of she life which she have choose to perform on she own judgment ! perhaps the most crushing memory of all be that which tell she that she , who have through all she youth be regard as a bright star in the family , have be the one person to bring a reproach upon the name of all these people who be so good to she . how shall a person conscious of disgrace , with a mind capable of feel the crush weight of personal disgrace , move and look and speak as though that disgrace have be wash away ? but she make the struggle , and do not altogether fail . as regard , in spite of this poor widow 's crape , he be very happy at this time , and he joy do in some degree communicate itself to the old barrister . be take round to every tenant and introduce as the heir . have already declare he purpose of abdicat any possible possession of the property . should he outlive Alured he must be the baronet ; but when that sad event should take place , whether should then be alive or no , should at once be the possessor of . , under these circumstance , discuss he own death with extreme satisfaction , and insist on have it discuss by the other . that he should have go and leave everything at the mercy of the spendthrift have be terrible to he old heart ; -- but now , the man come to the property would have L60,000 with which to support and foster , with which to mmend , as it be , the crevice , and stop up the hole of the estate . he seem to be almost impatient for 's ownership , give many hint as to what should be do when he himself be gone . he must surely have think that he would return to as a spirit , and take a ghostly share in the prosperity of the farms . " you will find a very good man , " say the baronet . have be a tenant on the estate for the last half - century , and be a older man than he landlord ; but the baronet spoke of all this a though he himself be about to leave for ever in the course of the next week . " have be a good man , and if not always quite ready with he rent , have never be much behind . you will not be hard on ? " " I hope I may not have the opportunity , sir . " " well ;--well ;--well ; that be as may be . but I do not quite know what to say about young . the farm have go from father to son , and there be never be a word of a lease . " " be there anything wrong about the young man ? " " he be a little give to poach . " " oh dear ! " " I have always get he off for he father 's sake . they say he be go to marry . that may take it out of he . I do like the farm to go from father to son , . it be the way that everything should go . of course there be no right . " " nothing of that kind , I suppose , " say , who be in he way a reformer , and have radical notion with which he would not for worlds have disturb the baronet at present . " no ;-- nothing of that kind . in he mercy forbid that a landlord in should ever be rob after that fashion . " , when he be utter this prayer , be think of what he have hear of a irish Land , the detail of which , however , have be altogether incomprehensible to he . " but I have a feeling about it , ; and I hope you will share it . it be good that thing should go from father to son . I never make a promise ; but the tenant know what I think about it ,
, and then the father work for the son . why should he work for a stranger ? be a very good young woman , and perhaps young will do better . " there be not a field or a fence that he do not show to he heir ;--hardly a tree which he leave without a word . " that bit of woodland come in there , -- they call it , -- do not belong to the estate at all . " this he say in a melancholy tone . " do not it , really ? " " and it come right in between 's farm and Puddock 's . they have always let I have the shooting as a compliment . not that there be ever anything in it . it be only seven acre . but I like the civility . " " who do it belong to ? " " it belong to . " " what ; ? " " yes , yes ; -- they have change the name . it use to be in my day . say the College would certainly sell , but you would have to pay for the land and the wood separately . I do not know that you would get much out of it ; but it be very unsightly , -- on the survey map , I mean . " " we will buy it , by all mean , " say , who be already jingl he in he pocket . " I never have the money , but I think it should be buy . " and rejoice in the idea that when he ghost should look at the survey map , that hiatus of would not trouble he spectral eye . in this way month run on at . we Wharton have come down in the latter half of , and at the beginning of return to . , of course , remain , as he be still learn the lesson of which he be in truth become a little weary ; and at last have also be persuade to stay in . she father promise to return , not mention any precise time , but give she to understand that he would come before the winter . he go , and probably find that he taste for the and for whist have return to he . in the middle of old arrive . Emily be not aware of what be be do ; but , in truth , the Fletchers and Whartons combine be conspir with the view of bring she back to she former self . have not yield without some difficulty , -- for it be a part of this conspiracy that yoArthu be to be allow to marry the widow . but have prevail . " he will do it any way , mother , " he have say , " whether you and I like it or not . and why on earth should not he do as he please ? " " think what the man be , ! " " it be more to the purpose to think what the woman be . yoArthu have make up he mind , and , if I know he , he be not the man to be talk out of it . " and so the old woman have give in , and have at last consent to go forward as the advanced guard of the Fletcher , and lay siege to the affections of the woman whom she have once so thoroughly discard from she heart . " my dear , " she say , when they first meet , " if there have be anything wrong between you and I , let it be among the thing that be past . you always use to kiss I . give I a kiss now . " of course Emily kiss she ; and after that . patt she and pet she , and give she lozenge , which she declare in private to be " the sovereignest thing on earth " for debilitated nerve . and then it come out by degree that and he wife and all the little Fletcher be come to for the week . have go , but be also to be back for , and 's visit be also postpone . it be absolutely necessary that should be at for the festivity , and expedient that 's father should be there to see they . in this way Emily have no means of escape . she father write tell she of he plan , say that he would bring she back after . 's heirship have make these festivity ,-- which be , however , to be confine to the two family , -- quite a necessity . in all this not a word be say about , nor do she dare to ask whether he be expect . the , 's wife , open she arm to the widow in a manner that almost plainly say that she regard Emily as she future sister - in - law . talk to she about Longbarns , and the child ,-- complete Fletcher talk , -- as though she be already one of they , never , however , mention 's name . the old lady get down a fresh supply of the lozenge from because those she have by she might perhaps be a little stale . and then there be another sign which after a while become plain to . no one in either family ever mention she name . it be not singular that none of they should call she , as she be Emily to all of they . but they never so describe she even in speak to the servants . and the servant themselves , as far as be possible , avoid the odious word . the
the thing be to be bury , if not in , yet in some speechless grave . and it seem that she father be join in this attempt . when write to she he usually make some excuse for writing also to , or , in 's absence , to the baronet , -- so that the letter for he daughter might be enclose and address simply to " " . she understand it all , and though she be move to continual solitary tear by this ineffable tenderness , yet she rebel against they . they should never cheat she back into happiness by such wile as that ! it be not fit that she should yield to they . as a woman utterly disgrace it could not become she again to laugh and be joyful , to give and take loving embrace , to sit and smile , perhaps a happy mother , at another man 's hearth . for they love she be grateful . for he love she be more than grateful . how constant must be he heart , how grand he nature , how more than manly he strength of character , when he be thus true to she through all the evil she have do ! love he ! yes ; -- she would pray for he , worship he , fill the remainder of she day with thinking of he , hope for he , and make he interest she own . should he ever be married , -- and she would pray that he might , -- he wife , if possible , should be she friend , he child should be she darling ; and he should always be she hero . but they should not , with all they scheme , cheat she into disgrac he by marry he . at last she father come , and it be he who tell she that be expect on the day before . " why do you not tell I before , papa , so that I might have ask you to take I away ? " " because I think , my dear , that it be better that you should be constrain to meet he . you would not wish to live all you life in terror of see ? " " not all my life . " " take the plunge and it will be over . they have all be very good to you . " " too good , papa . I do not want it . " " they be we oldest friend . there be not a young man in I think so highly of as . when I be gone , where be you to look for friend ? " " I be not ungrateful , papa . " " you can not know they all , and yet keep yourself altogether separate from . think what it would be to I never to be able to ask he to the house . he be the only one of the family that live in , and now it seem that will spend most of he time down here . of course it be better that you should meet he and have do with it . " there be no answer to be make to this , but still she be fix in she resolution that she would never meet he as she lover . then come the morning of the day on which he be to arrive , and he come be for the first time speak openly of at breakfast . " how be to be brotch from the station ? " ask old . " I be go to take the dog - cart , " say . " Gile will go for the luggage with the pony . he be bringe down a lot of thing ;-- a new saddle , and a gun for I . " it have all be arrange for she , this question and answer , and Emily blush as she feel that it be so . " we shall be so glad to see , " say young to she . " of course you will . " " he have not be down since the session be over , and he have get to be quite a speaking man now . I do so hope he will become something some day . " " I be sure he will , " say Emily . " not a judge , however . I hate wig . perhaps he might be in time . " be not more ignorant than some other lady in be unaware of the 's wig and exact position . at last he come . the 9 A.M. express for ,-- express , at least , for the first two or three hour out of , -- bring passengers for to the nearest station at 3 p.m. , and the distance be not above five mile . before four o'clock be stand before the drawing - room fire , with a cup of tea in he hand , surround by Fletchers and Whartons , and be make much of as the young family member of parliament . but be not in the room . she have study she , and learn the hour of the train , and be now in she bedroom . he have look around the moment he enter the room , but have not da to ask for she suddenly . he have say one word about she to Everett in the cart , and that have be all . she be in the house , and he must , at any rate , see she before dinner . Emily , in order that she might not seem to escape abruptly , have retire early to she solitude . but she , too , know that the meeting
meeting could not be long postpone . she sit think of it all , and at last hear the wheel of the vehicle before the door . she pause , listen with all she ear , that she might recognise he voice , or possibly he footstep . she stand near the window , behind the curtain , with she hand presse to she heart . she hear 's voice plainly as he give some direction to the groom , but from Arthur she hear nothing . yet she be sure that he be come . the very manner of the approach and she brother 's word make she certain that there have be no disappointment . she stand think for a quarter of a hour , make up she mind how best they might meet . then suddenly , with slow but certain step , she walk down into the drawing - room . no one expect she then , or something perhaps might have be do to encourage she come . it have be think that she must meet he before dinner , and she absence till then be to be excuse . but now she open the door , and with much dignity of mien walk into the middle of the room . yoArthu at that moment be discuss the 's chance for the next session , and be ask with rapture whether the old Conservative party would not come in . hear the step , turn round , and see the woman he love . he go at once to meet she , very quickly , and put out both he hand . she give he hers , of course . there be no excuse for she refusal . he stand for a instant press they , look eagerly into she sad face , and then he speak . " bless you , Emily ! " he say , " God bless you ! " he have think of no word , and at the moment nothing else occur to he to be say . the colour have cover all he face , and he heart beat so strongly that he be hardly he own master . she let he hold she two hand , perhaps for a minute , and then , burst into tear , tore herself from he , and , hurrie out of the room , make she way again into she own chamber . " it will be better so , " say old . " it will be better so . do not let any one follow she . " on that day take she out to dinner , and do not sit near she . in the evening he come to she as she be work close to he mother , and seate himself on a low chair close to she knee . " we be all so glad to see you ; be we not , mother ? " " yes , indeed , " say . then , after a while , the old woman get up to make a rubber at whist with the two old man and she eldest son , leave sit at the widow 's knee . she would willingly have escape , but it be impossible that she should move . " you need not be afraid of I , " he say , not whisper , but in a voice which no one else could hear . " do not seem to avoid I , and I will say nothing to trouble you . I think that you must wish that we should be friend . " " oh , yes . " " come out , then , to - morrow , when we be walk . in that way we shall get used to each other . you be troublead now , and I will go . " then he leave she , and she feel herself to be bound to he by infinite gratitude . a week go on and she have become used to he company . a week pass and he have speak no word to she that a brother might not have speak . they have walk together when no one else have be within hearing , and yet he have spare she . she have begin to think that he would spare she altogether , and she be certainly grateful . might it not be that she have misunderstand he , and have misunderstood the meaning of they all ? might it not be that she have troublead herself with false anticipation ? surely it be so ; for how could it be that such a man should wish to make such a woman he wife ? " well , ? " say he brother to he one day . " I have nothing to say about it , " say . " you have not change you mind ? " " never ! upon my word , to I , in that dress , she be more beautiful than ever . " " I wish you would make she take it off . " " I dare not ask she yet . " " you know what they say about widow generally , my boy . " " that be all very well when one talk about widow in general . it be easy to chaff about woman when one have not get any woman in one 's mind . but as it be now , have she here , love she as I do , -- by heaven ! I can not hurry she . I do not dare to speak to she after that fashion . I shall do it in time , I suppose ; -- but I must wait till the time come . " the Lady at it come at last to be decide among they that when old
old return to town , -- and he have now be at longer than he have ever be know to remain there before ,-- Emily should still remain in , and that at some period not then fix she should go for a month to Longbarns . there be various reason which induce she to consent to this change of plan . in the first place she find herself to be infinitely more comfortable in the country than in town . she could go out and move about and bestir herself , whereas in she could only sit and mope at home . she father have assure she that he think that it would be better that she should be away from the reminiscence of the house in town . and then when the first week of be past would be up in town , and she would be far away from he at Longbarns , whereas in she would be close within he reach . many little scheme be laid and struggle make both by herself and the other before at last they plan be settled . be to return to in the middle of . it be quite impossible that he could remain longer away either from or from the , and then at the same time , or a day or two follow , be to go back to . and he wife and child be already gone , -- and also have be at Longbarns . the two brother and have be backwards and forward . Emily be anxious to remain at at any rate till parliament should have meet , so that she might not be at home with in he own house . but matter would not arrange themselves exactly as she wish . it be at last settle that she should go to Longbarns with under the charge of in the first week in . as arrangement be already in progress for the purchase of , could not possibly leave he own house . not to have walk through the wood on the first day that it become a part of the property would to he have be treason to the estate . he experience ought to have tell he that there be no chance of a lawyer and a college deal together with such rapidity ; but in the present state of thing he could not bear to absent himself . order have already be give for the cutting down of certain tree which could not have be touch have the reprobate liv , and it be indispensable that if a tree fell at he should see the fall . it thus come to pass that there be a week during which Emily would be force to live under the roof of the Fletchers together with . the week come and she be absolutely receive by at the door of Longbarns . she have not be at the house since it have first be intimate to the Fletcher that she be dispose to receive with favou the address of . as she remembe this it see to she to be a age ago since that man have induce she to believe that of all man she have ever meet he be the nearest to a hero . she never speak of he now , but of course she thought of he be never end , -- as also of herself in that she have allow herself to be so deceive . she would recall to she mind with bitter inward sobbings all those lesson of iniquity which he have strive to teach she , and which have first open she eye to he true character , -- how sedulously he have endeavoure to persuade she that it be she duty to rob she father on he behalf , how continually he have endeavoure to make she think that appearance in the world be everything , and that , be in truth poor adventurer , it behove they to cheat the world into think they rich and respectable . every hint that have be so give have be a wound to she , and those wound be all now remember . though since he death she have never allow a word to be speak in she presence against he , she could not but hate he memory . how glorious be that other man in she eyes , as he stand there at the door welcome she to Longbarns , fair - haired , open - eyed , with bronz brow and cheek , and surely the honestest face that a loving woman ever love to gaze on . during the various lesson she have learn in she married life , she have become gradually but surely aware that the face of that other man have be dishonest . she have learn the false meaning of every glance of he eye , the subtlety of he mouth , the counterfeit manoeuvre of he body , -- the deceit even of he dress . he have be all a lie from head to foot ; and he have throw she love aside as useless when she also would not be a liar . and here be this man ,-- spotless in she estimation , compound of all good quality , which she could now see and take at they proper value . she hate herself for the simplicity with which she have be cheat by soft word and a false demeanour into so great a sacrifice . Life at be very quiet during the day which she pass there before he leave they . she be frequently alone with he , but he , if he still love she , do not speak of he love . he explain it all one day to he mother . " if it be to be , " say the old lady , " I do not see
see the use of more delay . of course the marriage ought not to be till twelvemonth . but if it be understand that it be to be , she might alter she dress by degree , -- and alter she manner of living . those thing should always be do by degree . I think it have better be settled , , if it be to be settle . " " I be afraid , mother . " " dear I ! I do not think you be the man ever to be afraid of a woman . what can she say to you ? " " refuse I . " " then you would better know it at once . but I do not think she will be fool enough for that . " " perhaps you hardly understand she , mother . " shook she head with a look of considerable annoyance . " perhaps not . but , to tell the truth , I do not like young woman whom I can not understand . young woman should not be mysterious . I like people of whom I can give a pretty good guess what they will do . I be sure I never could have guess that she would have marry that man . " " if you love I , mother , do not let that be mention between we again . when I say that you do not understand she , I do not mean that she be mysterious . I think that before he die , and since he death , she learn of what sort that man be . I will not say that she hate he memory , but she hate herself for what she have do . " " so she ought , " say . " she have not yet bring herself to think that she life should be anything but one long period of mourning , not for he , but for she own mistake . you may be quite sure that I be in earnest . it be not because I doubt of myself that I put it off . but I fear that if once she assert to I she resolution to remain as she be , she will feel herself bound to keep she word . " " I suppose she be very much the same as other woman , after all , my dear , " say . , who be almost jealous of the peculiar superiority of sentiment which she son seem to attribute to this woman . " circumstance , mother , make people different , " he reply . " so you be go without have anything fix , " he elder brother say to he the day before he start . " yes , old fellow . it seem to be rather slack ; -- do not it ? " " I dare say you know best what you be about . but if you have set you mind on it -- " " you may take you oath on that . " " then I do not see why one word should not put it all right . there never be any place so good for that kind of thing as a country house . " " I do not think that with she it will make much difference where the house be , or what the circumstance . " " she know what you mean as well as I do . " " I dare say she do , . she must have a very bad idea of I if she do not . but she may know what i mean and not mean the same thing herself . " " how be you to know if you do not ask she ? " " you may be sure that I shall ask she as soon as I can hope that my do so may give she more pleasure than pain . remember , I have have all this out with she father . I have determine that I will wait till twelve month have pass since that wretch man perish . " on that afternoon before dinner he be alone with she in the library some minute before they go up to dress for dinner . " I shall hardly see you to - morrow , " he say , " as I must leave this at half - past eight . I breakfast at eight . I do not suppose any one will be down except my mother . " " I be generally as early as that . I will come down and see you start . " " I be so glad that you have be here , . " " so be I . everybody have be so good to I . " " it have be like old day ,-- almost . " " it will never quite be like old day again , I think . but I have be very glad to be here , -- and at . I sometimes almost wish that I be never go back to again , -- only for papa . " " I like myself . " " you ! yes , of course you like . you have everything in life before you . you have thing to do , and much to hope for . it be all begin for you , . " " I be five year older than you be . " " what do that matter ? it seem to I that age do not go by year . it be long since I have feel myself to be a old woman . but you be quite young . everybody be proud of you , and you ought to be happy . " " I do not know , " say he . " it be hard
hard to say what make a person happy . " he almost make up he mind to speak to she then ; but he have make up he mind before to put it off still for a little time , and he would not allow himself to be change on the spur of the moment . he have think of it much , and he have almost teach himself to think that it would be better for herself that she should not accept another man 's love so soon . " I shall come and see you in town , " he say . " you must come and see papa . it seem that be to be a great deal at . I have better go up to dress now , or I shall be keep they wait . " he put out he hand to she , and wish she good - bye , excuse himself by say that they should not be alone together again before he start . she see he go on the next morning , -- and then she almost feel herself to be abandon , almost desert . it be a fine crisp winter day , dry and fresh and clear , but with the frost still on the ground . after breakfast she go out to walk by herself in the long shrubbery path which go round the house , and here she remain for above a hour . she tell herself that she be very thankful to he for not have speak to she on a subject so unfit for she ear as love . she strengthen herself in she determination never again to listen to a man willingly on that subject . she have make herself unfit to have any dealings of that nature . it be not that she could not love . oh , no ! she know well enough that she do love , -- love with all she heart . if it be not that she be so tear to rag that she be not fit to be wear again , she could now have throw herself into he arm with a whole heaven of joy before she . a woman , she tell herself , have no right to a second chance in life , after have make such a shipwreck of herself in the first . but the danger of be seduce from she judgment by be all over . he have be near she for the last week and have not speak a word . he have be in the same house with she for the last ten day and have be with she as a brother might be with he sister . it be not only she who have see the propriety of this . he also have acknowledge it , and she be -- grateful to he . as she endeavoure in she solitude to express she gratitude in spoken word the tear roll down she cheek . she be glad , she tell herself , very glad that it be so . how much trouble and pain to both of they would thus be spare ! and yet she tear be bitter tear . it be better as it be ; -- and yet one word of love would have be very sweet . she almost think that she would have like to tell he that for he sake , for he dear sake , she would refuse -- that which now would never be offer to she . she be quite clear as to the rectitude of she own judgament , clear as ever . and yet she heart be heavy with disappointment . it be the end of before she leave for , have spend the greater part of the time at Longbarns . the lady at that place be move by many doubt as to what would be the end of all this . . the elder at last almost teach herself to believe that there would be no marriage , and have get back to that belief , be again oppose to the idea of a marriage . anything and everythe that Arthur want he ought to have . the old lady feel no doubt as to that . when convince that he do want to have this widow , -- this woman whose life have hitherto be so unfortunate , -- she have for he sake take the woman again by the hand , and have assist in make she one of themselves . but how much better it would be that yoArthu should think better of it ! it be the maddest constancy , -- this cling to the widow of such a man as ! if there be any doubt , then she would be prepared to do all she could to prevent the marriage . Emily have be forgive , and the pardon bestow must of course be continue . but she might be pardon without be make . while be still at the old lady almost talk over she daughter - in - law to this way of think ,-- till put he foot upon it altogether . " I do not pretend to say what she may do , " he say . " oh , , " say the mother , " to hear a man like you talk like that be absurd . she would jump at he if he look at she with half a eye . " " what she may do , " he continue say , without appear to listen to he mother , " I can not say . but that he will ask she to be he wife be as certain as that I stand here . " chapter Lxxii " he think that we Day be number " all the detail of the new be settle at during the recess between ,
, , and a very experienced gentleman from the Treasury , one , who be suppose to know more about such thing than any man live , and be consequently call . he be a elderly man , over sixty year of age , who remember the first Reform , and have be engage in the doctoring of constituency ever since . the , if pass , would be mainly he , and yet the world would never hear he name as connect with it . let we hope that he be comfortable at , and that he find he consolation in the smile of the Duchess . during this time the old be away , and even the be absent for some day . he would afain have busy himself about the himself , but be hardly allow by he colleague to have any hand in fram it . the great point of the measure have of course be arrange in the cabinet , -- where , however , 's view have be adopt almost without a change . it may not perhaps be too much to assume that one or two member of the do not quite understand the full scope of every suggest clause . the effect which clause will produce , the dangers which may be expect from this or that change , the manner in which this or that proposition will come out in the washing , do not strike even at a glance . a little study in a man 's own cabinet , after the reading perhaps of a few leading article , and perhaps a short conversation with a astute friend or two , will enable a statesman to be strong at a give time for , or even , if necessary , against a measure , who have listen in silence , and have perhaps give he personal assent , to the original suggestion . I doubt whether , when he sit silent in the cabinet , have realise those fear which weigh upon he so strongly afterwards , or have then foresee that the adoption of a nearly similar franchise for the county and borough must inevitably lead to the american system of numerical representation . but when time have be give he , and he and have talk it all over , the mind of no man be ever clearer than that of . the , with the diligence which belong to he , have mastere all the detail of 's before it be discuss in the cabinet , and yet he find that he assistance be hardly need in the absolute preparation . have they allow he he would have do it all himself . but it be assume that he would not trouble himself with such work , and he perceive that he be not want . nothing of moment be settle without a reference to he . he require that everything should be explain as it go on , down to the extension of every borough boundary ; but he know that he be not do it himself , and that and have the prize between they . do he dare to ask what would be the fate of the . to devote all one 's time and mind and industry to a measure which one know will fall to the ground must be sad . work under such circumstance must be very grievous . but such be often the fate of statesman . whether laboure under such a conviction the do not know , though he see he friend and colleague almost daily . in truth no one da to tell he exactly what he think . even the old have become partially reticent , and take himself off to he own wood at . to the would sometimes say a word , but would say even that timidly . on any abstract question , such as that which he have discuss when they have be walk together , he could talk freely enough . but on the matter of the day , those affair which be of infinite importance to himself , and on which one would suppose he would take delight in speak to a trust colleague , he could not bring himself to be open . " it must be a long , I suppose ? " he say to one day . " I be afraid so , . it will run , I fear , to over a hundred clause . " " it will take you the best part of the session to get through it ? " " if we can have the second reading early in , we hope to send it up to you in the first week in . that will give we ample time . " " yes ; -- yes . I suppose so . " but he do not dare to ask whether he think that the house of Commons would assent to the second reading . it be know at this time that the be painfully anxious as to the fate of the . it seem to be but the other day that everybody connect with the government be live in fear lest he should resign . he threat in that direction have always be make to he old friend the of ; but a great man can not whisper he thought without have they carry in the air . in all the club it have be declare that that be the rock by which the would probably be wreck . the newspaper have repeat the story , and the " 's " have assure the world that if it be so the of would thus do for he country the only good service which it be possible that he should render it . that be at the time when be mutinous and when have destroy himself . but now no such
such threat come from the , and the " 's " be already accuse he of clinging to power with pertinacious and unconstitutional tenacity . have not desert he ? be it not well know that and be only restrain from do so by a mistaken loyalty ? everybody come up to town , have he in he pocket , and the 's speech be read , promise the . the address be vote with a very few word from either side . the battle be not to be fight then . indeed , the state of thing be so abnormal that there could hardly be say to be any side in the house . a stranger in the gallery , not know the condition of affair , would have think that no minister have for many year command so large a majority , as the crowd of member be always on the government side of the ; but the opposition which expect would , he know , come from those who sit around he , behind he , and even at he very elbow . about a week after parliament meet the be read for the first time , and the second reading be appoint for a early day in . the have suggest to the expedience of some further delay , give as he reason the necessity of get through certain routine work , should the rejection of the create the confusion of a resignation . no one who know the could ever suspect he of give a false reason . but it seem that in this the be allow himself to be harass by fear of the future . think that any delay would be injuriious and open to suspicion after what have be say and do , and be urgent in he argument . the give way , but he do so almost sullenly , signify he acquiescence with haughty silence . " I be sorry , " say , " to differ from you , but my opinion in the matter be so strong that I do not dare to abstain from express it . " the bow again and smile . he have intend that the smile should be acquiescent , but it have be as cold as steel . he know that he be misbehave , but be not sufficientely master of he own manner to be gracious . he tell himself on the spot ,-- though he be quite wrong in so tell himself , -- that he have now make a enemy also of , and through of . and now he feel that he have no friend leave in whom to trust , -- for the old have become cold and indifferent . the old , he think , be tired of he work and anxious for rest . it be the old who have bring he into this hornet ' nest ; have fix upon he back the unwilling load ; have compelle he to assume the place which now to lose would be a disgrace , -- and the old be now desert he ! he be sore all over , angry with every one , ungracious even with he private Secretary and he wife , -- and especially miserable because he be thoroughly aware of he own fault . and yet , through it all , there be present to he a desire to fight on to the very last . let he colleague do what they might , and say what they might , he would remain of as long as he be support by a majority of the of . " I do not know any greater step than this , " say to he pleasantly one day , speak of they new measure , " towards that millennium of which we be talk at , if we can only accomplish it . " " those moral speculation , , " he say , " will hardly bear the wear and tear of real life . " the word of the answer , combine with the manner in which they be spoken , be stern and almost uncivil . Phineas , at any rate , have do nothing to offend he . the pause , try to find some expression by which he might correct the injury he have do ; but , not find any , pass on without further speech . shrug he shoulders and go he way , tell himself that he have receive one further injunction not to put he trust in prince . " we shall be beaten , certainly , " say to , not long afterwards . " what make you so sure ? " " I smell it in the air . I see it in man 's face . " " and yet it be a moderate . they will have to pass something stronger before long if they throw it out now . " " it be not the that they will reject , but we . we have serve we turn , and we ought to go . " " the be tired of the ? " " the be so good a man that I hardly like to admit even that ; -- but I fear it be so . he be fretful and he make enemy . " " I sometimes think that he be ill . " " he be ill at ease and sick at heart . he can not hide he chagrin , and then be doubly wretch because he have betraye it . I do not know that I ever respect and , at the same time , pitie a man more thoroughly . " " he snub I awfully yesterday , " say , laugh . " he can not help himself . he snub I at every word that he speak , and yet I believe that
that he be most anxious to be civil to I . he ministry have be of great service to the country . for myself , I shall never regret have join it . but I think that to he it have be a continual sorrow . " the system on which the Duchess have commence she career as wife of the have now be completely abandon . in the first place , she have herself become so weary of it that she have be unable to continue the exertion . she have , too , become in some degree asham of she failure . the name of major and be not now pleasant to she ears , nor do she look back with satisfaction on the courtesy she have lavish on or the smile she have give to . " I have know a good many vulgar people in my time , " she say one day to , " but none ever so vulgar as we ministerial supporter . you do not remember , my dear . he be before you time ; -- one of the arithmetical man , and a great friend of 's . he be very bad , but there have come up worse since he . sometimes , I think , I like a little vulgarity for a change ; but , upon my honour , when we get rid of all this it will be a pleasure to go back to lady and gentleman . " this the say in she extreme bitterness . " it seem to I that you have pretty well get rid of ' all this ' already . " " but I have not get anybody else in they place . I have almost make up my mind not to ask any one into the house for the next twelve month . I use to think that nothing would ever knock I up , but now I feel that I be almost do for . I hardly dare open my mouth to . the of have cut I . look as ominous as a owl ; and you husband have not a word to say leave . hide he face and pass by when he see I . do try to comfort I the other day by say that everything be at six and seven , and I really take it almost as a compliment to be speak to . do not you think be ill ? " " he be carewear . " " a man may be wear by care till there come to be nothing leave of he . but he never speak of give up now . the old Bishop of talk of resigning , and he have already make up he mind who be to have the see . he use to consult the about all these thing , but I do not think he ever consult any one now . he never forgave the about . certainly , if a man want to quarrel with all he friend , and to double the hatred of all he enemy , he have better become . " " be you really sorry that such be he fate , ? " " ah ,-- I sometimes ask myself that question , but I never get at a answer . I should have think he a poltroon if he have decline . it be to be the greatest man in the greatest country in the world . do ever so little and the man who write history must write about you . and no man have ever try to be nobler than he till ,-- till --. " " make no exception . if he be careworn and ill and weary , he manners can not be the same as they be , but he purity be the same as ever . " " I do not know that it would remain so . I believe in he , , more than in any man , -- but I believe in none thoroughly . there be a devil creep in upon they when they hand be strengthen . I do not know what I would have wish . whenever I do wish , I always wish wrong . ah , I ; when I think of all those people I have down at , -- of the trouble I take , and of the glorious anticipation in which I revell , I do feel asham of myself . do you remember when I be determined that that wretch should be member for ? " " you have not see she since , ? " " no ; but I mean to see she . I could not make she first husband member , and therefore the man who be member be to be she second husband . but I be almost sick of scheme . oh , dear , I wish I know something that be really pleasant to do . I have never really enjoy anything since I be in love , and I only like that because it be wick . " the Duchess be wrong in say that the of have cut they . the old man still remember the kiss and still remember the pledge . but he have find it very difficult to maintain he old relation with he friend . it be he opinion that the have do all that be want from it , and that now have come the time when they might retire gracefully . it be , no doubt , hard for a to find a excuse for go . but if the of would have be content to acknowledge that he be not the man to alter the , a excuse might have be find that would have be injuriious to no one . and might have join , and the present might have resign ,
, explain that he have do all that he have be appoint to accomplish . he have , however , yield at once to , and now it be to be fear that the house of Commons would not accept the from he hand . in such a state of thing ,-- especially after that disagreement about , -- it be difficult for the old to tender he advice . he be at every ; he always come when he presence be require ; he be invariably good - humoure ; -- but it seem to he that he work be done . he could hardly volunteer to tell he chief and he colleague that he would certainly be beat in the of , and that therefore there be little more now to be do than to arrange the circumstance of they retirement . nevertheless , as the period for the second reading of the come on , he resolve that he would discuss the matter with he friend . he owed it to himself to do so , and he also owed it to the man whom he have certainly place in he present position . on himself politics have impos a burden very much lighter than that which they have inflict on he more energetic and much less practical colleague . through he long life he have either be in office , or in such a position that man be sure that he would soon return to it . he have take it , when it have come , willingly , and have always leave it without a regret . as a man cut in and out at a whist table , and enjoy both the game and the rest from the game , so have the of be well pleased in either position . he be patriotic , but he patriotism do not disturb he digestion . he have be ambitious , -- but moderately ambitious , and he ambition have be gratify . it never occur to he to be unhappy because he or he party be beat on a measure . when of the , he could do he duty and enjoy life . when in opposition , he could linger in till and devote he leisure to he tree and he bullock . he be always esteem , always self - satisfied , and always of . but with we it be very different . Patriotism with he be a fever , and the public service a exact mistress . as long as this have be all he have still be happy . not trust much in himself , he have never aspire to great power . but now , now at last , ambition have laid hold of he , -- and the feeling , not perhaps uncommon with such man , that personal dishonour would be attach to political failure . what would he future life be if he have so carry himself in he great office as to have show himself to be unfit to resume it ? Hitherto any office have suffice he in which he might be useful ; -- but now he must either be , or a silent , obscure , and humble man ! , I will be with you to - morrow morning at 11 a.m. , if you can give I half - a - hour . yours affectionately , . benefit . the receive this note one afternoon , a day or two before that appoint for the second reading , and meet he friend within a hour in the house of Lords , confirm the appointment . " shall I not rather come to you ? " he say . but the old , who live in 's , declare that would be in he way to ; and so the matter be settled . exactly at eleven the two meet . " I do not like trouble you , " say the old man , " when I know that you have so much to think off . " " on the contrary , I have but little to think of , -- and my thought must be very much engage , indeed , when they shall be too full to admit of my see you . " " of course we be all anxious about this . " the smile . anxious ! yes , indeed . he anxiety be of such a nature that it keep he awake all night , and never for a moment leave he mind free by day . " and of course we must be prepared as to what shall be do either in the event of success or of failure . " " you might as well read that , " say the other . " it only reach I this morning , or I should have tell you of it . " the letter be a communication from the solicitor- General contain he resignation . he have now study the closely , and regret to say that he could not give it a conscientious support . it be a matter of sincerest sorrow to he that relation so pleasant should be break , but he must resign he place , unless , indeed , the clause as to redistribution could be withdraw . of course he do not say this as expect that any such concession would be make to he opinion , but merely as indicate the matter on which he objection be so strong as to over -rule all other consideration . all this he explain at great length . " the pleasantness of the relation must have be on one side , " say the veteran . " he ought to have go long since . " " and have already as good as say that unless we will abandon the same clause , he must oppose the in the
the Lord . " " and resign , of course . " " he mean that , I presume . have not speak to I . " " the clause will not stick in he throat . ought they . if the lawyer have they own way about law they should be contente . " " the question be , whether in these circumstance we should postpone the second reading ? " ask the . " certainly not , " say the other . " as to the solicitor- General you will have no difficulty . be only place there as a concession to he party . Drummond will no doubt continue to hold he office till we see what be do in the . if the second reading be lose there , -- why then he lordship can go with the rest of we . " " say we shall have a majority . he and be quite agree about it . between they they must know , " say the , unintentionally plead for himself . " they ought to know , if any man do ; -- but the crisis be exceptional . I suppose you think that if the second reading be lose we should resign ? " " oh ,-- certainly . " " or , after that , if the be much mutilate in ? I do not know that I shall personally break my own heart about the . the exist difference in the suffrage be rather in accordance with my prejudice . but the country desire the measure , and I suppose we can not consent to any such material alteration as these man suggest . " as he speak he lay he hand on 's letter . " would not hear of it , " say the . " of course not . and you and I in this measure must stick to . my great , indeed my only strong desire in the matter , be to act in strict unison with you . " " you be always good and true , . " " for my own part I shall not in the least regret to find in all this a opportunity of resigning . we have do we work , and if , as I believe , a majority of the would again support either or as the head of the entire party , I think that that arrangement would be for the welfare of the country . " " why should it make any difference to you ? why should you not return to the Council ? " " I should not do so ; --certainly not at once ; probably never . but you , -- who be in the very prime of you life -- " the do not smile now . he knit he brows and a dark shadow come across he face . " I do not think I could do that , " he say . " Caesar could hardly have lead a legion under . " " it have be do , greatly to the service of the country , and without the slightest loss of honour or character in he who do it . " " we need hardly talk of that , . you think then that we shall fail ;-- fail , I mean , in the of . I do not know that failure in we House should be regard as fatal . " " in three case we should fail . the loss of any material clause in would be as bad as the loss of the . " " oh , yes . " " and then , in spite of Messrs . and , -- who have be wrong before and may be wrong now , -- we may lose the second reading . " " and the third chance against we ? " " you would not probably try to carry on the with a very small majority . " " not with three or four . " " , I think , with six or seven . it would be useless . my own belief be that we shall never carry the into . " " I have always know you to be right , . " " I think that general opinion have set in that direction , and general opinion be generally right . have come to that conclusion I think it best to tell you , in order that we might have we house in order . " the of , who with all he haughtiness and all he reserve , be the simplest man in the world and the least apt to pretend to be that which he be not , sigh deeply when he hear this . " for my own part , " continue he elder , " I feel no regret that it should be so . " " it be the first large measure that we have try to carry . " " we do not come in to carry large measure , my friend . look back and see how many large measure carry , -- but he take the country safely through its most dangerous crisis . " " what have we do ? " " carry on the 's government prosperously for three year . be that nothing for a minister to do ? I have never be a friend of great measure , know that when they come fast , one after another , more be break in the rattle than be repair by the reform . we have do what parliament and the country expect we to do , and to my poor judgment we have do it well . " " I do not feel much self - satisfaction , . well ; -- we must see it out , and if it be as you anticipate ,
, I shall be ready . of course I have prepare myself for it . and if , of late , my mind have be less turn to retirement than it use to be , it have only be because I have become wedded to this measure , and have wish that it should be carry under we auspices . " then the old take he leave , and the be leave alone to consider the announcement that have be make to he . he have say that he have prepare himself , but , in so say , he have hardly know himself . , though he have be troublead by many doubt , he have still hope . the report make to he by , back as it have be by 's assurance , have almost sufficed to give he confidence . but and combine be as nothing to the of . the know now , -- he feel that he know , that he day be number . the resignation of that linger old bishop be not complete , and the person in whom he believe would not have the see . he have meditate the making of a peer or two , have hithertoo be very cautious in that respect , but he would do nothing of the kind if call upon by the house of Commons to resign with a uncompleted measure . but he thought soon run away from the present to the future . what be now to come off himself ? how should he use he future life , -- he who as yet have not pass he forty - seventh year ? he regrett much have make that apparently pretentious speech about , though he know he old friend well enough to be sure that it would never be use against he . who be he that he should class himself among the big one of the world ? a man may indeed measure small thing by great , but the measurer should be careful to declare he own littleness when he illustrate he position by that of the topping one of the earth . but the thing say have be true . let the be who he might , he , the little Caesar of the day , could never now command another legion . he have once tell Phineas Finn that he regret that he have abstain from the ordinary amusement of English gentleman . but he have abstain also from they ordinary occupations ,-- except so far as politics be one of they . he care nothing for oxen or for furrow . in regard to he own land he hardly know whether the farm be large or small . he have be a scholar , and after a certain fitful fashion he have maintain he scholarship , but the literature to which he have be really attach have be that of blue - book and newspaper . what be he to do with himself when call upon to resign ? and he understand , -- or think that he understand , -- he position too well to expect that after a while , with the usual interval , he might return to power . he have be , not as the lead politician on either side , not as the king of a party , but ,-- so he tell himself , -- as a stop - gap . there could be nothing for he now till the insipidity of life should gradually fake away into the grave . after a while he get up and go off to he wife 's apartment , the room in which she use to prepare she triumph and where now she contemplate she disappointment . " I have have the with I , " he say . " what ; -- at last ? " " I do not know that he could have do any good by come sooner . " " and what do he say ? " " he think that we day be number . " " !-- be that all ? I could have tell he that ever so long ago . it be hardly necessary that he should disturb himself at last to come and tell we such well - ventilate news . there be not a porter at one of the club who do not know it . " " then there will be the less surprise , -- and to those who be concerned perhaps the less mortification . " " do he tell you who be to succeed you ? " ask the Duchess . " not precisely . " " he ought to have do that , as I be sure he know . everybody know except you , . " " if you know , you can tell I . " " of course , I can . it will be . " " with all my heart , . be a very good man . " " I wonder whether he will do anything for we . think how destitute we shall be ! what if I be to ask he for a place ! would he not give it we ? " " will it make you unhappy , ? " " what ; -- you go ? " " yes ; -- the change altogether . " she look he in the face for a moment before she answer , with a peculiar smile in she eye to which he be well use , -- a smile half ludicrous and half pathetic , -- haive in it also a dash of sarcasm . " I can dare to tell the truth , " she say , " which you can not . I can be honest and straightforward . yes , it will make I unhappy . and you ? " " do you think that I
I can not be honest too , -- at any rate to you ? it do fret I . I do not like to think that I shall be without work . " " yes ;-- 's occupation will be gone , -- for awhile ; for awhile . " then she come up to he and put both she hand on he breast . " but yet , Othello , I shall not be all unhappy . " " where will be you contentment ? " " in you . it be make you ill . Rough people , whom the tenderness of you nature could not well endure , trod upon you , and worry you with they tooth and woun you everywhere . I could have turn at they again with my tooth , and give they worry for worry ; -- but you could not . now you will be save from they , and so I shall not be discontent . " all this she say look up into he face , still with that smile which be half pathetic and half ludicrous . " then I will be content too , " he say as he kiss she . only the of the night of the debate arrive , but before the debate be commence get up to make a personal explanation . he think it right to state to the how it come to pass that he find himself bound to leave the at so important a crisis in its existence . then a observation be make by a honourable member of the government , -- presumably in a whisper , but still loud enough to catch the sharp ear of , who now sit just below the gangway . it be say afterwards that the gentleman who make the observation , -- a irish gentleman name , conspicuous rather for he loyalty to he party than he steadiness , -- have purposely take the place in which he then sit , that might hear the whisper . the whisper suggest that fall house be often leave by certain animal . it be certainly a very loud whisper , -- but , if gentleman be to be allow to whisper at all , it be almost impossible to restrain the volume of the voice . to restrain have always be find difficult . , who do not lack pluck , turn at once upon he assailant , and declare that word have be use with reference to himself which the honourable member do not dare to get upon he leg and repeat . , as the gentleman be call , look he full in the face , but do not move he hat from he head or sty a limb . it be a pleasant little episode in the evening 's work , and afford satisfaction to the generally . then go on with he explanation . the detail of this measure , as soon as they be make known to he , appear to he , he say , to be fraught with the gravest and most pernicious consequence . he be sure that the member of she Majesty 's government , who be hurry on this measure with what he think be indecent haste ,--minister be always either indecent in they haste or treacherous in they delay , -- have not consider what they be do , or , if they have consider , be blind as to its result . he then attempt to discuss the detail of the measure , but be call to order . a personal explanation could not be allow to give he a opportunity of anticipat the debate . he contrive , however , before he sit down , to say some very heavy thing against he late chief , and especially to congratulate the on the service of the honourable gentleman , the member for , -- mean thereby . it would perhaps have be well for everybody if the measure could have be withdraw and the could have resign without the debate , -- as everybody be convince what would be the end of it . let the second reading go as it might , the could not be carry . there be measure which require the hopeful heartiness of a new , and the thorough - go energy of a young parliament , -- and this be one of they . the House be as fully agree that this change be necessary , as it ever be agree on any subject , -- but still the thing could not be do . even , who be the most earnest of man , feel the general slackness of all around he . the commotion and excitement which would be cause by a change of might restore its proper tone to the house , but in its present condition it be unfit for the work . make he speech , and put all he argument into lucid order . he know it be for nothing , but nevertheless it must be do . for hour after hour he go on , -- for it be necessary to give every detail of he contemplate proposition . he go through it as sedulously as though he have expect to succeed , and sit down about nine o'clock in the evening . then move the adjournment of the till the morrow , give as he reason for do so the expedience of consider the detail he have hear . to this no opposition be make , and the house be adjourn . on the follow day the club be all alive with rumour as to the come debate . it be know that a strong party have be form under the auspices of , and that with he and other politician be in close council . it be of course necessary that they should impart to many the
the secret of they conclave , so that it be know early in the afternoon that it be the intention of the opposition not to discuss the , but to move that it be read a second time that day six month . the have hardly expect this , as the be undoubtedly popular both in the and the country ; and if the opposition should be beat in such a course , that defeat would tend greatly to strengthen the hand of the government . but if the foe could succeed in carry a positive veto on the second reading , it would under all the circumstance be tantamount to a vote of want of confidence . " I be afraid they know almost more than we do as to the feeling of member , " say to . " there be not a man in the house whose feele in the matter I do not know , " say , " but I be not quite so sure of they principle . on we own side , in we old party , there be a score of man who detest the , though they would fain be true to the government . they have vote with he through thick and thing , and he have not speak a word to one of they since he become . what be you to do with such a man ? how be you to act with he ? " " write to he the other day about something , " answer the other , " I forget what , and he get a note back from as cold as ice , -- a absolute slap in the face . Fancy treat a man like in that way , -- one of the most popular man in the , related to half the peerage , and a man who think so much of himself ! I should not wonder if he be to vote against we ;-- I should not indeed . " " it have all be the old 's do , " say , " and no doubt it be intend for the best ; but the thing have be a failure from the beginning to the end . I know it would be so . I do not think there have be a single man who have understand what a really mean except you and I . from the very begin all you man be averse to it in spirit . " " look how they be treat ! " say . " be it likely that they should be very staunch when become of the ? " there be a cabinet Council that day which last but a few minute , and it may easily be presume that the decide that they would all resign at once if should carry he amendment . it be not unlikely that they be agree to do the same if he should nearly carry it , -- leave probably the to judge what narrow majority would constitute nearness . on this occasion all the gentleman assemble be jocund in they manner , and apparently well satisfied , -- as though they see before they a end to all they trouble . the boy do not even make a grimace when the wolf bit he beneath he frock , and these be all spartan boy . even the , who have fortify himself for the occasion , and who never weep in any company but that of he wife and he old friend , be pleasant in he manner and almost affable . " we not make this step towards the millennium just at present , " he say to as they leave the room together ,-- refer to word which Phineas have speak on a former occasion , and which then have not be very well take . " but we shall have make a step towards the step , " say , " and in get to a millennium even that be something . " " I suppose we be all too anxious , " say the , " to see some great effect come from we own little doings . good -day . we shall know all about it tolerably early . seem to think that it will be a attack on the and not on the , and that it will be best to get a vote with as little delay as possible . " " I will bet a even five - pound note , " say at the , " that the present be out to - morrow , and another that no one name five member of the next cabinet . " " you can help to win you first bet , " say , a very old member , who , like many other conservatives , have support the . " I shall not do that , " say , " though I think I ink . I will not vote against the man in he misfortune , though , upon my soul , I do not love he very dearly . I shall vote neither way , but I hope that may succeed . " " if he do , who be to come in ? " say the other . " I suppose you do not want to serve under ? " " certainly under the of . we shall not want a as long as there be as good fish in the sea as have be catch out of it . " there have lately be form a new liberal club , establish on a broader basis than the progress , and perhaps with a greater amount of aristocratic support . this have come up since the have be . certain busy man have never be quite contente with the exist state of thing , and have think that the , with such
such assistance as such a club could give it , would be strong enough to rule alone . that the great liberal party should be imped in its work and its triumph by such man as and be odious to the club . all the Palliser have , from time immemorial , run straight as liberals , and therefore the club have be unwilling to oppose the personally , though he be the chief of the . and certain member of the government , , for instance , , and be on the committee of the club . but the club , as a club , be not averse to a discontinuance of the present state of thing . might again become , if he would condescmend so far , or . it might be possible that the great liberal triumph contemplate by the club might not be achieve by the present house ; -- but the present house must go shortly , and then , with that assistance from a well - organised club , which have lately be so terribly want , -- the lack of which have make the , -- no doubt the british constituency would do they duty , and a liberal , pure and simple , might reign ,-- almost for ever . with this great future before it , the club be very lukewarm in its support of the present . " I shall go down and vote for they of course , " say , " just for the look of the thing . " in say this express the feeling of the club , and the feeling of the party generally . there be something due to the , but not enough to make it incumbend on he friend to maintain he in he position as . it be a great day for . at half - past four the be full , -- not from any desire to hear 's argument against the , but because it be feel that a good deal of personal interest would be attach to the debate . if one be ask in these day what gift should a ask first from the fairy , one would name the power of attract personal friend . , if it be too easy , may become almost a curse . be suspect , and sometimes sink almost to pedantry . a - bear intellect be hardly want , and clash with the inferiority . be exacte . honesty be unpractical . Truth be easily offended . Dignity will not bend . but the man who can be all thing to all man , who have ever a kind word to speak , a pleasant joke to crack , who can forgive all sins , who be ever prepare for friend or foe but never very bitter to the latter , who forget be not man 's name , and be always ready with little word , -- he be the man who will be support at a crisis such as this that be now in the course of passing . it be for he that man will struggle , and talk , and , if need be , fight , as though the very existence of the country depend on he political security . the present man would receive no such defence ; -- but still the violent deposition of a be always a memorable occasion . make he speech , and , as have be anticipate , it have very little to do with the , and be almost exclusively a attack upon he late chief . he think , he say , that this be a occasion on which they have better come to a direct issue with as little delay as possible . if he rightly read the feeling of the house , no of this magnitude come from the present would be likely to be pass in a efficient condition . the have fritter away he support in that , and as a have lose that confidence which a majority of the have once be willing to place in he . we need not follow through he speech . he allude to he own service , and declare that he be oblige to withdraw they because the would not trust he with the management of he own office . he have reason to believe that other gentleman who have attach themselves to the 's have find themselves equally crippl by this passion for autocratic rule . Hereupon a loud chorus of disapprobation come from the bench , which be fully answer by opposing noise from the other side of the . declare that he need only point to the fact that the have be already shiver by the secession of various gentleman . " only two , " say a voice . be turn round to contradict the voice when he be greet by another . " and those the weakest , " say the other voice , which be indubitably that of . " I will not speak of myself , " say pompously ; " but I be authorise to tell the house that the noble lord who be now Secretary of State for the only hold he office till this crisis shall have pass . " after that there be some sparring of a very bitter kind between and , till at last it seem that the debate be to degenerate into a war of man against man . Phineas , and , and allow themselves to be lash into anger , and , as far as word go , have the best of it . but of what use could it be ? every man there have come into the house prepare to vote for or against the of , -- or resolve , like , not to vote at all ; and it be hardly on the card that
that a single vote should be turn this way or that by any violence of speak . " let it pass , " say in a whisper to . " the fire be not worth the fuel . " " I know the 's fault , " say ; " but these man know nothing of he virtue , and when I hear they abuse he I can not stand it . " Early in the night , -- before twelve o'clock , -- the divide , and even at the moment of the division no one quite know how it would go . there would be many who would of course vote against the amendment as be simply desirous of record they opinion in favour of the generally . and there be some who think that and he follower have be too forward , and too confident of they own standing in the , in try so violent a mode of opposition . it would have be better , these man think , to have insure success by a gradual and persistent opposition to the itself . but they hardly know how thoroughly man may be alienate by silence and a cold demeanour . on the division be beaten , but be beat only by nine . " he can not go on with he , " say in one of the lobby of the house . " I defy he . the would not stand it , you know . " " no minister , " say , " could carry a measure like that with a majority of nine on a vote of confidence ! " the be of course adjourn , and go at once to . " I wish it have only be three or four , " say the , laugh . " why so ? " " because there would have be less doubt . " " be there any at present ? " " less possibility for doubt , I will say . you would not wish to make the attempt with such a majority ? " " I could not do it , ! " " I quite agree with you . but there will be those who will say that the attempt might be make , -- who will accuse we of be faint - hear because we do not make it . " " they will be man who understand nothing of the temper of the house . " " very likely . but still , I wish the majority have only be two or three . there be little more to be say , I suppose . " " very little , you . " " we have better meet to - morrow at two , and , if possible , I will see she in the afternoon . good night , . " " good night , . " " my reign be end . you be a good deal a older man than I , and yet probably yours have yet to begin . " smile and shake he head as he leave the room , not trust himself to discuss so large a subject at so late a hour of the night . without wait a moment after he colleague 's departure , the , -- for he be still , -- go into he wife 's room , know that she be wait up till she should hear the result of the division , and there he find with she . " be it over ? " ask the Duchess . " yes ; -- there have be a division . have just be with I . " " well ! " " we have beaten they , of course , as we always do , " say the , attempt to be pleasant . " you do not suppose there be anything to fear ? you husband have always bid you keep up you courage ; -- have he not , ? " " my husband have lose he sense , I think , " she say . " he have take to such storming and rave about he political enemie that I hardly dare to open my mouth . " " tell I what have be do , , " ejaculate the Duchess . " do not you be as unreasonable as , . the House have vote against 's amendment by a majority of nine . " " only nine ! " " and I shall cease to be to - morrow . " " you do not mean to say that it be settled ? " " quite settled . the play have be play , and the curtain have fall , and the light be be put out , and the poor weary actor may go home to bed . " " but on such a amendment surly any majority would have do . " " no , my dear . I will not name a number , but nine certainly would not do . " " and it be all over ? " " my be all over , if you mean that . " " then everything be over for I . I shall settle down in the country and build cottage , and mix draught . you , , will still be go up the tree . if manage well he may come to be some day . " " he have hardly such ambition , . " " the ambition will come fast enough ; -- will it not , ? let he once begin to dream of it as possible , and the desire will soon be strong enough . how should you feel if it be so ? " " it be quite impossible , " say , gravely . " I do not see why anything be impossible . will be now ,
, and . after that anybody may hope to be anything . well , -- I suppose we may go to bed . be you carriage here , my dear ? " " I hope so . " " ring the bell , , for somebody to see she down . come to lunch to - morrow because I shall have so many groan to utter . what beast , what brute , what ungrateful wretch man be !-- worse than woman when they get together in number enough to be bold . why have they desert you ? what have we not do for they ? think of all the new bedroom furniture that we send to merely to keep the party together . there be thousand of yard of linen , and it have all been of no use . do not you feel like , ? " " not in the least , my dear . no one will take anything away from I that be my own . " " for I , I be almost as much divorc as , and have have my head cut off as completely as and the rest of they . go away , , because I be go to have a cry by myself . " the himself on that night put . Finn into she carriage ; and as he walk with she downstair he ask she whether she believe the Duchess to be in earnest in she sorrow . " she so mix up she mirth and woe together , " say the , " that I myself sometimes can hardly understand she . " " I think she do regret it , . " " she tell I but the other day that she would be contente . " " a few week will make she so . as for you , I hope I may congratulate you . " " oh yes ;-- I think so . we none of we like to be beat when we have take a thing in hand . there be always a little disappointment at first . but , upon the whole , it be better as it be . I hope it will not make you husband unhappy . " " not for he own sake . he will go again into the middle of the scramble and fight on one side or the other . for my own part I think opposition the pleasantest . good night , . I be so sorry that I should have troublead you . " then he go alone to he own room , and sit there without move for a couple of hour . surely it be a great thing to have be of for three year , -- a prize of which nothing now could rob he . he ought not to be unhappy ; and yet he know himself to be wretch and disappoint . it have never occur to he to be proud of be a duke , or to think of he wealth otherwise than a chance incident of he life , advantageous indeed , but by no means a source of honou . and he have be aware that he have owed he first seat in parliament to he birth , and probably also he first introduction to official life . a heir to a dukedom , if he will only work hard , may almost with certainty find himself receive into one or the other regiment in . it have not in he early day be with he as it have with he friend and , who have work they way from the very rank . but even a duke can not become by favour . surely he have do something of which he might be proud . and so he try to conseal himself . but to have do something be nothing to he , -- nothing to he personal happiness ,-- unless there be also something leave for he to do . how should it be with he now , -- how for the future ? would man ever listen to he again , or allow he again to work in they behoof , as he use to do in he happy day in the house of Commons ? he fear that it be all over for he , and that for the rest of he day he must simply be the of . " I be Disgraced and Shamed " after the commencement of the become a constant visitor in , dining with the old barrister almost constantly on , and not unfrequently on other day when the and he general engagement would permit it . between he and 's father there be no secret and no misunderstanding . quite understand that the young member of parliament be earnestly purpose to marry he daughter , and be sure of all the assistance and support which could give he . the name of be very rarely use between they . it have be tacitly agree that there be no need that it should be mention . the man have come like a destroy angel between they and they fondest hope . neither could ever be what he would have be have that man never appear to destroy they happiness . but the man have go away , not without a tragedy that be appal ; -- and each think that , as regard he , he and the tragedy might be , if not forget at least put aside , if only that other person in whom they be interested could be teach to seem to forget he . " it be not love , " say the father , " but a feeling of shame . " shook he head , not quite agree with this . it be not that he fear that she love the memory of she late husband
husband . such love be , he think , impossible . but there be , he believe , something more than the feeling which she father describe as shame . there be pride also ;-- a determination in she own bosom not to confess the fault she have make in give herself to he whom she must now think to have be so much the least worthy of she two suitor . " she fortune will not be what I once promise you , " say the old man plaintively . " I do not remember that I ever ask you as to she fortune , " yoArthu reply . " certainly not . if you have I should not have tell you . but as I name a sum , it be right that I should explain to you that that man succeed in lessen it by six or seven thousand pound . " " if that be all ! " " and I have promise Alure that , as he heir , should have the use of a considerable portion of he share without waiting for my death . it be odd that the one of my child from whom I certainly expect the greater trouble should have fall so entirely on he foot ; and that the other -- ; well , let we hope for the best . seem to have take up with as though it belong to he already . and Emily -- ! well , my dear boy , let we hope that it may come right yet . you be not drink you wine . yes , -- pass the bottle ; I will have another glass before I go upstairs . " in this way the time go by return to town . the have just then resign , but I think that " this great reactionary success , " as it be call by the writer in the " 's , " affect one member of the much less than the return to of . have determine that he would renew he suit as soon as a year should have expire since the tragedy which have make he love a widow , -- and that year have now pass away . he have know the day well , -- as have she , when she pass the morning weep in she own room at . now he question himself whether a year would suffice ,-- whether both in mercy to she and with the view of realize he own hope he should give she some longer time for recovery . but he have tell himself that it should be do at the end of a year , and as he have allow no one to talk he out of he word , so neither would he be untrue to it himself . but it become with he a deep matter of business , a question of great difficulty , how he should arrange the necessary interview ,-- whether he should plead he case with she at they first meeting , or whether he have better allow she to become accustom to he presence in the house . he mother have attempt to ridicule he , because he be , as she say , afraid of a woman . he well remember that he have never be afraid of when they have be quite young ,-- little more than a boy and girl together . then he have tell she of he love over and over again , and have find almost a comfortable luxury in urge she to say a word , which she have never indeed say , but which probably in those day he still hope that she would say . and occasionally he have feign to be angry with she , and have temp she on to little quarrel with a boyish idea that quick reconciliation would perhaps throw she into he arm . but now it seem to he that a age have pass since those day . he love have certainly not fade . there have never be a moment when that have be on the wing . but now the azure plumage of he love have become grey as the wing of a dove , and the gorgeousness of he dream have sober into hope and fear which be a constant burden to he heart . there be time enough , still time enough for happiness if she would yield ; -- and time enough for the dull pressure of unsatisfied aspiration should she persist in she refusal . at last he see she , almost by accident , and that meeting certainly be not fit for the purpose of he suit . he call at the day after she arrival , and find she at she father 's chamber . she have come there keep some appointment with he , and certainly have not expect to meet she lover . he be confused and hardly able to say a word to account for he presence , but she greet he with almost sisterly affection , say some word of Longbarns and he family , tell he how Everett , to 's great delight , have be swear in as a magistrate for the , and how at the last hunt meeting have be ask to take the County hound , because old Weobly at seventy - five have declare himself to be unable any longer to ride as a master of hound ought to ride . all these thing yoArthu have of course heard , such news be too important to be keep long from he ; but on none of these subject have he much to say . he stutter and stammer , and quickly go away ; -- not , however , before he have promise to come and dine as usual on the next , and not without observe that the
the anniversary of that fatal day of release have do something to lighten the sombre load of mourning which the widow have hithertoo worn . yes ; -- he would dine there on the , but how would it be with he then ? never go out of the house on a evening , and could hardly be expect to leave he own draw - room for the sake of give a lover a opportunity . no ;--he must wait till that evening should have pass , and then make the occasion for himself as best he might . the come and the dinner be eat , and after dinner there be the single bottle of port and the single bottle of claret . " how do you think she be look ? " ask the father . " she be as pale as death before we get she down into the country . " " upon my word , sir , " say he , " I have hardly look at she . it be not a matter of look now , as it use to be . it have get beyond that . it be not that I be indifferent to see a pretty face , or that I have no longer a opinion of my own about a woman 's figure . but there grow up , I think , a longe which almost kill that consideration . " " to I she be as beautiful as ever , " say the father proudly . do manage , when in the drawing - room , to talk for a while about and the hound , and then go away , have resolve that he would come again on the very next day . surely she would not give a order that he should be deny admittance . she have be too calm , too even , too confident in herself for that . yes ; -- he would come and tell she plainly what he have to say . he would tell it with all the solemnity of which he be capable , with a few word , and those the strongest which he could use . should she refuse he , -- as he almost know that she would at first ,-- then he would tell she of she father and of the wish of all they jous not friend . " nothing , " he would say to she , " nothing but personal dislike can justify you in refuse to heal so many wound . " as he fix on these word he fail to remember how little probable it be that a lover should ever be able to use the phrase he arrange . on he come , and ask for , slurr over the word as best he could . the butler say he mistress be at home . since the death of the man he have so thoroughly despise , the old servant have never call she . yoArthu be show upstairs , and find the lady he seek , -- but he find also . it may be remembe that . , after the tragedy , have be refuse admittance into 's house . since that there have be some correspondence , and a feeling have prevail that the woman be not to be quarrell with for ever . " I do not do it , papa , because of she , " Emily have say with some scorn , and that scorn have procure 's pardon . she be now make a morning call , and sui she conversation to the black dress of she niece . yoArthu be horrify at see she . have always been to he odious , not only as a personal enemy but as a vulgar woman . he , at any rate , attribute to she a great part of the evil that have be do , feel sure that have there be no house round the corner , would never have become . as it be he be force to shake hand with she , and force to listen to the funereal tone in which . ask he if he do not think that look much improve by she sojourn in . he shrank at the sound , and then , in order that it might not be repeat , take occasion to show that he be allow to call he early playmate by she Christian name . , think that she ought to check he , remark that 's return be a great thing for . Thereupon seize he hat off the ground , wish they both good - bye , and hurrie out of the room . " what a very odd manner he have take up since he become a member of parliament , " say . Emily be silent for a moment , and then with a effort , -- with intense pain , -- she say a word or two which she think have better be at once spoken . " he go because he do not like to hear that name . " " good gracious ! " " and papa do not like it . do not say a word about it , aunt ; pray do not ; -- but call I Emily . " " be you go to be asham of you name ? " " never mind , aunt . if you think it wrong you must stay away ; -- but I will not have papa wounded . " " oh ; -- if wish it ; -- of course . " that evening tell , she husband , what a old fool be . the next day , quite early , be again at the house and be again admit upstairs . the butler , no doubt , know well enough why he come , and also know that the
the purport of he come have at any rate the sanction of . the room be empty when he be show into it , but she come to he very soon . " I go away yesterday rather abruptly , " he say . " I hope you do not think I rude . " " oh no . " " you aunt be here , and I have something I wish to say but could not say very well before she . " " I know that she have drive you away . you and be never great friend . " " never ; -- but I will forgive she everything . I will forgive all the injury that have be do I if you now will do as I ask you . " of course she know what it be that he be about to ask . when he have leave she at Longbarns without say a word of he love , without give she any hint whereby she might allow herself to think that he intend to renew he suit , then she have weep because it be so . though she resolution have be quite firm as to the duty which be incumbend on she of remain in she desolate condition of almost nameless widowhood , yet she have be unable to refrain from bitter tear because he also have seem to see that such be she duty . but now again , know that the request be come , feel once more confident of the constancy of he love , she be urgent with herself as to that heavy duty . she would be unwomanly , dead to all shame , almost inhuman , be she to allow herself again to indulge in love after all the havoc she have make . she have be little more than a bride when that husband , for whom she have so often be force to blush , have be drive by the weight of he misfortune and disgraces to destroy himself ! by the marriage she have make she have overwhelm she whole family with dishonour . she have do it with a persistency of perverse self - will which she herself could not now look back upon without wonder and horror . she , too , should have die as well as he , -- only that death have not be within the compass of she power as of he . how then could she forget it all , and wipe it away from she mind , as she would figure from a slate with a wet towel ? how could it be fit that she should again be a bride with such a spectre of a husband haunt she memory ? she have know that the request be to be make when he have come so quickly , and have not doubte it for a moment when he take he sudden departure . she have know it well , when just now the servant tell she that be in the drawing - room below . but she be quite certain of the answer she must make . " I should be sorry you should ask I anything I can not do , " she say in a very low voice . " I will ask you for nothing for which i have not you father 's sanction . " " the time have go by , , in which I might well have be guide by my father . there come a time when personal feeling must be stronger than a father 's authority . can not see I with my own eye ; he can not understand what I feel . it be simply this , -- that he would have I to be other than I be . but I be what I have make myself . " " you have not hear I as yet . you will hear I ? " " oh , yes . " " I have love you ever since I be a boy . " he pause as though he expect that she would make some answer to this ; but of course there be nothing that she could say . " I have be true to you since we be together almost as child . " " it be you nature to be true . " " in this matter , at any rate , I shall never change . I never for a moment have a doubt about my love . there never have be any one else whom I have venture to compare with you . then come that great trouble . Emily , you must let I speak freely this once , as so much , to I at least , depend on it . " " say what you will , . do not wound I more than you can help . " " know how willingly I would heal every wound without a word if it could be do . I do not know whether you ever think what I suffer when he come among we and rob I ,-- well , I will not say rob I of you love , because it be not mine -- but take away with he that which I have be try to win . " " I do not think a man would feel it like that . " " why should not a man feel as well as a woman ? I have set my heart on have you for my wife . can any desire be dearer to a man than that ? then he come . well , dearest ; surely I may say that he be not worthy of you . " " we be neither of we worthy , " she say . " I need not tell you that we all grieve . it seem to we
we down in as though a black cloud have come upon we . we could not speak of you , nor yet could we be altogether silent . " " of course you condemne I , -- as a outcast . " " do I write to you as though you be a outcast ? do I treat you when I see you as a outcast ? when I come to you to - day , be that proof that I think you to be a outcast ? I have never deceive you , . " " never . " " then you will believe I when I say that through it all not one word of reproach or contumely have ever pass my lip in regard to you . that you should have give yourself to one whom I could not think to be worthy of you be , of course , a great sorrow . have he be a prince of man it would , of course , have be a sorrow to I . how it go with you during you married life I will not ask . " " I be unhappy . I would tell you everything if I could . I be very unhappy . " " then come -- the end . " she be now weep , with she face bury in she handkerchief . " I would spare you if I know how , but there be some thing which must be say . " " no ;-- no . I will bear it all -- from you . " " well ! he success have not lessen my love . through then I could have no hope , -- though you be utterly remove from I , -- all that could not change I . there it be , -- as though my arm or my leg have be take from I . it be bad to live without a arm or leg , but there be no help . I go on with my life and try not to look like a whipped cur ;--though from time to time would tell I that I fail . but now ;-- now that it have again all change , -- what would you have I do now ? it may be that after all my limb may be restore to I , that I may be again as other man be , whole , and sound , and happy ; -- so happy ! when it may possibly be within my reach be I not to look for my happiness ? " he pause , but she weep on without speak a word . " there be those who will say that I should wait till all these sign of woe have be laid aside . but why should I wait ? there have come a great blot upon you life , and be it not well that it should be cover as quickly as possible ? " " it can never be cover . " " you mean that it can never be forgote . no doubt there be passage in we life which we can not forget , though we bury they in the deepest silence . all this can never be drive out of you memory , -- nor from mine . but it need not therefore blacke all we life . in such a condition we should not be rule by what the world think . " " not at all . I care nothing for what the world think . I be below all that . it be what I think : I myself , -- of myself . " " will you think of no one else ? be any of you thought for I , -- or for you father ? " " oh , yes ; -- for my father . " " I need hardly tell you what he wish . you must know how you can best give he back the comfort he have lose . " " but , , even for he I can not do everything . " " there be one question to be ask , " he say , rise from she foot and stand before she ;-- " but one ; and what you do should depend entirely on the answer which you may be able truly to make to that . " this he say so solemnly that he start she . " what question , ? " " do you love I ? " to this question at the moment she could make no reply . " of course I know that you do not love I when you marry he . " " love be not all of one kind . " " you know what love I mean . you do not love I then . you could not have love I ,-- though , perhaps , I think I have deserve you love . but love will change , and memory will sometimes bring back old fancie when the world have be stern and hard . when we be very young I think you love I . do you remember seven year ago at , when they part we and send I away , because -- because we be so young ? they do not tell we then , but I think you know . I know that I know , and go nigh to swear that I would dry myself . you love I then , Emily . " " I be a child then . " " now you be not a child . do you love I now , -- to - day ? if so , give I you hand , and let the past be bury in silence . all this have come , and go , and have nearly make we old . but there
there be life before we yet , and if you be to I as I be to you it be better that we life should be live together . " then he stand before she with he hand stretch out . " I can not do it , " she say . " and why ? " " I can not be other than the wretched thing I have make myself . " " but do you love I ? " " I can not analyse my heart . love you ;--yes ! I have always love you . everything about you be dear to I . I can triumph in you triumph , rejoice at you joy , weep at you sorrow , be ever anxious that all good thing may come to you ; -- but , , I can not be you wife . " " not though it would make we happy ,-- Fletcher and Whartons all alike ? " " do you think I have not think it over ? do you think that I have forgote you first letter ? know you heart , as I do know it , do you imagine that I have spend a day , a hour , for month past , without ask myself what answer I should make to you if the sweet constancy of you nature should bring you again to I ? I have tremble when I have hear you voice . my heart have beat at the sound of you footstep as though it would burst ! do you think I have never tell myself what I have throw away ? but it be gone , and it be not now within my reach . " " it be ; it be , " he say , throw himself on he knee , and twin he arm round she . " no ; -- no ;--no ;--neverespect I be disgrace and sham . I have lain among the pots till I be foul and blacken . take you arm away . they shall not be defile , " she say as she spring to she foot . " you shall not have the thing that he have leave . " " Emily , -- it be the only thing in the world that I crave . " " be a man and conquer you love , -- as I will . get it under you foot and press it to death . tell yourself that it be shameful and must be abandon . that you , , should marry the widow of that man , -- the woman that he have thrust so far into the mire that she can never again be clean ; -- you , the chosen one , the bright star among we all ; -- you , whose wife should be the fairest , the purest , the tenderest of we all , a flower that have yet be hardly breathe on ! while I -- , " she say , " I know my duty better than that . I will not seek a escape from my punishment in that way , -- nor will I allow you to destroy yourself . you have my word as a woman that it shall not be so . now I do not mind you know whether I love you or no . " he stand silent before she , not able for the moment to go on with he prayer . " and now , go , " she say . " bless you , and give you some day a fair and happy wife . and , , do not come again to I . if you will let it be so , I shall have a delight in see you ; -- but not if you come as you have come now . and , , spare I with papa . do not let he think that it be all my fault that I can not do the thing which he wish . " then she leave the room before he could say another word to she . but it be all she fault . no ;-- in that direction he could not spare she . it must be tell to she father , though he doubt he own power of describe all that have be say . " do not come again to I , " she have say . at the moment he have be leave speechless ; but if there be one thing fix in he mind , it be the determination to come again . he be sure now , not only of love that might have sufficed , -- but of hot , passionate love . she have tell he that she heart have beat at he footstep , and that she have tremble as she listen to he voice ; -- and yet she expect that he would not come again ! but there be a violence of decision about the woman which make he dread that he might still come in vain . she be so war from herself by the conviction of she great mistake , so prone to take shame to herself for she own error , so keenly alive to the degradation to which she have be submit , that it might yet be impossible to teach she that , though she husband have be vile and she mistaken , yet she have not be soile by he baseness . he go at once to the old barrister 's chamber and tell he the result of the meeting . " she be still a fool , " say the father , not understand at second - hand the depth of he daughter 's feeling . " no , sir , -- not then . she feel herself degrad by he degradation . if it be possible we must save
save she from that . " " she do degrade herself . " " not as she mean it . she be not degrad in my eye . " " why should she not take the only means in she power of rescue herself and rescue we all from the evil that she do ? she owe it to you , to I , and to she brother . " " I would hardly wish she to come to I in payment of such a debt . " " there be no room leave , " say angrily , " for soft sentimentality . well ; -- she must take she be as she make it . it be very hard on I , I know . consider what she use to be , it be marvellous to I that she should have so little idea left of do she duty to other . " find that the barrister be at the moment too angry to hear reason , or to be make to understand anything of the feeling of mixed love and admiration with which he himself be animate at the moment . he be oblige therefore to content himself with assure the father that he do not intend to give up the pursuit of he daughter . the Great when get home on that day he say not a word to Emily as to . he have resolve to take various course ,-- first to tell she roundly that she be neglect she duty to herself and to she family , and that he would no longer take she part and be she good friend unless she would consent to marry the man whom she have confess that she love . but as he think of this he become aware , -- first that he could not carry out such a threat , and then that he would lack even the firmness to make it . there be something in she face , something even in she dress , something in she whole manner to himself , which soften he and reduce he to vassalage directly he see she . then he determin to throw himself on she compassion and to implore she to put a end to all this misery by make herself happy . but as he draw near home he find himself unable to do even this . how be a father to beseech he widowed daughter to give herself away in a second marriage ? and therefore when he enter the house and find she wait for he , he say nothing . at first she look at he wistfully , -- anxious to learn by he face whether she lover have be with he . but when he speak not a word , simply kiss she in he usual quiet way , she become cheerful in manner and communicative . " , " she say , " I have have a letter from . " " well , my dear . " " just a nice chatty letter , -- full of , of course . " " be a great man now . " " I be sure that you be very glad that he be what he be . will you see 's letter ? " be not specially give to read young lady ' correspondence , and do not know why this particular letter should be offer to he . " you do not suspect anything at , do you ? " she ask . " suspect anything ! no ; I do not suspect anything . " but now , have have he curiosity arouse , he take the letter which be offer to he and read it . the letter be as follow :-- , . ,-- we all hope that you have a pleasant journey up to , and that be quite well . you brother come over to Longbarns the day after you start and drive I back to in the dog - cart . it be such a pleasant journey , though , now I remember , it rain all the way . but have always so much to say that I do not mind the rain . I think it will end in take the hound . he say he will not , because he do not wish to be the slave of the whole county ; -- but he say it in that sort of way that we all think he mean to do it . tell he that he ink , because he be the only hunt man on this side of the county who can afford to do it without feel it much ; and of course what say will go a long way with he . [ be 's wife ] be rather against it . but if he make up he mind she will be sure to turn round . of course it make we all very anxious at present to know how it be to end , for the master of the Hound always be the lead man in we part of the world . go to the bench at yesterday and take with he . it be the first time that have sit there . he say I be to tell he father he have not hang anybody as yet . they have already begin to cut down , or what they call stubb up , . say that it be no good keep it as a wood , and papa agree . so it be to go into the home farm , and be to pay rent for it . I do not like have it cut down as the boy always use to get nut there , but say it will not do to keep wood for little boy to get nut . have be very ill since you go , and I be afraid she
she will not last long . when they get to be so very bad with rheumatism I almost think it be wrong to pray for they , because they be in so much pain . we think at one time that 's ointment have do she good , but when we come to inquire , we find she have swallow it . be not it dreadful ? but it do not seem to do she any harm . say that it would not make any difference which she do . be begin to be afraid that be a . but I be sure he be not . he say he be as good a Conservative as there be in all , only that he like to know what be to be conserve . say after dinner yesterday that everything ought to be maintain . say that accord to that we should have keep the . " of course I would , " say papa . then they go at it , hammer and tong . have the best of it . at any rate he talk the longest . but I do hope he be not a . no country gentleman ought to be a . ought he , dear ? say you be to get the lozenge at 's in , and be sure to ask for the Vade mecum lozenge . she be all in a flutter about the hound . she say she hope will do nothing of the kind because of the expense ; but we all know that she would like he to have they . the subscription be not very good , only L1500 , and it would cost he ever so much a year . but everybody say that he be very rich and that he ought to do it . if you see give he we love . of course a member of parliament be too busy to write letter . but I do not think ever be good at writing . say that man never ought to write letter . give my love to . I be , dearest Emily , you most affectionate , . " be a fool , " say as soon as he have read the letter . " why be he a fool , papa ? " " because he will quarrel with Alured about politics before he know where he be . what business have a young fellow like that to have a opinion either one side or the other , before he betters ? " " but always have strong opinion . " " it do not matter as long as he only talk nonsense at a club in , but now he will break that old man 's heart . " " but , papa , do not you see anything else ? " " I see that be go to make a ass of himself and spend a thousand a year in keep up a pack of hound for other people to ride after . " " I think I see something else besides that . " " what do you see ? " " would it annoy you if be to become engage to ? " then whistle . " to be sure she do put he name into every line of she letter . no ; it would not annoy I . I do not see why he should not marry he second cousin if he like . only if he be engage to she , I think it odd that he should not write and tell we . " " I be sure he be not engage to she yet . she would not write at all in that way if they be engage . everybody would be tell at once , and would never be able to keep it a secret . why should there be a secret ? but I be sure she be very fond of he . would never write about any man in that way unless she be begin to be attach to he . " about ten day after this there come two letter from to , the shortest of which shall be give first . it run as follow :-- my ,-- I have propose to my cousin , and she have accept I . everybody here seem to like the idea . I hope it will not displease you . of course you and Emily will come down . I will tell you when the day be fix . you affectionate son , . this the old man read as he sit at breakfast with he daughter opposite to he , while be read a very much longer letter from the same house . " so it be go to be just as you guess , " he say . " I be quite sure of it , papa . be that from ? be he very happy ? " " upon my word , I can not say whether he be happy or not . if he have get a new horse he would have write at much greater length about it . it seem , however , to be quite fix . " " oh , yes . this be from . she be happy at any rate . I suppose man never say so much about these thing as woman . " " may I see 's letter ? " " I do not think it would be quite fair , papa . it be only a girl 's rhapsody about the man she love , -- very nice and womanly , but not intend for any one but I . it do not seem that they mean to wait very long . " " why should they wait ? be any day fix ? " " say that Everett talk about the middle of . of course you
you will go down . " " we must both go . " " you will at any rate . do not promise for I just at present . it must make Alure very happy . it be almost the same as find himself at last with a son of he own . I suppose they will live at altogether now ,-- unless get into parliament . " but the reader may see the young lady 's letter , though she future father - in - law be not permit to do so , and will perceive that there be a paragraph at the close of it which perhaps be more conducive to 's secrecy than she feeling as to the sacr obligation of female correspondence . , . ,-- I wonder whether you will be much surprised at the news I have to tell you . you can not be more so than I be at have to write it . it have all be so very sudden that I almost feel ashamed of myself . have propose to I , and I have accept he . there ; -- now you know it all . though you never can know how very dearly I love he and how thoroughly I admire he . I do think that he be everything that a man ought to be , and that I be the most fortunate young woman in the world . only be not it od that I should always have to live all my life in the same house , and never change my name , -- just like a man , or a old maid ? but I do not mind that because I do love he so dearly and because he be so good . I hope he will write to you and tell you that he like I . he have write to , I know . I be sit by he and he letter do not take he a minute . but he say that long letter about such thing only give trouble . I hope you will not think my letter troublesome . he be not sit by I now but have go over to to help to settle about the hound . be go to have they after all . I wish it have not happen just at this time because all the gentleman do think so much about it . of course be one of the committee . and be both very , very glad of it . of course it be nice for they as it will keep and I here . if I have marry anybody else , -- though I be sure I never should , -- she would have be very lonely . and of course papa like to think that be already one of we . I hope they never will quarrel about politics ; but , as say , the world do change as it go on , and young man and old man never will think quite the same about thing . tell papa the other day that if he could be put back a century he would be a . then there be ever so many word . but Everett always laugh , and at last papa come round . I can not tell you , my dear , what a fuss we be in already about it all . want to have we marriage early in , so that we may have two month in before be what he call turn loose . and papa say that there be no use in delaying , because he get older every day . of course that be true of everybody . so that we be all in a flutter about get thing . do talk of go up to town , but I believe they have thing now quite as good at . , when she be married , have all she thing from , but they say that there have be a great change since that . I be sure that I think that you may get anything you want at and 's . but mamma say I be to have my veil from and 's . of course you and will come . I sha not think it any marriage without . and mamma talk of it as quite of course . you know how fond papa be of the bishop . I think he will marry we . I own I should like to be marry by a bishop . it would make it so sweet and so solemn . could of course assist ; -- but he be such a odd old man , with he snuff and he spectacle always tumbl off , that I should not like to have no one else . I have often think that if it be only for marry people we ought to have a nicer rector at . almost all the tenant have be to wish I joy . they be very fond of already , and now they feel that there will never be any very great change . I do think it be the very best thing that could be do , even if it be not that I be so thoroughly in love with he . I do not think I should ever be able to own that I be in love with a man ; but now I feel quite proud of it . I do not mind tell you because he be you brother , and I think that you will be glad of it . he talk very often about you . of course you know what it be that we all wish . I love almost as much as if he be my brother . he be my sister 's brother - in - law , and if he could become my husband 's brother -
- in - law too , I should be so happy . of course we all know that he wish it . write immediately to wish I joy . perhaps you could go to and be about the veil . and promise to come to we in . say the veil ought to cost about thirty pound . Dearest , dearest Emily , I shall so soon be you most affectionate sister , . 's answer be full of warm , affectionate congratulation . she have much to say in favour of . she promise to use all she little skill at and 's . she express a hope that the overture to be make in regard to the bishop might be successful . and she make kind remark even as to and . but she would not promise that she herself would be at on the happy day . " dear , " she say , " remember what I have suffer , and that I can not be quite as other people be . I could not stand at you marriage in black clothes , -- nor should I have the courage even if I have the will to dress myself in other . " none of the Wharton have come to she wedding . there be no feeling of anger now left as to that . she be quite aware that they have do right to stay away . but the very fact that it have be right that they should stay away would make it wrong that the widow of should now assist at the marriage of one to another . this be all that a marriage ought to be ; whereas that have be -- all that a marriage ought not to be . in answer to the paragraph about have not a word to say . after this , early in , come up to town . though he bride might be content to get she bridal clothes in , none but a tailor could decorate he properly for such a occasion . during these last week have not be see in ; nor have he name be mention there by . of anything that may have pass between they be altogether ignorant . she observ , or think that she observe , that she father be more silent with she ,--perhaps less tender than he have be since the day on which she husband have perish . he manner of life be the same . he almost always dine at home in order that she might not be alone , and make no complaint as to she conduct . but she could see that he be unhappy , and she know the cause of he grief . " I think , papa , " she say one day , " that it would be better that I should go away . " this be on the day before 's arrival , -- of which , however , he have give no notice . " go away ! where would you go to ? " " it do not matter . I do not make you happy . " " what do you mean ? who say that I be not happy ? why do you talk like that ? " " do not be angry with I . nobody say so . I can see it well enough . I know how good you be to I , but I be make you life wretch . I be a wet blanket to you , and yet I can not help myself . if I could only go somewhere , where I could be of use . " " I do not know what you mean . this be you proper home . " " no ; -- it be not my home . I ought to have forfeit it . I ought to go where I could work and be of some use in the world . " " you might be of use if you choose , my dear . you proper career be before you if you would condescmend to accept it . it be not for I to persuade you , but I can see and feel the truth . till you bring yourself to do that , you day will be blighted , -- and so will mine . you have make one great mistake in life . stop a moment . I do not speak often , but I wish you to listen to I now . such mistake do generally produce misery and ruin to all who be concerned . with you it chance that it may be otherwise . you can put you foot again upon the firm ground and recover everything . of course there must be a struggle . one person have to struggle with circumstance , another with he foe , and a third with he own feeling . I can understand that there should be such a struggle with you ; but it ought to be make . you ought to be brave enough and strong enough to conquer you regret , and to begin again . in no other way can you do anything for I or for yourself . to talk of go away be childish nonsense . Whither would you go ? I shall not urge you any more , but I would not have you talk to I in that way . " then he get up and leave the room and the house , and go down to he club , -- in order that she might think of what he have say in solitude . and she do think of it ; -- but still continually with a assurance to herself that she father do not understand she feeling . the career of which he speak be no doubt open to she , but she could not
not regard it as that which it be proper that she should fulfil , as he do . when she tell she lover that she have lain among the pots till she be black and defile , she express in the strongest language that which be she real conviction . he do not think she to have be defile , -- or at any rate think that she might again bear the wing of a dove ; but she feel it , and therefore know herself to be unfit . she have say it all to she lover in the strongest word she could find , but she could not repeat they to she father . the next morning when he come into the parlour where she be already sit , she look up at he almost reproachfully . do he think that a woman be a piece of furniture which you can mmend , and revarnish , and fit out with new ornament , and then send out for use , second - hand indeed , but for all purpose as good as new ? then , while she be in this frame of mind , come in upon she unaware , and with he almost boisterous happiness succeed for a while in change the current of she thought . he be of course now uppermost in he own thought . the last few month have make so much of he that he might be excused for be unable to sink himself in the presence of other . he be the heir to the baronetcy , -- and to the double fortune of the two old man . and he be go to be marry in a manner as every one tell he to increase the glory and stability of the family . " it be all nonsense about you not come down , " he say . she smile and shake she head . " I can only tell you that it will give the greatest offence to every one . if you know how much they talk about you down there I do not think you would like to hurt they . " " of course I would not like to hurt they . " " and consider that you have no other brother -- " " oh , ! " " I think more about it , perhaps , than you do . I think you owe it I to come down . you will never probably have another chance of be present at you brother 's marriage . " this he say in a tone that be almost lachrymose . " a wedding , , should be merry . " " I do not know about that . it be a very serious sort of thing to my way of thinking . when get you letter it nearly break she heart . I think I have a right to expect it , and if you do not come I shall feel myself injure . I do not see what be the use of have a family if the member of it do not stick together . what would you think if I be to desert you ? " " desert you , ? " " well , yes ; -- it be something of the kind . I have make my request , and you can comply with it or not as you please . " " I will go , " she say very slowly . then she leave he and go to she own room to think in what description of garment she could appear at a wedding with the least violence to the condition of she life . " I have get she to say she will come , " he say to he father that evening . " if you leave she to I , I will bring she round . " after that ,-- within a day or two , -- there come out a paragraph in one of the fashionable newspapers of the day , say that a alliance have be arrange between the heir to the title and property and the daughter of the present baronet . I think that this have probably originate in the club gossip . I trust it do not spre directly from the activity or ambition of himself . who Will it be ? for the first day or two after the resignation of the the appear to take no further notice of the matter . a ungrateful world have repudiate she and she husband , and he have foolishly assist and give way to the repudiation . all she grand aspiration be at a end . all she triumph be over . and worse than that , there be present to she a conviction that she never have really triumph . there never have come the happy moment in which she have feel herself to be dominant over other woman . she have toil and struggle , she have battle and occasionally submit ; and yet there be present to she a feeling that she have stand higher in public estimation as , -- whose position have be all she own and have not depend on she husband , -- than now she have do as of , and wife of the of . she have mean to be something , she know not what , greater than have be the wives of other and other Dukes ; and now she feel that in she failure she have be almost ridiculous . and the failure , she think , have be he , -- or hers , -- rather than that of circumstance . if he have be less scrupulous and more persistent it might have be different , -- or if she have be more discreet . sometimes she feel she own failing so violently as to acquit he almost entirely .
. at other time she be almost beside herself with anger because all she loss seem to have arisen from want of stubbornness on he part . when he have tell she that he and he follower have determine to resign because they have beat they foe by a majority only of nine , she take it into she head that he be in fault . why should he go while he supporter be more numerous than he opponent ? it be useless to bid he think it over again . though she be far from understand all the circumstance of the game , she do know that he could not remain after have arrange with he colleague that he would go . so she become cross and sullen ; and while he be go to and back and set he house in order , and prepare the way for he successor ,-- whoever that successor might be , -- she be moody and silent , dream over some impossible condition of thing in accordance with which he might have remain -- almost for ever . on the after the fatal division , -- the division which the Duchess would not allow to have be fatal , -- she come across he somewhere in the house . she have hardly spoken to he since he have come into she room that night and tell she that all be over . she have say that she be unwell and have keep out of sight ; and he have be here and there , between and the Treasury chambers , and have be glad to escape from she ill - humour . but she could not endure any longer the annoyance of have to get all she news through , -- second hand , or third hand , and now find herself drive to capitulate . " well , " she say ; " how be it all go to be ? I suppose you do not know or you would have tell I ? " " there be very little to tell . " " be to be ? " she ask . " I do not say so . but it be not impossible . " " have the send for he ? " " not as yet . she Majesty have see both and as well as myself . it do not seem a very easy thing to make a just at present . " " why should not you go back ? " " I do not think that be on the card . " " why not ? ever so many man have do it , after go out , -- and why not you ? I remember do it twice . it be always the thing when the man who have be send for make a mess of it , for the old minister to have another chance . " " but what if the old minister will not take the chance ? " " then it be the old minister 's fault . why should not you take the chance as well as another ? it be not many day ago since you be quite anxious to remain in . I think you be go to break you heart because people even talk of you go . " " I be go to break my heart , as you call it , " he say , smile , " not because people talk of my ceasing to be minister , but because the feeling of the of justified people in so say . I hope you see the difference . " " no , I do not . and there be no difference . the people we be talk about be the member , -- and they have support you . you could go on if you choose . I be sure would not leave you . " " it be just what would do , and ought to do . no one be less likely than to behave badly in such a emergency . the more I see of , the higher I think of he . " " he have he own game to play as well as other . " " I think he have no game to play but that of he country . it be no use we discuss it , . " " of course I understand nothing , because I be a woman . " " you understand a great deal , -- but not quite all . you may at any rate understand this , -- that we trouble be at a end . you be say but the other day that the labour of be a 's wife have be almost too many for you . " " I never say so . as long as you do not give way no labour be too much for I . I would have do anything , -- slave morning and night , -- so that we might have succeed . I hate be beat . I would sooner be cut in piece . " " there be no help for it now , . the , you know , be only for one year , and must then go back to private life . " " but man have be for ten year at a time . if you have make up you mind , I suppose we may as well give up . I shall always think it you own fault . " he still smile . " I shall , " she say . " oh , ! " " I can only speak as I feel . " " I do not think you would speak as you do , if you know how much you word hurt I . in such a matter as this I should not be justifi in allow you opinion
opinion to have weight with I . but you sympathy would be so much to I ! " " when I think it be make you ill , I wish that you might be spare . " " my illness would be nothing , but my honour be everything . I , too , have something to bear as well as you , and if you can not approve of what I do , at any rate be silent . " " yes ; -- I can be silent . " then he slowly leave she . as he go she be almost temp to yield , and to throw herself into he arm , and to promise that she would be soft to he , and to say that she be sure that all he do be for the best . but she could not bring herself as yet to be good - humoured . if he have only be a little stronger , a little thicker - skinn , make of clay a little coarser , a little other than he be , it might all have be so different ! Early on that afternoon she have herself drive to 's house in , instead of waiting for she friend . Latterly she have but seldom do this , finde that she presence at home be much want . she have be fill with , perhaps , foolish idea of the necessity of do something , -- of add something to the strength of she husband 's position , -- and have certainly be diligent in she work . but now she might run about like any other woman . " this be a honour , , " say . " do not be sarcastic , . we have nothing further to do with the bestowal of honour . why do not he make everybody a peer or a baronet while he be about it ? ! I do not see why he should not have be . I be sure he deserve it for the way in which he attack . " " I do not think he would like it . " " they all say so , but I suppose they do like it , or they would not take it . and I would have make a knight ;-- . he would make a more knightly knight than . when a man have power he ought to use it . it make people respect he . make a duke , and people think more of that than anything he do . be go to join the new ministry ? " " if you can tell I , Duchess , who be to be the new minister , I can give a guess . " " . " " then he certainly will . " " or . " " then he certainly will not . " " or . " " that I could not answer . " " or the of . " " that would depend upon he Grace , if the come back , 's service would be at he disposal , whether in or out of office . " " very prettily say , my dear . I never look round this room without think of the first time I come here . do you remember , when I find the old man sit there ? " the old man allude to be the late . " I be not likely to forget it , . " " how I hate you when I see you ! what a fright I think you be ! I picture you to myself as a sort of ogre , willing to eat up everybody for the gratification of you own vanity . " " I be very vain , but there be a little pride with it . " " and now it have come to pass that I can not very well live without you . how he do love you ! " " he be very good to I . " " it would have do no great harm , after all , if he have make you of . " " very great harm to I , . as it be I get a friend that I love dearly , and a husband that I love dearly too . in the other case I should have have neither . perhaps I may say , that in that other case my life would not have be brighten by the affection of the present Duchess . " " one can not tell how it would have go , but I well remember the state I be in then . " the door be open and enter the room . " what , , be you at home ? I think everybody be crowd down at the club , to know who be to be what . we be settled . we be quiet . we have nothing to do to disturb ourselves . but you ought to be in all the flutter of renew expectation . " " I be wait my destiny in calm seclusion . I hope the be well ? " " as well as can be expect . he do not walk about he room with a poniard in he hand , -- ready for himself or ; nor be he sit crown like , drink the health of the new with and . he be probably sipp a cup of coffee over a blue - book in dignified retirement . you should go and see he . " " I should be unwilling to trouble he when he be so much occupi . " " that be just what have do he all the harm in the world . everybody presume that he have so much to think of that nobody go near he . then he be
be leave to boody over everything by himself till he become a sort of political hermit , or ministerial , whom human eye be not to look upon . it do not matter now ; do it ? " visitor after visitor come in , and the Duchess chat to they all , leave the impression on everybody that hear she that she at least be not sorry to be relieve from the trouble attend she husband 's late position . she sit there over a hour , and as she be take she leave she have a few word to whisper to . " when this be all over , " she say , " I mean to call on that . " " I think you do go there . " " that be soon after the poor man have kill himself , -- when she be go away . of course I only leave a card . but I shall see she now if I can . we want to get she out of she melancholy if possible . I have a sort of feeling , you know , that among we we make the train run over he . " " I do not think that . " " he get so horribly abuse for what he do at ; and I really do not see why he be not to have he money . it be I that make he spend it . " " he be , I fancy , a thoroughly bad man . " " but a wife do not always want to be make a widow even if she husband be bad . I think I owe she something , and I would pay my debt if I know how . I shall go and see she , and if she will marry this other man we will take she by the hand . good - bye , dear . you would better come to I early to - morrow , as I suppose we shall know something by eleven o'clock . " in the course of that eve the of come to and be closeted for some time with the late . he have be engage during that and the last two previous day in lend he aid to various political manoeuvre and ministerial attempt , from which we have keep himself altogether aloon . he do not go to , but as each successive competitor journey thither and return , some one either send for the old or go to seek he counsel . he be the Nestor of the occasion , and strove heartily to compose all quarrel , and so to arrange matter that a wholesome , moderately might be again install for the good of the country and the comfort of all true Whigs . in such moments he almost ascend to the grand height of patriotism , be always indifferent as to himself . now he come to he late chief with a new project . would attempt to form a if the of would join he . " it be impossible , " say the younger politician , fold he hand together and throw himself back in he chair . " listen to I before you answer I with such certainty . there be three or four gentleman who , after the work of the last three year , bear in mind the manner in which we defeat have just be accomplish , feel themselves disinclin to join unless you will do so also . I may specially name and . I might perhaps add myself , be it not that I have hope that in any event I might at length regard myself as exempt from further service . the old horse should be leave to graze out he last day , Ne peccet ad extremum ridendus . but you can not consider yourself absolve on that score . " " there be other reason . " " but the 's service should count before everything . and with they own friend can hardly make a as thing be now unless will join they . I do not think that any other of the be at present possible . " " I will beseech Monk not to let any feeling as to I stand in he way . why should it ? " " it be not only what you may think and he may think , -- but what other will think and say . the will have do all that ought to have be expect from it if we party in it can now join . " " by all means . but I could give they no strength . they may be sure at any rate of what little I can do for they out of office . " " have make he acceptance of office ,-- well , I will not say strictly conditional on you join he . that would hardly be correct . but he have express himself quite willing to make the attempt with you aid , and doubtful whether he can succeed without it . he suggest that you should join he as of the . " " and you ? " " if I be want at all I should take the . " " certainly not , my friend . if there be any question of my return we would reverse the offix . but I think I may say that my mind be fix . if you wish it I will see , and do all that I can to get he to go with you . but for myself , -- I feel that it would be useless . " at last , at the 's pressing request , he agree to take twenty - four hour before he give he final answer to the proposition . the Duchess in the say
say not a word to he wife as to this new proposition , and when she ask he what tiding they old friend have bring as to the state of affair , he almost tell a fib in he anxiety to escape from she persecution . " he be in some doubt what he mean to do himself , " say the . the ask many question , but get no satisfactory reply to any of they . do . Finn learn anything from she husband , whom , however , she do not interrogate very closely . she would be contente to know when the proper time might come for lady to be inform . the , however , be determined to take he twenty - four hour all alone , -- or at any rate not to be drive to he decision by feminine interference . in the meantime the go to intent on perform certain good office on behalf of the poor widow . it may be doubt whether she have clearly make up she mind what it be that she could do , though she be clear that some debt be due by she to . and she know too in what direction assistance might be serviceable , if only it could in this case be give . she have hear that the present member for have be the lady 's lover long before have come upon the scene , and with those feminine wile of which she be a perfect mistress she have extract from he a confession that he mind be unaltered . she like , -- as indeed she have for a time like , -- and feel that she conscience would be easier if she could assist in this good work . she build castle in the air as to the presence of the bride and bridegroom at , think how she might thus repair the evil she have do . but she heart misgave she a little as she draw near to the house , and remember how very slight be she acquaintance and how extremely delicate the mission on which she have come . but she be not the woman to turn back when she have once put she foot to any work ; and she be drive up to the door in without any expressed hesitation on she own part . " yes , -- he mistress be at home , " say the butler , still shrink at the sound of the name which he hate . the Duchess be then show upstairs , and be leave alone for some minute in the drawing - room . it be a large handsome apartment , hang round with valuable picture , and have sign of considerable wealth . since she have first invite to stand for Silverbridge she have hear much about he , and have wonder how he have gain possession of such a girl as . and now , as she look about , she wonder be increase . she know enough of such people as the and the Fletcher to be aware that as a class they be more impregnable , more closely guard by they feeling and prejudice against stranger than any other . none keep they daughter to themselves with greater care , or be less willing to see they rule of life change or abolish . and yet this man , half foreigner half , -- and as it now appear , whole pauper , -- have step in and carry off a prize for which such a one as be contende ! the Duchess have never see Emily but once , -- so as to observe she well , -- and have then think she to be a very handsome woman . it have be at the garden party at , and have then insist that he wife should be well dress . it would perhaps have be impossible in the whole of that assembly to find a more beautiful woman than then be , -- or one who carry herself with a finer air . now when she enter the room in she deep mourning it would have be difficult to recognise she . she face be much thinner , she eye apparently larger , and she colour fade . and there have come a settle seriousness on she face which seem to rob she of she youth . have declare that as he see she now she be more beautiful than ever . but , in look at she , see more than she mere featur . to he eyes there be a tenderness add by she sorrow which have its own attraction for he . and he be so well verse in every line of she countenance , that he could see there the old loveliness behind the sorrow ; the loveliness which would come forth again , as bright as ever , if the sorrow could be remove . but the Duchess , though she remember the woman 's beauty as she might that of any other lady , now see nothing but a thing of woe wrap in customary widow 's weed . " I hope , " she say , " I be not intrud in come to you ; but I have be anxious to renew we acquaintance for reason which I be sure you will understand . " Emily at the moment hardly know how to address she august visitor . though she father have live all he life in what be call good society , he have not consort much with duke and duchess . she herself have indeed on one occasion be for a hour or two the guest of this grand lady , but on that occasion she have hardly be call upon to talk to she . now she doubt how to name the Duchess , and with some show of
of hesitation decide at last upon not name she at all . " it be very good of you to come , " she say in a falter voice . " I tell you that I would when I write , you know . that be many month ago , but I have not forget it . you have be in the country since that , I think ? " " yes , in . be we county . " " I know all about it , " say the Duchess , smile . she generally do contrive to learn " all about " the people whom she choose to take by the hand . " we have a Herefordshire gentleman sit for , -- I must not say we borough of . " she be anxious to make some allusion to ; but it be difficult to travel on that Silverbridge ground , as have be she choose candidate when she still wish to claim the borough as a appanage of the family . Emily , however , keep she countenance and do not show by any sign that she thought be run in that direction . " and though we do not presume to regard , " continue the Duchess , " as in any way connect with we local interest , he have always support the , and I hope have become a friend of ours . I think he be a neighbour of yours in the country . " " oh , yes . my cousin be marry to he brother . " " I know there be something of that kind . he tell I that there be some close alliance . " the Duchess as she look at the woman to whom she want to be kind do not as yet dare to express a wish that there might at some not very distant time be a closer alliance . she have come there intend to do so ; and have still some hope that she might do it before the interview be over . but at any rate she would not do it yet . " have I not hear , " she say , " something of another marriage ? " " my brother be go to marry he cousin , 's daughter . " " ah ;-- I think it have be one of the Fletcher . it be we member who tell I , and he speak as though they be all he very dear friend . " " they be dear friend ,-- very . " poor Emily still do not know whether to call she Duchess , my , or you , -- and yet feel the need of call she by some special name . " exactly . I suppose it be so . they tell I will become quite a favourite in the house . at this present moment nobody know on which side anybody be go to sit to - morrow . it may be that will become the dire enemy of all the 's friend . " " I hope not . " " of course I be speak of political enemie . political enemie be often the best friend in the world ; and I can assure you from my own experience that political friend be often the bitterest enemie . I never hate any people so much as some of we supporter . " the Duchess make a grimace , and could not refrain from smiling . " yes , indeed . there be a old saying that misfortune make strange bedfellow , but political friendship make stranger alliances than misfortune . perhaps you never meet . " " never . " " well ; -- do not . but , as I be say , there be no knowing who may support whom now . if I be ask who would be to - morrow , I should take half - a - dozen name and shake they in a bag . " " it be not settle then ? " " settle ! no , indeed . nothing be settled . " at that moment indeed everything be settle , though the Duchess do not know it . " and so we none of we can tell how may stand with we when thing be arrange . I suppose he call himself a Conservative ? " " oh , yes ! " " all the Whartons , I suppose , be conservatives , -- and all the Fletcher . " " very nearly . call himself a Tory . " " a very much better name , to my thinking . we be all Whigs , of course . a Palliser who be not a would be hold to have disgrac himself for ever . be not politics od ? a few year ago I only barely know what the word mean , and that not correctly . lately I have be so eager about it , that there hardly seem to be anything else left worth live for . I suppose it be wrong , but a state of pugnacity seem to I the greatest bliss which we can reach here on earth . " " I should not like to be always fight . " " that be because you have not know and two or three other gentleman whom I could name . the day will come , I dare say , when you will care for politics . " Emily be about to answer , hardly know what to say , when the door be open and . come into the room . the lady be not announce , and Emily have hear no knock at the door . she be force to go through some ceremony of introduction . " this be my aunt , , " she say . " , the Duchess of .
. " be beside herself , -- not all with joy . that feeling would come afterwards as she would boast to she friend of she new acquaintance . at present there be the embarrassment of not quite know how to behave herself . the Duchess bow from she seat , and smile sweetly , -- as she have learn to smile since she husband have become . curtsy , and then remember that in these day only housemaid ink to curtsey . " anything to we ? " say the Duchess , continue she smile , -- " ours as he be till yesterday at least . " this she say in a absurd wail of mock sorrow . " my brother - in - law , you , " say , delight . " oh indeed . and what do think about it , I wonder ? but I dare say you have find , . , that when a crisis come , -- a real crisis , -- the lady be tell nothing . I have . " " I do not think , you , that ever divulge political secret . " " do not he indeed ! what a dull man you brother - in - law must be to live with , -- that be as a politician ! good - bye , . you must come and see I and let I come to you again . I hope , you know , -- I hope the time may come when thing may once more be bright with you . " these last word she murmure almost in a whisper , as she hold the hand of the woman she wish to befriend . then she bow to , and leave the room . " what be it she say to you ? " ask . " nothing in particular , . " " she seem to be very friendly . what make she come ? " " she write some time ago to say she would call . " " but why ? " " I can not tell you . I do not know . do not ask I , aunt , about thing that be pass . you can not do it without wounde I . " " I do not want to wound you , Emily , but I really think that that be nonsense . she be a very nice woman ; -- though I do not think she ought to have say that be dull . do know that she be come ? " " he know that she say she would come , " reply Emily very sternly , so that . find herself compelle to pass on to some other subject . have hear the wish express that something " once more might be bright , " and when she get home tell she husband that she be sure that be go to marry . " and why the ---- should not she ? " say . " and that poor man destroy himself not much more than twelve month ago ! I could not do it , " say . " I do not mean to give you the chance , " say . the Duchess when she go away suffer under a sense of failure . she have intend to bring about some crisis of female tenderness in which she might have rush into future hope and joyous anticipation , and with the freedom which will come from ebullition of feeling , have tell the widow that the peculiar circumstance of she position would not only justify she in marry this other man but absolutely call upon she to do it . unfortunately she have fail in she attempt to bring the interview to a condition in which this would have be possible , and while she be still make the attempt that odious aunt have come in . " I have be on my mission , " she say to . afterwards . " have you do any good ? " " I do not think I have do any harm . women , you know , be so very different ! there be some who would delight to have a opportunity of open they heart to a Duchess , and who might almost be talk into anything in a ecstasy . " " hardly woman of the best sort , . " " not of the best sort . but then one do not come across the very best , very often . but that kind of thing do have a effect ; and as I only want to do good , I wish she have be one of the sort for the occasion . " " be she -- offend ? " " oh dear , no . you do not suppose I attack she with a husband at the first word . indeed , I do not attack she at all . she do not give I a opportunity . such a you never see . " " be she weep ? " " not actual tear . but she gow , and she cap , and she string be weep . she voice wept , and she hair , and she nose , and she mouth . do not you know that look of subdue mourning ? and yet they say that that man be die for love . how beautiful it be to see that there be such a thing as constancy leave in the world . " when she get home she find that she husband have just return from the old 's house , where he have meet , , and . " it be all settle at last , " he say cheerfully . the when the be leave by himself after the departure of he old friend he first feeling have be one of
of regret that he have be weak enough to doubt at all . he have long since make up he mind that after all that have pass he could not return to office as a subordinate . that feel as to the impropriety of Caesar descend to serve under other which he have be foolish enough to express , have be strong with he from the very commencement of he . when first ask to take the place which he have fill the reason strong against it have be the conviction that it would probably exclude he from political work during the latter half of he life . the man who have write after he name must abandon he practice behind the bar . as he then be , although he have already be drive by the unhappy circumstance of he peerage from the house of Commons which he love so well , there be still open to he many field of political work . but if he should once consent to stand on the top rung of the ladder , he could not , he think , take a lower place without degradation . till he should have be place quite at the top no shifting he place from this higher to that lower office would injure he in he own estimation . the exigency of the service and not defeat would produce such change as that . but he could not go down from be and serve under some other chief without acknowledge himself to have be unfin for the place he have fill . of all that he have quite assure himself . and yet he have allow the old to talk he into a doubt ! as he sit consider the question he acknowledge that there might have be room for doubt , though in the present emergency there certainly be none . he could imagine circumstance in which the experience of a individual in some special branch of he country 's service might be of such paramount importance to the country as to make it incumbend on a man to sacrifice all personal feeling . but it be not so with he . there be nothing now which he could do , which another might not do as well . that bless task of introduce decimal into all the commercial relation of british life , which have once keep he aloft in the air , float as upon 's wing , have be deny he . if ever do it must be do from the of ; and the people of the country have become deaf to the charms of that great reform . 's occupation be , in truth , altogether gone , and there be no reason by which he could justify to himself the step down in the world which the old have propose to he . Early on the follow morning he leave on foot and walk as far as 's house , which be close to 's . here at eleven o'clock he find he late Chancellor of the in that state of tedious agitation in which a man be kept who do not yet know whether he be or be not to be one of the actor in the play just about to be perform . the have never before be in 's very humble abode , and now cause some surprise . know that he might probably be send for , but have not expect that any of the of the day would come to he . people have say that not improbably he himself might be the man , -- but he himself have indulge in no such dream . have have no great charms for he ; -- and if there be one man of the late government who could lay it down without a personal regret , it be . " I wish you to come with I to the 's house in 's , " say the late . " I think we shall find he at home . " " certainly . I will come this moment . " then there be not a word speak till the two man be in the street together . " of course I be a little anxious , " say . " have you anything to tell I before we get there ? " " you of course must return to office , . " " with you -- I certainly will do so . " " and without , if there be the need . they who be want should be forthcome . but perhaps you will let I postpone what I have to say till we see the . what a charming morning ; -- be it not ? how sweet it would be down in the country . " have go out like a lamb , and even in the early day be sweet , -- to be follow , no doubt , by the usual nipping inclemency of . " I never can get over the feeling , " continue the , " that parliament should sit for the six winter month , instead of in summer . if we meet on the first of , how glorious it would be to get away for the early spring ! " " nothing less strong than grouse could break up parliament , " say ; " and then what would the pheasant and the fox say ? " " it be give up almost too much to we amusement . I use to think that I should like to move for a return of the number of hunting and shoot gentleman in both house . I believe it would be a small minority . " " but they son shoot , and they daughter hunt , and all they hanger - on would be against it . " " custom be against we ,
, ; that be it . here we be . I hope my friend will not be out , look up young Lord of the Treasury . " the of be not in search of cadet for the government , but be at this very moment close with , and 's especial friend . he have be at this work so long and so constantly that he very servant have they ministerial - crisis manners and felt and enjoy the importance of the occasion . the two newcomer be soon allow to enter the august conclave , and the five great senator greet each other cordially . " I hope we have not come inopportunely , " say the of . assure he almost with hilarity that nothing could be less inopportune ; -- and then the be sure that be to be the new , whoever might join he or whoever might refuse to do so . " I tell my friend here , " continue we Duke , lay he hand upon the old man 's arm , " that I would give he he answer to a proposition he make I within twenty - four hour . but I find that I can do so without that delay . " " I trust you 's answer may be favourable to we , " say , -- who indeed do not doubt much that it would be so , see that have accompany he . " I do not think that it will be unfavourable , though I can not do as my friend have propose . " " any practicable arrangement -- " begin , with a frown , however , on he brow . " the most practicable arrangement , I be sure , will be for you to form you government without hamper yourself with a beaten predecessor . " " not beaten , " say . " certainly not , " say the other . " it be because off you success that I ask you service , " say . " I have none to give , -- none that I can not better bestow out of office than in . I must ask you , gentlemen , to believe that I be quite fix . come here with my friend , I do not state my purpose to he ; but I beg he to accompany I , fear lest in my absence he should feel it incumbent on himself to sail in the same boat with he late colleague . " " I should prefer to do so , " say . " of course it be not for I to say what may be 's idea ; but as my friend here suggest to I that , be I to return to office , would do so also , I can not be wrong in surmising that he service be desire . " bow assent . " I shall therefore take the liberty of tell that I think he be bound to give he aid in the present emergency . be I have happily place as he be in be the possessor of a seat in the of , I too should hope that I might do something . " the four gentleman , with eager pressure , beg the to reconsider he decision . he could take this office and do nothing in it , -- there being , as we all know , office the holder of which be not call upon for work , -- or he could take that place which would require he to labour like a galley slave . would he be ? would he undertake the ? but the of be at last resolute . of this administration he would not at any rate be a member . whether might or might not at some future time condescmend to command a legion , he could not do so when the purple have be but that moment stripp from he shoulders . he soon afterwards leave the house with a repeat request to that he would not follow he late chief 's example . " I regret it greatly , " say when he be gone . " there be no man , " say , " whom all who know he more thoroughly respect . " " he have be worried , " say the old , " and must take time to recover himself . he have but one fault , -- he be a little too conscientious , a little too scrupulous . " , of course , do join they , make one or two stipulation as he do so . he require that he friend should be include in the government . yield , though poor Phineas be not among the most favoured friend of that statesman . and so the government be form , and the crisis be again over , and the list which all the newspaper have be publish for the last three day be republish in a amended and nearly correct condition . the triumph of the " 's , " as to the omission of the , be of course complete . the editor have no hesitation in declaring that he , by he own sagacity and persistency , have make certain the exclusion of that very unfit and very pressing candidate for office . the list be fill up after the usual fashion . for a while the dilettanti politician of the club , and the strong - minded woman who take a interest in such thing , and the writer in newspaper , have almost doubt whether , in the emergency which have be suppose to be so peculiar , any government could be form . there have been , -- so they have say , -- peculiarity so peculiar that it might be that the much - dread deadlock have come at
at last . a have be possible and , though antagonistic to british feeling generally , have carry on the government . but what might succeed the , nobody have know . the radicals and liberals together would be too strong for and . have no longer a party of he own at he back , and a second Coalition would be generally spur . in this way there have be much political excitement , and a fair amount of consequent enjoyment . but after a few day the old man have rattle into they old place , -- or , generally , old man into new place , -- and it be understand that would be again support by a majority . as we grow old it be a matter of interest to watch how the natural gaps be fill in the two rank of parliamentary workman by whom the government be carry on , either in the one interest or the other . of course there must be gaps . some man become too old , -- though that be rarely the case . a peel may perish , or even a must die . some man , though long support by interest , family connection , or the loyalty of colleague , be weigh down at last by they own incapacity and sink into peerage . now and again a man can not bear the bondage of office , and fly into rebellion and independence which would have be more respectable have it not be the result of discontent . then the gap must be fill . whether on this side or on that , the candidate be first look for among the son of Earls and Dukes , -- and not unnaturally , as the son of Earls and Dukes may be educated for such work almost from they infancy . a few rise by the slow process of acknowledge fitness , -- men who probably at first have not think of office but be choose because they be want , and whose career be grudge they , not by they opponent or rival , but by the Brown and Jones of the world who can not bear to see a or a become something so different to themselves . these man have a great weight to carry , and can not always shake off the burden of they origin and live among begotten statesman as though they too have be bear to the manner . but perhaps the most wonderful ministerial phenomenon ,-- though now almost too common to be longer call a phenomenon , -- be he who rise high in power and place by have make himself thoroughly detest and also , -- alas for parliamentary cowardice !--thoroughly fear . give sufficient audacity , a thick skin , and power to bear for a few year the evil look and cold shoulders of he comrade , and that be the man most sure to make he way to some high seat . but the skin must be thicker than that of any animal know , and the audacity must be complete . to the man who will once shrink at the idea of be look at askance for treachery , or hat for he ill condition , the career be impossible . but let he be obdurate , and the bid will come . " not because I want he , do I ask for he , " say some groan chief of a party , -- to himself , and also sufficiently aloud for other 's ears , -- " but because he sting I and goad I , and will drive I to madness as a foe . " then the pachydermatous one enter into the other 's heaven , probably with the resolution already form of ousting that unhappy angel . and so it be in the present instance . when 's complete list be publish to the world , the world be astonished to find that be to be 's - . become , and the liberal chief be content to borrow he senior law adviser from the Conservative side of the late . it could not be that be very fond of ; -- but in the late debate have show himself to be a man of whom a minister might well be afraid . immediately on leave the old 's house , the late go home to he wife , and , find that she be out , wait for she return . now that he have put he own decision beyond he own power he be anxious to let she know how it be to be with they . " I think it be settle at last , " he say . " and you be come back ? " " certainly not that . I believe I may say that be . " " then he ought not to be , " say the crossly . " I be sorry that I must differ from you , my dear , because I think he be the fittest man in for the place . " " and you ? " " I be a private gentleman who will now be able to devote more of he time to he wife and child than have hithertoo be possible with he . " " how very nice ! do you mean to say that you like it ? " " I be sure that I ought to like it . at the present moment I be think more of what you will like . " " if you ask I , Plantagenet , you know I shall tell the truth . " " then tell the truth . " " after drink brandy so long I hardly think that 12s . claret will agree with my stomach . you ask for the truth , and there it be ,
, -- very plainly . " " plain enough ! " " you ask , you know . " " and I be glad to have be tell , even though that which you tell I be not pleasant hearing . when a man have be drink too much brandy , it may be well that he should be put on a course of 12s. claret . " " he will not like it ; and then ,-- it be kill or cure . " " I do not think you be go so far , , that we need fear that the remedy will be fatal . " " I be think of you rather than myself . I can make myself generally disagreeable , and get excitement in that way . but what will you do ? it be all very well to talk of I and the child , but you can not bring in a for reform we . you can not make we go by decimal . you can not increase we consumption by lower we taxation . I wish you have go back to some board . " this she say look up into he face with a anxiety which be half real and half burlesque . " I have make up my mind to go back to no board , -- for the present . I be think that we could spend some month in , . " " what ; for the summer ;-- so as to be in in ! after that we could utilise the winter by visit . " " we might take first . " " and be eat up by mosquitoe ! I have get to be too old to like travel . " " what do you like , dear ? " " nothing ;--except be the 's wife ; and upon my word there be time when I do not like that very much . I do not know anything else that I be fit for . I wonder whether would let I go to he as housekeeper ? only we should have to lend he , or there would be no room for the display of my ability . be in ? " " he keep he old office . " " and ? " " I believe so ; but in what place I do not know . " " and who else ? " " we old friend the , and , and , -- and will be . " " just the old stupid liberal team . put they name in a bag and shake they , and you can always get a ministry . well , will go anywhere you like to take I . I will have something for the malaria at , and something for the mosquitoe in , and will make the best of it . but I do not see why you should run away in the middle of the session . I would stay and pitch into they , all round , like a true ex-minister and independent member of parliament . " then as he be leave she she fire a last shot . " I hope you make and peer before you give up . " it be not till two day after this that she read in one of the daily papers that be to be - , and then she patience almost desert she . to tell the truth , she husband have not da to mention the appointment when he first see she after hear it . she explosion first fall on the head of , whom she find at home with he wife , deplor the necessity which have fall upon he of fill the faineant office of of the of . " , " she say , " I congratulate you on you colleague . " " you be very good . I be at any rate introduce to many of they under the 's auspices . " " and ink , I think , to have see enough of they to be asham of they . such a regiment to march through Coventry with ! " " I do not doubt that we shall be good enough man for any enemy we may meet . " " it can not but be that you should conquer all the world with such a hero among you as . the idea of come back again ! what do you feel about it ? " " very indifferent , . he will not interfere much with I , as I have a Attorney - General of my own . you see I be especially safe . " " I do believe man would do anything , " say the Duchess , turn to . " of course I mean in the way of politics ! but I do not think it possible that the of should again be in the same government with . " the it be at last settle that the marriage should take place during the second week in . there be various reason for the postponement . in the first place , after a few preliminary inquiry , find herself force to declare that Messr . and could not send she forth equip as she ought to be equip for such a husband in so short a time . " perhaps they do it quicker in , " she say to Everett with a soft regret , remember the metropolitan glory of she sister 's wedding . and then could be present during the Whitsuntide holiday ; and the presence of be essential . and it be not only he presence at the altar that be need ;-- parliament be not so exact but that he might have give that ; -- but it be consider by the united family to be highly desirable that he should
should on this occasion remain some day in the country . Emily have promise to attend the wedding , and would of course be at for at least a week . as soon as have succeed in wrest a promise from he sister , the tiding be convey to . it be a great step gain . when in she be she own mistress ; but surround as she would be down in by Fletchers and Whartons , she must be stubborn indeed if she should still refuse to be take back into the flock , and be make once more happy by marry the man whom she confess that she love with she whole heart . the letter to contain the news be from he brother , and be write in a very business - like fashion . " we have put off 's marriage a few day , so that you and she should be down here together . if you mean to go on with it , now be you time . " , in answer to this , merely say he would spend the Whitsuntide holiday at Longbarns . it be probable that Emily herself have some idea in she own mind of what be be do to entrap she . she brother 's word to she have be so strong , and the occasion of he marriage be itself so sacr to she , that she have not be able to refuse he request . but from the moment that she have make the promise , she feel that she have greatly add to she own difficulty . that she could yield to never occur to she . she be certain of she own persistency . whatever might be the wish of other , the fitness of thing require that 's wife should not have be the widow of , -- and require also that the woman who have marry should bear the result of she own folly . though since he death she have never speak a syllable against he , -- if those passionate word be except which Arthur himself have draw from she ,-- still she have not refrain from acknowledge the truth to herself . he have be a man disgrace , -- and she as he wife , have become he wife in opposition to the wish of all she friend , be disgrac also . let they do what they will with she , she would not soil 's name with this infamy . be still she steadfast resolution ; but she know that it would be , not endanger , but increase in difficulty by this visit to . and then there be other trouble . " , " she say , " I must get a dress for 's marriage . " " why not ? " " I can not bear , after all that I have cost you , put you to such useless expense . " " it be not useless , and such expensis as that I can surely afford without groan . do it handsomely and you will please I best . " then she go forth and choose she dress ,-- a grey silk , light enough not to throw quite a gloom on the brightness of the day , and yet dark enough to declare that she be not as other woman be . the very act of purchase this , almost blush at she own request as she sit at the counter in she widow 's weed , be a pain to she . but she have no one whom she could employ . on such a occasion she could not ask she aunt Harriet to act for she , as she aunt be distrust and dislike . and then there be the fitting on of the dress ,-- very grievous to she , as it be the first time since the heavy black mourning come home that she have clothed herself in other garment . the day before that fix for the marriage she and she father go down to Herefordshire together , the conversation on the way be all in respect to . where be he to live ? what be he to do ? what income would he require till he should inherit the good thing which destiny have in store for he ? the old man seem to feel that Providence , have be so very good to he son in kill that other heir , have put rather a heavy burden on himself . " he will want a house of he own , of course , " he say , in a somewhat lachrymose tone . " I suppose he will spend a good deal of he time at . " " he will not be content to live in another man 's house altogether , my dear ; and can allow he nothing . it mean , of course , that I must give he a thousand a year . it seem very natural to he , I dare say , but he might have ask the question before he take a wife to himself . " " you will not be angry with he , papa ! " " it be no good be angry . no ;--i be not angry . only it seem that everybody be uncommonly well please without think who have to pay for the piper . " on that evening , at , still wear she mourn dress . no one , indeed , da to speak to she on the subject , and be even afraid lest she might appear in black on the follow day . we all know in what condition be a house on the eve of a marriage , -- how the bride feel that all the world be go to be change , and that therefore everything be for the moment
moment disjoint ; and how the rest of the household , include the servants , be lead to share the feeling . be of course away . he be over at with the Fletcher , and be to be bring to on the follow morning . be at , -- and the bishop , whose service have be happily secure . he be formally introduce to , the use of the name for the occasion be absolutely necessary , and with all the smiling urbanity which as a bishop he be bound to possess , he be hardly able not to be funereal as he look at she and remember she story . before the evening be over do venture to give a hint . " we be so glad you have come , my dear . " " I could not stay away when say he wish it . " " it would have be wrong ; yes , my dear ,-- wrong . it be you duty , and the duty of we all , to subordinate we feeling to those of other . even sorrow may be selfish . " poor Emily listen but could make no reply . " it be sometimes harder for we to be mindful of other in we grief than in we joy . you should remember , dear , that there be some who will never be light - heart again till they see you smile . " " do not say that , . " " it be quite true ; -- and right that you should think of it . it will be particularly necessary that you should think of it to - morrow . you will have to wear a light dress , and -- " " I have come provide , " say the widow . " try then to make you heart as light as you frock . you will be do it for 's sake , and for you father 's , and for 's sake -- and 's . you will be do it for the sake of all of we on a day that should be joyous . " she could not make any promise in reply to this homily , but in she heart of heart she acknowledge that it be true , and declare to herself that she would make the effort require of she . on the follow morning the house be of course in confusion . there be to be a breakfast after the service , and after the breakfast the bride be to be take away in a carriage and four as far as Hereford on she route to ; -- but before the great breakfast there be of course a subsidiary breakfast , -- or how could bishop , bride , or bridesmaid have sustain the ceremony ? at this meal Emily do not appear , have begge for a cup of tea in she own room . the carriage to take the party to the church , which be but the other side of the park , be order at eleven , and at a quarter before eleven she appear for the first time in she grey silk dress , and without a widow 's cap . everything be very plain , but the alteration be so great that it be impossible not to look at she . even she father have not see the change before . not a word be say , though old 's thanks be imply by the graciousness of she smile . as there be four bridesmaid and four other lady besides the bride herself , in a few minute she become obscured by the brightness of the other ; -- and then they be all pack in they carriage and take to the church . the eyes which she must dread do not meet hers till they be all stand round the altar . it be onlly then that she see , who be there as she brother 's best man , and it be then that he take she hand and hold it for half a minute as though he never mean to part with it , hide behind the wide - spread glory of the bridesmaid 's finery . the marriage be as sweet and solemn as a kind - hear bishop could make it , and all the lady look particularly well . the veil from , -- with the orange wreath , also metropolitan , -- be perfect , and as for the dress , I doubt whether any woman would have know it to be provincial . look the rising baronet , every inch of he , and the old barrister smile and seem , at least , to be well pleased . then come the breakfast , and the speech - make , in which shone triumphantly . it be a very nice wedding , and , -- as she have be and still be , -- feel herself for a moment to be a heroine . but , through it all , there be present to the heart of most of they a feeling that much more be to be effect , if possible , than this simple and cosy marriage , and that the fate of be hardly so important to they as that of . when the carriage and fou be go there come upon the household the difficulty usual on such occasion of get through the rest of the day . the bridesmaid retire and repack they splendour so that they might come out fresh for other second - rate need , and with the bridesmaid go the widow . remain at with all the other Fletcher for the night , and be prepared to renew he suit on that very day , if a opportunity be give he ; but Emily do not again show herself till a few minute
minute before dinner , and then she come down with all the appurtenance of mourning which she usually wore . the grey silk have be put on for the marriage ceremony and for that only . " you should have keep you dress at any rate for the day , " say . she reply that she have change it for , and that as be go there be no further need for she to wear clothes unfitted to she position . yoArthu would have care very little for the clothes could he have have he way with the woman who wear they , -- could he have have he way even so far as to have find himself alone with she for half - a - hour . but no such chance be he . she retreat from the party early , and do not show herself on the follow morning till after he have start for Longbarns . all the Fletcher go back , -- not , however , with any intention on the part of to abandon he immediate attempt . the distance between the house be not so great but that he could drive himself over at any time . " I shall go now , " he say to , " because I have promise to fish with he to - morrow , but I shall come over on or , and stay till I go back to town . I hope she will at any rate let I speak to she . " the father say he would do he best , but that that obstinate resumption of she weed on she brother 's very wedding day have nearly break he heart . when the Fletcher be back at , the two lady be very severe on she . " it be downright obstinacy , " say the squire 's wife , " and it almost make I think it would serve she right to leave she as she be . " " it be pride , " say the old lady . " she will not give way . I say ever so much to she , -- but it be no use . I feel it the more because we have all gone so much out of the way to be good to she after she have make such a fool of herself . if it go on much longer , I shall never forgive she again . " " you will have to forgive she , mother , " say she eldest son , " let she sind be what they may , -- or else you will have to quarrel with . " " I do think it be very hard , " say the old lady , take herself out of the room . and it be hard . the offence in the first instance have be very great , and the forgiveness very difficult . but . have live long enough to know that when son be thoroughly respectable a widow mother have to do they bidding . Emily , through the whole wedding day , and the next day , and day after day , remembe 's word . " there be some who will never be light - heart again till they see you smile . " and the old woman have name she dearest friend , and have end by name . she have then acknowledge to herself that it be she duty to smile in order that other might smile also . but how be one to smile with a heavy heart ? should one smile and lie ? and how long and to what good purpose can such force contentment last ? she have mar she whole life . in former day she have be proud of all she virgin glory , -- proud of she intellect , proud of she beauty , proud of that obeisance which beauty , birth , and intellect combine , exact from all comer . she have be ambitious as to she future life ; -- have intend to be careful not to surrender herself to some empty fool ; --have think herself well qualifie to pick she own step . and this have come of it ! they tell she that she might still make everything right , annul the past and begin the world again as fresh as ever , -- if she would only smile and study to forget ! do it for the sake of other , they say , and then it will be do for yourself also . but she could not conquer the past . the fire and water of repentance , adequate as they may be for eternity , can not burn out or wash away the remorse of this life . they scorch and choke ; -- and unless it be so there be no repentance . so she tell herself , -- and yet it be she duty to be light - hear that other around she might not be make miserable by she sorrow ! if she could be in truth light - hear , then would she know herself to be unfeeling and worthless . on the third day after the marriage come back to with the declare intention of remain there till the end of the holiday . she could make no objection to such a arrangement , nor could she hasten she own return to . that have be fix before she departure and be to be make together with she father . she feel that she be be attack with unfair weapon , and that undue advantage be take of the sacrifice which she have make for she brother 's sake . and yet , -- yet how good to she they all be ! how wonderful be it that after the thing she have do , after the disgrace she have bring
bring on herself and they , after the destruction of all that pride which have once be hers , they should still wish to have she among they ! as for he , -- of whom she be always think , -- of what nature must be he love , when he be willing to take to himself as he wife such a thing as she have make herself ! but , think of this , she would only tell herself that as he would not protect himself , she be bound to be he protector . yes ; -- she would protect he , though she could dream of a world of joy that might be hers if she could dare to do as he would ask she . he catch she at last and force she to come out with he into the grounds . he could tell he tale better as he walk by she side than sit restlessly on a chair or move awkwardly about the room as on such a occasion he would be sure to do . within four walls she would have some advantage over he . she could sit still and be dignify in she stillness . but in the open air , when they would both be on they leg , she might not be so powerful with he , and he perhaps might be stronger with she . she could not refuse he when he ask she to walk with he . and why should she refuse he ? of course he must be allow to utter he prayer , -- and then she must be allow to make she answer . " I think the marriage go off very well , " he say . " very well . ought to be a happy man . " " no doubt he will be , -- when he settle down to something . everything will come right for he . with some people thing seem to go smooth ; do not they ? they have not hithertoo go smoothly with you and I , Emily . " " you be prosperous . you have everything before you that a man can wish , if only you will allow yourself to think so . you profession be successful , and you be in parliament , and everyone like you . " " it be all nothing . " " that be the general discontent of the world . " " it be all nothing ,-- unless I have you too . remember that I have say so long before I be successful , when I do not dream of parliament ; before we have hear of the name of the man who come between I and my happiness . I think I be entitle to be believe when I say so . I think I know my own mind . there be many man who would have be change by the episode of such a marriage . " " you ought to have be change by it , -- and by its result . " " it have no such effect . here I be , after it all , tell you as I use to tell you before , that I have to look to you for my happiness . " " you should be asham to confess it , . " " never ; -- not to you , nor to all the world . I know what it have be . I know you be not now as you be then . you have be he wife , and be now he widow . " " that should be enough . " " but , such as you be , my happiness be in you hand . if it be not so , do you think that all my family as well as yours would join in wishing that you may become my wife ? there be nothing to conceal . when you marry that man you know what my mother think of it ; and what think of it , and he wife . they have want you to be my wife ; and they want it now , -- because they be anxious for my happiness . and you father wish it , and you brother wish it , -- because they trust I , and think that I should be a good husband to you . " " good ! " she exclaim , hardly know what she mean by repeat the word . " after that you have no right to set yourself up to judge what may be best for my happiness . they who know how to judge be all united . whatever you may have be , they believe that it will be good for I that you should now be my wife . after that you must talk about I no longer , unless you will talk of my wish . " " do you think I be not anxious for you happiness ? " " I do not know ; -- but I shall find out in time . that be what I have to say about myself . and as to you , be it not much the same ? I know you love I . whatever the feeling be that overcame you as to that other man , -- it have go . I can not now stop to be tender and soft in my word . the thing to be say be too serious to I . and every friend you have want you to marry the man you love and to put a end to the desolation which you have bring on yourself . there be not one among we all , Fletcher and Wharton , whose comfort do not more or less depend on you sacrifice the luxury of you own woe . " "
" ! " " yes ; luxury . no man ever have a right to say more positively to a woman that it be she duty to marry he , than I have to you . and I do say it . I say it on behalf of all of we , that it be you duty . I will not talk of my own love now , because you know it . you can not doubt it . I will not even talk of yours , because I be sure of it . but I say that it be you duty to give up drown we all in tear , bury we in desolation . you be one of we , and should do as all of we wish you . if , indeed , you could not love I it would be different . there ! I have say what I have get to say . you be cry , and I will not take you answer now . I will come to you again to - morrow , and then you shall answer I . but , remember when you do so that the happiness of many people depend on what you say . " then he leave she very suddenly and hurrie back to the house by himself . he have be very rough with she , -- have not once attempt to touch she hand or even she arm , have speak no soft word to she , speak of he own love as a thing too certain to need further word ; and he have declare himself to be so assured of she love that there be no favour for he now to ask , nothing for which he be bound to pray as a lover . all that be past . he have simply declare it to be she duty to marry he , and have tell she so with much sternness . he have walk fast , compelle she to accompany he , have frown at she , and have more than once stampe he foot upon the ground . during the whole interview she have be so near to weep that she could hardly speak . once or twice she have almost think he to be cruel ; -- but he have force she to acknowledge to herself that all that he have say be true and unanswerable . have he press she for a answer at the moment she would not have know in what word to couch a refusal . and yet as she make she way alone back to the house she assure herself that she would have refuse . he have give she four - and - twenty hour , and at the end of that time she would be bound to give he she answer , -- a answer which must then be final . and as she say this to herself she find that she be admit a doubt . she hardly know how not to doubt , know , as she do , that all whom she love be on one side , while on the other be nothing but the stubbornness of she own conviction . but still the conviction be leave to she . over and over again she declare to herself that it be not fit , mean thereby to assure herself that a higher duty even than that which she owed to she friend , demand from she that she should be true to she conviction . she meet he that day at dinner , but he hardly speak to she . they sit together in the same room during the evening , but she hardly once hear he voice . it seem to she that he avoid even look at she . when they separate for the night he part from she almost as though they have be stranger . surely he be angry with she because she be stubborn ,-- think evil of she because she would not do as other wish she ! she lay awake during the long night think of it all . if it might be so ! oh ; -- if it might be so ! if it might be do without utter ruin to she own self - respect as a woman ! in the morning she be down early , -- not have anything to say , with no clear purpose as yet before she , -- but still with a feeling that perhaps that morning might alter all thing for she . he be the latest of the party , not come in for prayer as do all the other , but take he seat when the other have half finish they breakfast . as he sit down he give a general half - uttere greeting to they all , but speak no special word to any of they . it chance that he seat be next to hers , but to she he do not address himself at all . then the meal be over , and the chair be withdraw , and the party group itself about with vague , uncertain movement , as man and woman do before they leave the breakfast table for the work of the day . she meditate she escape , but feel that she could not leave the room before or , -- who have remain at to keep she mother company for a while . at last they go ; -- but then , just as she be escape , he put he hand upon she and remind she of she appointment . " I shall be in the hall in a quarter of a hour , " he say . " will you meet I there ? " then she bow she head to he and pass on . she be there at the time name and find he stand by
by the hall door , wait for she . he hat be already on he head and he back be almost turn to she . he open the door , and , allow she to pass out first , lead the way to the shrubbery . he do not speak to she till he have close behind she the little iron gate which separate the walk from the garden , and then he turn upon she with one word . " well ? " he say . she be silent for a moment , and then he repeat he eager question : " well ;--well ? " " I should disgrace you , " she say , not firmly as before , but whisper the word . he wait for no other assent . the form of the word tell he that he have win the day . in a moment he arm be round she , and she veil be off , and he lip be press to hers ; -- and when she could see he countenance the whole form of he face be alte to she . it be bright as it use to be bright in old day , and he be smile on she as he use to smile . " my own , " he say ; --" my wife -- my own ! " and she have no longer the power to deny he . " not yet , ; not yet , " be all that she could say . the last meeting at the do not carry out he purpose of leave in the middle of the season and travel either to or . he be away from at longer perhaps than he might have be if still in office , and during this period regard himself as a man from whose hand all work have be take , -- as one who have be find unfit to carry any longer a burden serviceably ; but before be over he and the Duchess be back in , and gradually he allow himself to open he mouth on this or that subject in the house of Lords , -- not pitch into everybody all round , as he wife have recommend , but express a opinion now and again , generally in support of he friend , with the dignity which should belong to a retire . the to recovere much of she good temper , -- as far at least as the outward show go . one or two who know she , especially . , be aware that she hatre and she idea of revenge be not lay aside ; but she go on from day to day anathematize she special enemie and abstain from reproach she husband for he pusillanimity . then come the question as to the autumn . " let 's have everybody down at , just as we have before , " say the Duchess . the proposition almost take away the 's breath . " why do you want a crowd , like that ? " " just to show they that we be not beat because we be turn out . " " but , inasmuch as we be turn out , we be beat . and what have a gathering of people at my private house to do with a political manoeuvre ? do you especially want to go to ? " " I hate the place . you know I do . " " then why should you propose to go there ? " he hardly yet know he wife well enough to understand that the suggestion have be a joke . " if you do not wish to go abroad -- " " I hate go abroad . " " then we will remain at . you do not hate . " " ah dear ! there be memory there too . but you like it . " " my book be there . " " - book , " say the Duchess . " and there be plenty of room if you wish to have friend . " " I suppose we must have somebody . you can not live without you Mentor . " " you can ask whom you please , " he say almost fretfully . " , of course , " suggest the Duchess . then he turn to the papers before he and would not say another word . the matter end in a party much as usual be collect at about the middle of ,-- have spend the early part of the autumn with at . there might perhaps be a dozen guest in the house , and among they of course be and he wife . and be there , have come back from he eastern mission , -- whose unfortunate abandonment of he seat at have cause so many trouble , -- and , who in day now long pass have be almost as necessary to as be now she later friend , -- and the Cantrip , and for a short time the . but on this occasion be not present . there be few there whom my patient reader have not see at before ; but among those few be . " so it be to be , " say the Duchess to the member for one morning . she have by this time become intimate with " she member , " as she would sometimes call he in joke , and have concerned herself much as to he matrimonial prospect . " yes , ; it be to be ,-- unless some unforeseen circumstance should arise . " " what circumstance ? " " Lady and gentleman sometimes do change they mind ; -- but in this case I do not think it likely . " " and why be not you be marry now , ? " " we
we have agree to postpone it till next year ; -- so that we may be quite sure of we own mind . " " I know you be laugh at I ; but nevertheless I be very glad that it be settled . pray tell she from I that I shall call again as soon as ever she be . , though I do not think she repay either of the last two visit I make she . " " you must make excuse for she , . " " of course . I know . after all she be a most fortunate woman . and as for you ,-- I regard you as a hero among lover . " " I be get used to it , " she say one day to . " of course you will get used to it . we get use to anything that chance send we in a marvellously short time . " " what I mean be that I can go to bed , and sleep , and get up and eat my meal without miss the sound of the trumpet so much as I do at first . I remember hearing of people who live in a mill , and could not sleep when the mill stop . it be like that with I when we mill stop at first . I have get myself so use to the excitement of it , that I could hardly live without it . " " you might have all the excitement still , if you please . you need not be dead to politics because you husband be not Prime . " " no ; never again ,-- unless he should come back . if any one have tell I ten year ago that I should have take a interest in this or that man be in the government , I should have laugh he to scorn . it do not seem possible to I then that I should care what became of such man as and . but I do get to be anxious about it when be shift from one office to another . " " of course you do . do you think I be not anxious about ? " " but when he become , I give myself up to it altogether . I shall never forget what I feel when he come to I and tell I that perhaps it might be so ; -- but tell I also that he would escape from it if it be possible . I be the of the occasion all over ;--whereas he be so scrupulous , so burdene with conscience ! as for I , I would have take it by any means . then it be that the old play the part of the three witch to a nicety . well , there have not be any absolute murder , and I have not quite gone mad . " " nor need you be afraid , though all the wood of should come to . " " forbid ! I will never see anything of again . what annoy I most be , and always be , that he would not understand what I feel about it ; -- how proud I be that he should be , how anxious that he should be great and noble in he office ; -- how I work for he , and not at all for any pleasure of my own . " " I think he do feel it . " " no ; -- not as I do . at last he like the power , -- or rather fear the disgrace of lose it . but he have no idea of the personal grandeur of the place . he never understand that to be in be as much as to be a in , and much more than be in . oh , how I do labour for he , -- and how he do scold I for it with those quiet little stinging word of he ! I be vulgar ! " " be that a quiet word ? " " yes ; -- as he use it ; -- and indiscreet , and ignorant , and stupid . I bear it all , though sometimes I be die with vexation . now it be all over , and here we be as humdrum as any one else . and the , and the , and the Drought , and the Pountney , and the , have all pass over the scene ! do you remember that affair , and how he turn the poor man out of the house ? " " it serve he right . " " it would have serve they all right to be turn out , -- only they be there for a purpose . I do like it in a way , and it make I sad to think that the feeling can never come again . even if they should have he back again , it would be a very lame affair to I then . I can never again rouse myself to the effort of prepare food and lod for half the parliament and they wife . I shall never again think that I can help to rule by coax unpleasant man . it be do and go , and can never come back again . " not long after this the take , who have come down to for a few day , out to the very spot on which he have sit when he indulge himself in lectur on and generally , and then ask the of the what he think of the present state of public affair . he himself have support 's government , and do not belong to it because he could not at present reconcile himself to fill any office . do
